WATCHTOWER.
Published Semi-Monthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N. Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford President W. E. Van Amburgh Secretary "And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.’’ ~ Isaiah 54:13.
. THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man wilfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ which has now begun; that the Lord's next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall be restored and live on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses. It provides
systematic Bible study for all its readers and supplies teachers to aid any person or company of persons engaged in sincere Bible study. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his Beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of tho Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, Ts. American remittances should be made by Express or Postal Money Order, or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ..............34 Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England
Canadian ....... 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Australasian . . 7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia South African .... Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this Journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The 'Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations. Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires. Entered as Second Class Mail Matter at Brooklyn, N. T., Postofftce.
Act of March 3, 1879.
“DIVIDING THE PEOPLE”
The title of this new booklet focuses attention on the work which Jehovah God, by his Judge at the temple, Christ Jesus, is now doing in view of the great slaughter to occur at Armageddon. The cover illustration is very expressive of tlie title and gives compelling force thereto. This booklet contains the three lectures “The True God”, “The Mimic God,” and “Why Serve Jehovah”, delivered within recent mouths over both a coast-to-coast radio network and one along the Atlantic coast, and which deserve thoughtful study by all. Like all other booklets of the Society, it may be had for 5c.
“DIVIDING THE PEOPLE” TESTIMONY PERIOD
As suggested by the name, the period from January 20 to 28, inclusive, has been set aside to specialize on offering to the people the newest booklet, Dividing the People. During these nine days Jehovah’s witnesses as one man in Christ Jesus will be in action, and, whether privileged to distribute the above booklet in their respective languages or not, will be equally engaged in marking the foreheads of those hoping in the Lord’s name and thus be instruments of the Lord in his division work. All Watchtower readers, also all those foreshadowed by Jonadab, may participate. The importance of the campaign behooves that due preparation be begun without delay by companies and individuals alike.
YEAR BOOK
The Year Book for 1934 is now ready. The Society has had the grandest and most intense and effective service year of its history, and the annual report thereon as compiled by the president will be sure to delight all who have the kingdom interests at heart. Also, there is a pointed discussion of the 1934 year text, and a text and appropriate comment for each day of the year. The book is 50c a copy, mailed anywhere. Remittance to cover should accompany each order. Company members will place their orders with the local stockkeeper, that he may send in a group order. This will reduce shipping costs and also expedite filling of orders here.
THE 1934 CALENDAR
The Society’s. calendar for 1934 will be a beautiful adornment and help in the homes of all interested in Jehovah’s purposes at this.time. Not only is the year’s text set forth, but a magnificent picture expressive thereof, and also a special message from the president of the Society. The date pad indicates the periods of special world-wide witnessing arranged for the year. The Calendar may be had at 25c a copy; or, in lots of 5 or more, at 20c apiece. Members of companies may avail themselves of this latter rate by placing their orders with their stockkeeper.
Vol. LV	January 1, 1934	No. 1
HOPE
“Zn his name shall [the] nations hope.”—Matt. 12:21, Roth.
JEHOVAH caused his prophet to give utterance to the words of the above text. The words are therefore Jehovah’s giving expression to his purpose, and ‘having purposed it he will also do it’. The peoples of the nations of earth need to know that Jehovah is the only true and almighty God. He has made provision for them to know. Because Jehovah’s name has been defamed he has appointed Christ Jesus the vindicator of his great and holy name. Those who refuse to hear and give heed to God’s great vindicator shall be destroyed. Those who desire to know the will and name of Jehovah God shall learn, and then obeying him they shall live.
2 In the years next preceding this we have had emphasized the Scriptural truths that ‘they shall know that Jehovah is God’ and that the privilege of delivering the testimony of this great truth is given to Jehovah’s witnesses and for that reason these witnesses are the objects of Satan’s wrath. Jehovah’s witnesses having received his name, which he bestows upon them, have learned that his name is their high tower, and into it they run and are safe. They are not immune from persecution, but, remaining faithful to the name of Jehovah, they shall be delivered. The peoples of the nations are without hope in the world; therefore appropriate for this year is the text: “In his name shall [the] nations hope.” Having this text in mind during the year Jehovah’s witnesses will appreciate their duty and privilege in carrying such great truths to the people, even though by so doing they must endure many hardships. In this manner must they follow in the footsteps of Christ Jesus, their Head and Lord.
VINDICATOR
• Jehovah God being the Creator of all things good, his name must stand for everything that is good, pure, holy, lovable and righteous. He having purposed to do a thing and having given his word as expressing that purpose, a failure to accomplish that purpose would prove that his name does not stand for everything that is good, holy, pure, righteous and all-powerful. The experience of Job discloses the question or issue raised as involving the name of Jehovah God,
and the record there shows that his holy name must be completely vindicated. Satan declared before Jehovah that if God would afflict or permit affliction to come upon perfect man that man would curse God to his face, meaning necessarily that all men would in time become the enemies of God and turn against him and thus prove that no man would maintain his integrity toward God when put to the crucial test. Jehovah God accepted that challenge and permitted the test to proceed. (Job 2:4-6) Should Satan eventually prove the truth of his boastful challenge the name of Jehovah would stand for ever blemished. But if Satan fails in his boastful challenge the name of Jehovah God stands completely and for ever vindicated. Satan is doomed to complete failure. The victory is given to the Most High.
* Adam, the first man created by the Lord God, was perfect in his organism, but he failed to maintain his integrity toward his Creator, which fact tended to prove Satan’s side of the question at issue. All of the human race descended from Adam; hence all were born in sin and, as sinners, they could have no standing before God. (Rom. 5:12) Then Jehovah made his Logos or Word a man, full of grace and truth, and caused him to dwell upon the earth amongst men. (John 1:14) Adam and Jesus were the only two perfect human creatures that have ever lived on the earth. Jesus was sent to the earth in the name of his Father, Jehovah God, which necessarily means that he was sent as the vindicator of Jehovah’s name, that is to say, to prove that the challenge made by Satan is false.
8Jesus was a perfect man; which truth is often denied. “God sent forth his Son, made of a woman.” (Gal. 4:4) That the man Christ Jesus was perfect of necessity must be true, for several Scriptural reasons. Jesus was the direct creation of Jehovah, and “his work is perfect”. (Deut. 32:4) He was sent to be the ransomer, redeemer and savior of sinful man. (Matt. 1:25; John 3:16; 1 Tim. 2:5,6) He must therefore be a price exactly corresponding to the man Adam at the time Adam was perfect and before Adam sinned. As man’s redeemer Jesus was foreshadowed by the paschal lamb slain in Egypt, which lamb must
4
fffie WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. V.
be without blemish. (Ex. 12:5) Man is not redeemed by an imperfect thing, but “with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot”. (1 Pet. 1:19) Nothing more and nothing less than a perfect man could be the ransomer or redeemer of the human race, because God would require only the life of a perfect man. Jesus was made a little lower than the angels, a man perfect in every respect. —Heb. 2:7.
MADE PERFECT
* If Jesus was perfect as a man, then why is it written of him in the Scriptures that ‘he was made perfect through suffering’? (Heb. 2:10; 5:9) That scripture could not mean that he was made perfect in his organism as a man by reason of suffering, because he was already perfect. Could it mean that he was made perfect as a spirit creature ? It could not mean that; for the reason that he is Jehovah God’s creature and whatsoever God creates is perfect, and suffering could not make him more perfect. (Deut. 32:4) Does it mean that he was made perfect in character development? No; for the reason he was at all times a perfect character. Does it mean that by his sufferings he was made “perfect as a new creature”? No; because as a new creature he was never at any time imperfect, and indeed could not be.
7	What, then, is meant by the scripture, ‘ ‘ Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered; and being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him.” (Heb. 5:8,9) Jehovah God sent his beloved Son to earth as the vindicator of his (Jehovah’s) name. The issue or question for determination was: Could, a perfect man be subjected to all manner of afflictions and sufferings and maintain his integrity toward God? Satan said he could not. God’s word and name declared exactly the contrary. In order to prove the name of Jehovah, the perfect man Jesus must be subjected to the assaults and sufferings that Satan would inflict upon him. If he came through the fire of affliction unscathed and victorious, that would prove Satan a liar and Jehovah right. It was Satan who tempted Jesus at the beginning of his ministry and thereby attempted to bring about his self-destruction. Failing in that, then Satan caused Jesus to be persecuted in every conceivable manner. Truly “he was oppressed, and he was afflicted”. God did not afflict his own dearly beloved Son; “yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him . . . [and] put him to grief.”—Isa. 53:7-10.
8	Why would it thus please Jehovah to have his Son put to grief? God permitted his Son to thus be bruised and afflicted because it was necessary in order to settle the question at issue raised by the boastful challenge of Satan. There never was a time that Jesus was disobedient to his Father, but he must suffer in order to learn obedience under suffering and thus prove that under suffering he would be obedient.
Therefore in all of his sufferings Jesus learned obedience and steadfastly maintained his integrity toward Jehovah God. The final suffering came when Jesus knew that he was to die the ignominious death of a sinner. Jesus did not fear death, but because his Father’s name was involved he did fear that, dying like a sinner, he would thus defame his Father’s name, because the Devil would appear to triumph. For that reason Jesus in Gethsemane cried out: “Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from me: nevertheless, not my will, but thine, be done.” (Luke 22:42) That time of suffering is the same referred to by the apostle who wrote: “Who in the days of his flesh, when he had offered up prayers and supplications, with strong crying and tears, unto him that was able to save him from death, and was heard in that he feared.” (Heb. 5:7) The Scriptural proof is conclusive that Jehovah at that time gave Jesus assurance that his death as a sinner would not be a reproach to the name of Jehovah but that eventually Jehovah would use that very thing to the vindication of his name. ‘ ‘ And there appeared an angel unto him from heaven, strengthening him.” (Luke 22:43) Thereafter Jesus exhibited no fear whatsoever, which shows that it was not death that he feared, but that his agony was because of the apparent triumph of Satan.
8	The meaning of the scripture above quoted concerning Jesus’ being made perfect by suffering manifestly is this: As the Son of God he was perfect, but as a Son who was at all times obedient to his Father he had not suffered and there was no occasion for him to suffer. He was made a perfect man, and now Jehovah would have him prove that a perfect man can be subjected to all manner of suffering and still maintain his integrity toward God, and, this being done, such would prove Satan to be a liar and would be a vindication of Jehovah’s name. Jesus must therefore go through all manner of suffering, and through it all he was obedient to his Father; hence ‘he learned obedience by the things which he suffered’. Whether he suffered or did not suffer he was always obedient; but if he had not suffered there would have been no proof that he would be obedient under suffering. His constant obedience under the most terrible suffering proved Satan’s boastful challenge absolutely false, and hence was the vindication of Jehovah. The word in this text above quoted, and which is rendered make perfect, is also rendered to complete, accomplish, finish, and fulfil. By remaining steadfast throughout his period of suffering Jesus did completely accomplish and fulfil his Father’s side of the question at issue, and this he did by being obedient to his Father under the severe test.
10	What was Jehovah’s purpose in thus having his beloved Son ‘made perfect through suffering’? The answer is, to prove that Satan is a liar, and that his challenge is without foundation, and that Jehovah
JANUARY 1, 1934
Tfo WATCHTOWER.
&
God is right and always righteous, and that the one gaining the victory over Satan under the test would prove his qualification to be the redeemer of man and the leader of all obedient creation back to the Father, and the one whom Jehovah would use to destroy the Devil. Therefore says the apostle: “And being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him. ’ ’—Heb. 5: 9.
11	It was necessary for Jesus to be a human creature of flesh and blood like other men and, as a man meeting the terms of the question at issue, to prove his qualification to be the one whom Jehovah would use to destroy the Devil and all of his wicked organization. In support of this conclusion, it is written: “Since then the children are sharers in flesh and blood, he also himself in like manner partook of the same; that through death he might bring to nought him that had the power of death, that is, the devil.” —Heb. 2:14, A.R.V.
12	Jesus by his triumph in this contest becomes the vindicator of Jehovah’s name and the executioner appointed by Jehovah to destroy the enemy. The resurrection of Jesus proved that Jesus had been faithful and true to Jehovah, had maintained his integrity as a man, and therefore as a perfect man he had fully and completely met the contest and vindicated his Father’s name. This proves Satan’s boastful challenge to be an empty thing. Jesus not only becomes the redeemer of mankind, but becomes the vindicator of his Father’s name and the leader and commander of all peoples, and all who live must obey him; and this is a further vindication of Jehovah’s name. Jehovah therefore commands that all creation shall bow before the name of Christ Jesus. “Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name: that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth; and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.” (Phil. 2:9-11) The suffering of Jesus therefore had nothing whatsoever to do with making him perfect as a man, or perfect as a new creature divine, or perfect in character development, but by his suffering he did prove fully and completely that a perfect man can, under the most severe test and suffering, remain true, obedient and steadfastly devoted to Jehovah God. Only those who suffer in like manner, and who in like manner prove their integrity toward God, will be permitted to be associated with Christ Jesus in his kingdom. (2 Tim. 2:12) That the suffering of Christ and his true followers is a privilege enabling them to have a part in the vindication of Jehovah’s name is further supported by the following texts: “For even hereunto were ye called: because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps.” (1 Pet. 2:21) “Because to you it was graciously given on behalf of Christ, not only to believe
into him, but also to suffer on his account.”—Phil. 1:29, Diag.
HIS NAME
13	Having proved his Father’s side of the great issue by reason of his faithfulness even unto the ignominious death, Jesus, when he was raised up out of death and ascended on high, was ready to proceed with the work of destroying the enemy, if such was the will of his Father. That was a part of the work he was commissioned to do. This is proved by the statement: “Jehovah saith unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool. Jehovah will send forth the rod of thy strength out of Zion: rule thou in the midst of thine enemies.” (Ps. 110:1,2, A.R.V.; Heb. 10:12,13) Jesus must await Jehovah’s due time to destroy the enemy and his organization. During that period of waiting two important things would come to pass, to wit: (1) Jehovah would permit the Devil to remain and continue his efforts to prove his side of the question at issue and to practice all kinds of fraud, deceit and oppression, particularly by and through fraudulent religion; and (2) Jehovah would take out from amongst imperfect men a company to be associated with Christ Jesus, who must prove their integrity to Jehovah and be made the associates of Jesus in Zion, and who must declare the name of Jehovah throughout the earth, and thus further prove Satan as a liar and a fraud: “But for this cause have I allowed thee to remain, in order to show thee my power; and in order that they may proclaim my name throughout all the earth.”—Ex. 9:16, Lees.
14	Jehovah puts his own name upon his beloved Son and commands that all creation must worship him. Why would he do that? It is the name of Jehovah that is involved, and now his beloved Son having been appointed to the office of vindicator and executioner, he bears the name of his Father. Jehovah honors him above any and all others. Jehovah puts his spirit upon his beloved Son, and the Father and Son are one, that is to say,, in complete unity for the accomplishment of Jehovah’s purpose. The Father is Master, and Christ Jesus, his Son, is the servant, hence subject to Jehovah. “Behold my servant, whom I uphold, mine elect, in whom my soul delighteth; I have put my spirit upon him; he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles [nations].” (Isa. 42:1) “Christ” means the anointed One of Jehovah; which means that Jehovah has commissioned this mighty One to carry out his purposes and particularly the vindication of his name. Concerning his anointed One Jehovah says: “I am Jehovah, that is my name; and my glory will I not give to another [than Christ], neither my praise unto graven images.” (Isa. 42:8, A..R.V.) No creature aside from Jehovah’s anointed can ever have the honor of bearing his name. Images or organizations that parade in the name of God and of Christ are not permitted to share in that honor. Those who have this
6
Sfo WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
honor conferred upon them must prove their integrity to Jehovah God, and it is limited to Christ Jesus and the members of his body.
OTHERS
15	During the waiting period of 1800 years and more Jehovah has been gathering out from amongst human creatures those who have signified their desire to be the followers of the Lord Jesus Christ. In that period of time millions of persons have professed to be followers of Christ Jesus, but the Devil has blinded most of them by his divers and numerous fraudulent methods. Most of those professed ones have understood that Jehovah was trying to get them into heaven so that the Devil could not get all the human race into hell. Such a conclusion is entirely foreign to Jehovah’s purpose. Many persons have heard the truth in recent years and responded thereto, but only a small number, comparatively speaking, have been chosen. Satan has turned millions of professed followers of Christ Jesus away from God, and God has at no time tried to prevent him from so doing. Those who worship God must do so in spirit, sincerity and truth.
16	What God has been doing during the waiting period is to ‘take out from the nations a people for his name’. (Acts 15:14) This people taken out and approved by Jehovah must bear his name. Since Jehovah confers this honor on none aside from his anointed, it follows that all thus taken out must follow the Lord Jesus not only for a time, but to the end, and that they must prove their integrity, must become members of God’s organization of which the anointed Christ Jesus is the Head, and must bear testimony to the name of Jehovah faithfully unto the end. To take men and women to heaven would be no honor to Jehovah’s name; but to select out from amongst fallen men 144,000 who would prove their integrity and unswerving devotion to Jehovah God even unto death is a vindication of his name, because such further proves the Devil’s boastful challenge is wickedly false. The anointed servant of the Most High is composed of Christ Jesus and 144,000 who are made the associates of Christ Jesus. All of these must through suffering learn obedience and prove their faithfulness unto God. They must all be brought to unity and made one in Christ, even as God and Christ Jesus are one. (John 17: 21) The 144,000 company must be brought into absolute unity and participate in the vindication of Jehovah’s name. (Eph. 4:11-14) Such unity means perfect and harmonious action as members of God’s organization to vindicate his name. This unity is accomplished when Christ Jesus comes to the temple, builds up Zion, and puts the entire organization into harmonious action under his direct supervision. The waiting period named in the Psalm ended in 1914, and then Jehovah sent forth his beloved Son to rule, and he comes to his temple and gathers the approved ones, because the time has
arrived for the vindication of Jehovah’s great name. —Ps. 110:2.
THE NATIONS
irIn the year text the term “nations” means the peoples throughout the earth. (Matt. 12:21) Many millions of these profess to be followers of Christ Jesus, and yet most of them are without hope because they are ignorant of Jehovah’s purpose. After centuries of operation of a religious system called “organized Christianity” the peoples of “Christendom” are hopeless. Divers and numerous schemes formulated by men and man-made organizations have been placed before the people and which schemes have promised the people relief and blessings. The people have feared their men leaders and have trusted in them, and for that reason have been led into the snare of the enemy. They have failed to trust in God and in his Word. “The fear of man bringeth a snare: but whoso putteth his trust in the Lord shall be safe.” (Prov. 29:25) Selfish men have made and promulgated these various schemes, and the invisible ruler, Satan the Devil, has overreached the men of the world and hence led the whole world into his snare. The nations of the earth are therefore under the domination of that wicked one, the Devil. (1 John 5:19) Only those who have trusted in the Lord and who faithfully serve him have escaped the snares of the wicked one. (Ps. 119:110; 2 Tim. 2:26) Satan by and through his various worldly agencies has blinded the people to the truth of God’s purpose. In times past the people had hope in the schemes of men, but now those schemes have all failed and the people are sad and distressed. (Prov. 13:12) No person can have a substantial hope who is without knowledge of God and his kingdom. The only hope for the nations of the earth is the name of Jehovah and his Christ, because it is the kingdom under Christ that will vindicate Jehovah’s name and bring relief to mankind.
18	The Watchtower has stated that the clergy of “organized Christianity” serve the Devil and do not serve Jehovah God. This statement has been vigorously challenged, the contention being that there are sincere ministers who preach and who are preaching the gospel as they believe it. The answer thereto is that sincerity in belief does not make one a servant of Jehovah God. Let it be conceded that there are sincere men in the ministry of so-called “organized Christianity”. It must also be conceded by those who defend them that such ministers preach doctrines that are selfish. Even those who preach that the salvation of man comes by and through the blood of Christ Jesus tell the people that Jehovah’s purpose is to save men and take them to heaven in order to prevent the Devil from getting all mankind. Such a conclusion not only is erroneous, but is extremely selfish and results from deception practiced upon men by Satan, and thus such men are made to serve the Devil, regardless of whether they are sincere or not.
January 1, 1934
TKe WATCHTOWER
7
They are the servants of him whom they serve. (Rom. 6:16) The clergy of “organized Christianity” never tell the people that there will be but a small number to go to heaven, and that the most that are saved will find restitution blessings under the kingdom of God on earth. They never tell the people about the vindication of Jehovah’s name by and through his King, Christ Jesus, and that their hope rests in faithfulness to God and his kingdom. They do not tell the people these things, because they do not believe them. They tell the people, probably in all sincerity, that God sends afflictions upon them because of their indifference to their church obligations, which is not only erroneous, but a defamation of God’s holy name, and serves the Devil. The preaching of error, even though done in all sincerity, tends to turn the people away from Jehovah God and thus makes the preacher of such error a servant of Satan. In order for the people to have hope, they must know the truth.
THE LEADER
18	The greatest of all questions for determination is the vindication of Jehovah’s name. All other matters are subsidiary thereto. The salvation of the human race or any portion thereof will be a vindication of Jehovah’s name and prove his supremacy, but the salvation of the human race is not the important thing. Jehovah could wipe out the entire race and make a new one, and in so doing he would in no wise violate justice. On the other hand, by placing the truth before his creatures and giving life everlasting to those who willingly obey him, such is a vindication of his name and results beneficially to the creature that obeys. When the wicked are destroyed, and those who love God and are obedient are given life, such proves that Jehovah alone is the Supreme One and worthy of all worship and joyful service. That will settle for ever the question of supremacy, and then all creation will see that only the obedient ones are given life everlasting by the Most High. Thus is magnified the name of Jehovah’s anointed King, through whose name he brings vindication and the hope of life to the obedient ones of creatures.
20	Jehovah made Christ Jesus his servant or anointed one to vindicate his name. He appointed Jesus as leader of all who will ever get life. Therefore it is written by his prophet: ‘ ‘ Incline your car, and come unto me; hear [obey], and your soul shall live; . . . Behold, I have given him for a witness to the people, a leader and commander to the people.” (Isa. 55: 3, 4) Those who faithfully and successfully follow the leader must have faith and confidence in the leader’ and must obey his commandments. They must do as the leader does; and since Christ Jesus maintained his integrity toward Jehovah God, others who live must do likewise. He leads first those whom he associates with him in his kingdom, and afterwards all that get life everlasting.
21	Jehovah sent his beloved Son to earth to bear testimony to the truth, and everyone who maintains his integrity toward God must hear and obey the truth as declared by Christ Jesus. (John 18:37) Jehovah by and through Christ Jesus takes out from amongst men a people for his name. Now, as the great vindicator of Jehovah’s name, Christ Jesus commands these taken-out ones to ‘preach this gospel of the kingdom as a witness to the nations’. (Matt. 24:14) This means that they must obey this commandment in order to maintain their integrity towards Jehovah.
SHARING THE HONOR
22	Jehovah having taken out from amongst the nations a people for his name and having now brought them unto Zion and built them up into his organization, he bestows upon them as members of The Christ his own great name. This is the honor or glory which no others are permitted to have. “And the Gentiles [nations] shall see thy righteousness, and all kings thy glory; and thou shalt be called by a new name, which the mouth of the Lord shall name.” (Isa. 62: 2) As Christ Jesus is the great witness of Jehovah, likewise all those who are brought into unity with him, and upon whom the new name is bestowed, must be witnesses to the name of God and Christ; hence Jehovah says to them: “Ye are my witnesses . . . that I am God,” that is to say, the Supreme One, and besides whom there is no other. (Isa. 43:10-12) Jehovah committed to Christ Jesus the testimony of his purpose to vindicate his name, and all those who are brought into unity with Christ have in turn committed to them the privilege, duty and obligation of bearing witness to that great name. (Rev. 12:17) Christ Jesus is therefore the great leader and great witness to all those who are now in Zion, and those who continue therein must be witnesses to the name of Jehovah God and to his kingdom.
SUPREMACY
23	The question of supremacy must now be for ever settled, because it is Jehovah’s due time to settle it. He has assembled Zion and made his taken-out people a part thereof, and to them he says: “1 am the first, and I am the last; and beside me there is no God. . . . Fear ye not, neither be afraid; have not I told thee from that time, and have [I not] declared it? ye are even my witnesses.” (Isa. 44:6-8) Jehovah’s anointed, therefore, must fully trust him and fearlessly declare his name. The time approaches now when Jehovah will give opportunity to the people to determine in whom they will trust and whom they will serve. Because he has made Christ Jesus his vindicator Jehovah now speaks to his great Servant and Witness, saying: “Thus saith God Jehovah, he that created the heavens, and stretched them forth; he that spread abroad the earth and that which cometh out of it; he that giveth breath unto the people upon it, and spirit to them that walk therein; I, Jehovah,
8
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thy hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the [nations]; to open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the dungeon, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison-house.” (Isa. 42:5-7, A.R.V.) This scripture does not say that Christ Jesus is commissioned to take the people to heaven, but it does say that he is commissioned to open their blind eyes and inform them of the truth, that they may have an opportunity to choose whom they will serve. Those who believe upon the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, the great Redeemer and the Vindicator of Jehovah’s name, have reason for a hope. They must then be obedient to Jehovah, the Supreme One. Every one who maintains his integrity toward God, to that extent, therefore, will prove Satan to be a liar and hence have a part in the vindication of Jehovah’s name.
24	When Jesus had endured much suffering and thereby continued to be obedient unto his Father he was made the vindicator of his Father’s name. For that reason Jehovah made Christ Jesus his “right hand” and his “holy arm” to accomplish his purpose of proving his own great supremacy. It is Jehovah, therefore, who gains the victory over his enemies; but he gets this victory by and through his beloved Son as his instrument, and he makes his Son this instrument or vindicator because the Son was obedient under suffering. In harmony with this Jehovah caused to be written by his prophet: “ 0 sing unto the Lord a new song; for he hath done marvellous things; his right hand, and his holy arm, hath gotten him the victory. The Lord hath made known his salvation; his righteousness hath he openly shewed in the sight of the [nations].” (Ps. 98:1,2) It is Jehovah who saves the obedient ones and gives them everlasting life, and this he does for his own great name’s sake. Their salvation is a vindication of his name, and this vindication operates beneficially to everyone who proves his integrity toward God.
DESIRE
” All reasonably sane persons desire to have life and to dwell in peace and to enjoy the things which God has provided for them. No human creature can realize such desired blessings until he learns whence they come and what he must do to obtain them. Jehovah God sent his beloved Son to earth that man might believe in him and live and not perish. (John 3:16) That means that without knowledge and without belief mankind must perish. The life of the perfect man Jesus provided the redemptive price for man, but in order for man to reap the benefits thereof he must know Jehovah God and Christ Jesus and choose to be obedient to the righteous laws of his kingdom. “Where there is no vision [knowledge and understanding] , the people perish; but he that kcepeth the law, happy is he.” (Prov. 29:18) Hence it is written: “This is life eternal, that they might know thee the
only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.” (John 17: 3) Jehovah has made provision for the people to learn, and he lays the privilege and obligation upon his witnesses to now declare to them that their hope is in his kingdom.
26	The crisis is here when the paramount question must be settled. Satan is exercising all his power in his efforts to win, but he is certain to lose. Satan would destroy all the people rather than see any of them serve God. Satan continues to oppress and increase the burdens of the people, and this drives them to desperation. (Rev. 12:12) The rulers in their efforts to pull the world out of the mire continue to lay greater burdens upon the people. There is absolutely nothing in this world upon which the people can hope; hence the nations are in despair.
27	Standing out boldly in contrast to the miserable condition of the world is Jehovah God’s gracious provision for obedient mankind. He has made Christ Jesus his vindicator and has placed the name of Christ above every name save that of his alone, and he calls upon the people to hear his great King and to learn the importance of his name. The remnant of the elect company yet on earth are made the witnesses of Jehovah, and they are commanded to point the people of good will to Jehovah’s kingdom and his great King. The name of Christ Jesus stands for the kingdom of Jehovah, which will vindicate Jehovah’s name, and “in his name shall [the] nations hope”, and there is no other name in which they can hope or whereby they can possibly be saved. (Acts 4:12) Jehovah’s witnesses must therefore point the people to this one and only and complete hope.
28	Is it to be expected that Jehovah’s witnesses can give testimony to the name of Jehovah God and his kingdom without being subjected to persecution and suffering? Certainly not! The Devil piled persecutions upon Jesus in an effort to prove his side of the question at issue and to prevent the giving of testimony by Jesus concerning God and his kingdom. Amidst great sufferings Jesus continued to the end to bear testimony to the truth and to maintain his integrity and to thus prove God to be true. Those who are associated with him, and particularly the remnant now on earth, must likewise suffer at the hands of Satan, because they are bearing the testimony of Christ Jesus the great King. At the same time they must maintain their integrity by learning obedience by and through the things which they must suffer. “We must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of God.” (Acts 14:22) But there is a real joy in tribulation when we know that the tribulation is heaped upon us because we are doing right in obedience to God’s commandments and if we continue faithful unto the end we shall prove our integrity and thus have a part in the vindication of Jehovah’s name. That is the reason Jesus invites his faithful ones to ‘enter into the joy of thy Lord’, meaning the joy of
January 1, 1934
WATCHTOWER.
9
participating in the vindication of his Father’s name. (Matt. 25:21) For the same reason the apostle wrote: “I am exceeding joyful in all our tribulation.” (2 Cor. 7:4) As Jehovah’s witnesses go forth and with boldness declare the name of Jehovah God and his King and kingdom it is to be expected that persecutions and sufferings will be their lot. Those who willingly persecute Jehovah’s witnesses and oppose God’s kingdom are now marking themselves for the slaughter that shall come at the battle of the great day of God Almighty. They are putting on their garments of identification; and the people of good will must be told that their only hope is in the name of Jehovah God’s great vindicator and they must identify themselves as being on his side. In due time Jehovah will go forth to fight for his own people, and thus he will vindicate his witnesses who have faithfully maintained their integrity toward him in proclaiming his name and the name of his King.—Zech. 14:3.
29	The testimony now being given by Jehovah’s witnesses is not for the purpose of converting the world. The whole world lies in the wicked one, and all these walk on in darkness, except those persons who have a desire to escape from the wicked one and take refuge in the kingdom of God’s dear Son. Such must now be told the truth, that they may have hope in his name. The testimony must continue to be given until the organization of Satan is “wasted without inhabitant”. (Isa. 6:9-11) Truly this is a great and glorious time. It is a time of great distress amongst the nations and peoples of the earth, and a time of great opposition to the truth, and a time of great joy to those who are privileged to bear the name of Jehovah and his beloved Son and to tell the people what is their only hope. Those now devoted to Jehovah and his kingdom will not permit tribulation to discourage them. We should be in doubt about the understanding of the prophecies if there were not opposition to and persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses now. “Because thou hast made the Lord, which is my refuge, even the Most High, thy habitation, there shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling. For he shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways.” (Ps. 91: 9-11) “In thy name shall they rejoice all the day: and in thy righteousness shall they be exalted.”—Ps. 89:16.
80	From the Scriptures and the physical facts we know that we are right and if we continue faithful to the end we shall triumph in Christ and have a part in the vindication of Jehovah’s name.
SUMMARY
81	Summing up the matter, it is seen that the name of Jehovah, the Most High, is involved; that in order to clear his name and prove to all creation that Satan is a liar, Jehovah God must put on earth a perfect man who can and will remain true and steadfastly faithful even under the most severe and crucial suf
fering; that Jehovah sent his beloved Son Jesus to earth, made him a perfect man, and permitted him to be subjected to great sufferings in order that by the things which he suffered Jesus could prove Jehovah’s side of the question at issue and that by his faithfulness under such sufferings Jesus could establish his qualification to be the savior and redeemer of man, the executioner of the Devil, and the vindicator of Jehovah’s great name. In the exercise of his loving-kindness and as further proof that Satan is a liar Jehovah God selects a company of 144,000 human creatures from amongst imperfect men, all of whom must suffer as Christ suffered, and likewise maintain their integrity unto God, and for so doing Jehovah graciously gives them a part with Christ Jesus in the vindication of his name. No one can obtain everlasting life except by Jehovah, and they must believe on the name of Christ Jesus, and obey him, in order to receive life, because Jehovah has made this provision. The peoples of the nations of the earth must be told to whom they can look for hope. Therefore God commands his witnesses to tell the people that in the name of Christ Jesus, the vindicator of Jehovah and the Savior of the world, they shall hope. Blessed is the privilege of those who have part in keeping these commandments of Jehovah and pointing the people to the King of kings.
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
7 1. What is now the greatest need of the peoples of the nations? How has Jehovah provided to meet that need, and how will such provision affect those to whom it is offered?
7 2. What is the great privilege now set before Jehovah’s witnesses? Account for the treatment these have received, and that which they may yet expect.
7 3. Point out the importance of the fulfilment of Jehovah’s declared purposes.
7 4,5. Account for the Logos ’ having been here on the earth as a man.
7 6-9. How did Jesus ‘learn obedience by the things which he suffered'? What is meant by his being “made perfect” through suffering? Explain his agony in Gethsemane, and the angel’s “strengthening him’’.
7 10. What was Jehovah’s purpose in having his beloved Son ‘made perfect through suffering’?
7 11. Why was it necessary for Jesus to be a human creature, a man?
7 12. What is the outcome of that great contest, (a) in relation to Jehovah? (b) As to Jesus?
7 13. Why did not Jesus, upon ascending to his Father, immediately proceed to destroy the enemy? What was to take place in the meantime?
7 14. Why did Jehovah put his own name upon his beloved Son and command all creation to worship him?
7 15. What are the reasons why, with millions professing to be followers of Christ, during the waiting period of more than 1800 years, so few have been chosen?
7 16. Explain how and why Jehovah has ‘taken out from the nations a people for his name’. How and for what purpose have these been brought into unity?
7 17. Account for the fact that after centuries of operation of “Christianity’’ the peoples of “Christendom” are hopeless.
7 18. What are the facts to prove that the clergy of “organized Christianity”, even if sincere, are servants of Satan?
7 19. Of all questions for determination, what is the greatest? How will the method employed for the salvation of the human race contribute to the vindication of Jehovah’s name?
10
ttz WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
f 20, 21. To whom, how, and when, does Isaiah 55: 3, 4 have its application?
T 22. Wherein do the faithful remnant now share in the honor bestowed upon Christ Jesus?
H 23,24. Apply Isaiah 44: 6-8 and 42: 5-7. How has Jehovah’s “right hand” and “holy arm” “ gotten him the victory ”?
K 25-27. What is the natural and proper desire of mankind as human creatures with the earthly heritage? How only can such blessings be realized? What provision has Jehovah made for their coming to a knowledge of him and his purposes and for their entering into enjoyment of the blessings he has in store for the human family?
H 28. What may the remnant henceforth expect as they con
tinue with boldness to deliver the testimony committed to them, and why? What are the purposes served in their being subjected to persecution and suffering? How, then, will they regard those things which they are permitted to bear?
29, 30. What is the purpose of the testimony now being given by Jehovah’s witnesses? How long will the testimony continue? Why should this time of distress upon the world and of persecution of these faithful witnesses be a time of great joy to the latter?
If 31. Briefly sum up the matter here presented. The correct understanding of these truths invites what response on the part of the faithful?
INCREASE OF HIS GOVERNMENT
A RIGHTEOUS government on earth, administered for the general welfare of the people, has for centuries been the desire of honest persons. In obedience to the commandment of Jesus Christ his faithful followers for nineteen centuries have prayed for the coming of such a government that the will of God might be done on earth even as it is done in heaven. Centuries before the coming of Jesus to earth men who believed in and served Jehovah God looked forward with confidence to the time when there would be a righteous rule on the earth. Their hope was based upon the promise Jehovah made to Abraham, the father of the faithful, that he would in due time raise up a seed that would rule the world in righteousness and by and through which seed all the families and nations of the earth shall have an opportunity for lasting blessings.—Gen. 22:17,18.
Jehovah sent his beloved Son Jesus to earth to give testimony of and concerning the purpose of God and to redeem the human race. It was in the year (A.D.) 33 that Jesus Christ began his ministry, preaching to his hearers: “The kingdom of heaven is at hand’’; meaning that Jesus himself was God’s anointed King and had begun his work amongst men according to the will of the Most High. Jesus gathered round him faithful men and taught them and used them as witnesses for Jehovah. He strongly impressed upon their minds the fact that he must die and be raised from the dead in order that mankind might have the opportunity to live, and that he must go away to heaven and receive from Jehovah the authority for his kingdom or rule of the world. He further informed his disciples that in God’s due time he, Jesus, would come again and receive unto himself those whom he found faithful and that then he would begin his reign as the world’s ruler.
Portions of the Bible were written by the faithful apostles of Jesus Christ, and this they did under the inspiration and direction of the holy spirit. That which, in the writings of the apostles, is emphasized above all things else is the fact that Christ Jesus the King shall come again and establish Jehovah God’s kingdom and carry out the purposes of the Most High, that the peoples of earth may be blessed. It was the apostle Paul who identified Christ Jesus as the seed of Abraham according to the promise which Jehovah made to Abraham long centuries ago. (Gal. 3:16-29) Thus the promises of Jehovah set forth in the Old
Testament are directly connected with the truths in the New Testament, and this proves that the Old Testament and the New Testament constitute the "Word of God given to man for his direction in the course of righteousness and that it is the truth.
The apostles were informed that from the time of the resurrection of Christ Jesus and his ascension into heaven until his coming again to set up the kingdom or government would be a long period, during which men must wait. What was to be done in that long interval of waiting? The apostles and other men of mature mind met together at Jerusalem to consider this very matter. (Acts 15:6) They knew that God had dealt with the Jews as his chosen people and that because of unfaithfulness of the majority of that people God had removed his favor from them as a nation, but that his favor still continued toward the faithful individuals of that nation. They also saw that honest seekers for the truth who were not Jews were receiving God’s favor. Some of these faithful men at the convention above mentioned made known to their brethren that ‘God had wrought miracles among the Gentiles [nations] ’ by giving them the truth. The Lord had especially directed Peter to take the gospel to Cornelius and other Gentiles. (Acts 10: 1-48) Thus they discerned that God was no respecter of persons but now opportunity should be given to non-Jews to become followers of Christ Jesus.
The apostles then considered the words of the prophecy of Jehovah, spoken by Amos, which disclosed Jehovah’s purpose to take out from the nations a people to be associated with Christ Jesus in his kingdom and that in due time Christ Jesus would come again, receive these faithful ones to himself, and set up his righteous government, which government or kingdom was foreshadowed by the reign of King David. (Acts 15:14-18; Amos 9:11,12) The Lord therefore revealed to the apostles that the long period of time of waiting, from the exaltation of Christ Jesus to heaven to the time of his coming again, would be employed in teaching or preaching to the people of and concerning the Kingdom; and this the apostles proceeded to do. This preaching of the gospel has been for the purpose of bearing witness to Jehovah’s kingdom and for the taking out a people for his name. All those persons so selected from the world and who continue faithful to God and Christ Jesus must bear witness to the truth. (John 18:37) The apostles
January 1, 1934
WATCHTOWER.
11
stressed the fact that the faithful followers of Christ Jesus would look with eagerness for the coming of the Lord again and that those who remained faithful and true to God would love the appearing of Christ Jesus, and that such would then receive their reward, to wit, the crown of life, that is, the highest element of life. That would mean that such faithful ones would be made a part of the Kingdom or righteous government.—2 Tim. 4:7,8; Rev. 20:4.
With these great truths ever before those who love and serve Jehovah God and Christ Jesus it can readily be seen that such faithful ones would eagerly look for the second coming of the Lord and his kingdom. It was about the year 1872 (A.D.) that a small company of earnest and faithful followers of Christ Jesus, while studying the Scriptures and comparing these with events coming to pass, saw evidence that the Lord was giving special attention to those on earth, and that the second coming of the Lord and his kingdom was imminent. This little company of faithful Christians continued to grow in numbers and in knowledge of the precious things which are found in the Word of God. Shortly thereafter they formed themselves into a Society for more systematic study and teaching of the Word of God. Living on earth and in a nation that has laws for the holding and control of property, both real and personal, and desiring that their organization should perpetuate its work and activity without depending upon the earthly existence of any particular person, this little company of faithful followers of Christ Jesus decided to form a corporation, which corporation should have the management and control of the property and holdings and direct the activities of those who would continue faithful to God and who were looking for his kingdom under Christ.
In the year 1884 these followers of Christ Jesus formed a corporation under the laws of the State of Pennsylvania, which was then given the name Zion’s Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society. The word “Zion” is one of the names which Jehovah God has given his capital organization and frequently appears in the Bible. The word “Zion” appearing in the corporate name had no reference to or connection with the Jewish organization which is called “Zionism”. Afterwards the name of the above-mentioned corporation was, by the law of the State of Pennsylvania and order of court, changed to that of Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society; and the faithful followers of Christ Jesus on earth have continued that name of their corporation to this day. At no time has any Jew been connected with or supported the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society.
Merely for convenience and to comply with the laws of the land, and to further the interest of its work, the Society organized the Peoples Pulpit Association, in 1909, under the membership corporation law of the State of New York. For the same reason the International Bible Students Association was organized, in 1914, under the laws of Great Britain. These three corporations are really one, and they are all directed by the same officers and have possession and control of the property of the Society. By the word “Society” is meant the united company of faithful men and
women now on earth who are wholly devoted to God and his kingdom under Christ and who are, by His grace, carrying forward the work of the Lord in the earth. No one of these three corporations above named has any capital stock. They pay no dividends to any person, and no person receives any pecuniary profit therefrom. They are wholly and entirely devoted to carrying forward the work of the Society, which is the preaching or making known to the people the good news that Jehovah’s time is at hand for the establishment of his kingdom under Christ, and the truths kindred thereto.
These statements of fact are here made for the information of any and all honest persons who desire to know what is the purpose of the Society and the corporations that carry forward its work. Misinformed persons, who have been misled and deceived by the willful enemy of God and his kingdom, have been induced to believe that the Society and the corporations above mentioned are selfish, political organizations, operating in connection with other selfish, political organizations for the overthrow of present governments. Such wicked falsehoods proceed from the Devil, who at all times has opposed every one who serves Jehovah God.
In every country of the world where there is an anti-Jewish sentiment the malicious falsehood is circulated among the people that our Society and its corporations are financed by commercial Jews. That is also a malicious lie originating with Satan and carried forward by his earthly representatives. In countries where socialism and communism are threatened the enemies charge the Society and its supporters with being in league with socialists and communists for the overthrow of the government; which is also a malicious lie emanating from Satan and carried forward by his earthly representatives.
This Society and the three corporations named herein have at all times kept completely separate and apart from all political parties or affiliations. We have no part in the political affairs of this world, for the reason that our devotion is absolutely and completely to God and his kingdom under Christ, for which kingdom faithful men and women have been hoping and praying for the past nineteen hundred years. It would be foolish and contrary to God’s will for us to participate in or be associated with any political organization. Our Society and its corporations have never received one cent of financial support from Jews. From the very beginning of the Society until the present day its money to carry forward its work has come from contributions made by humble men and women who have a desire to make known the truth of and concerning Jehovah God’s provision for the blessings of the peoples of the earth. The work of the Society is done according to the will of Jehovah God, the Creator of heaven and earth, and he puts in the hearts of faithful men and women the desire to supply the money to carry forward his work. All the money and all the property of the earth belong to him, and he can see to it, and does see to it, that the money which is necessary is supplied for his purposes.
Those who love God, and who believe and rely upon his Word as set forth in the Bible, plainly sec and
12
tte WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
clearly understand that Satan the Devil is the arch enemy of God and the opposer of all true followers of Christ Jesus. It was Satan the Devil who at the very beginning of human history challenged Jehovah God to put on earth men who would remain faithful and true to God. Satan declared his ability to cause all men to curse God and turn away from him. That raised the issue, which Jehovah accepted, and he has permitted or suffered Satan to do all within his power to make proof of his wicked challenge, Jehovah biding his own due time to vindicate his great name and to completely destroy Satan and his wicked organization. The great time of climax has arrived, and hence the strenuous witness in the earth and the opposition thereto.
To carry out his wicked challenge Satan commercialized the human race and has caused his agents on earth to deal in human flesh and blood. He is the one who put in the mind of man the greedy love for money, or the things that bring personal gain, and by which men have builded among the nations a tremendous commercial organization that at all times has been oppressive and injurious to the common people.
As a part of his commercial scheme, and as another means of defaming Jehovah’s name and of turning men away from the true God, Satan early in the history of man organized religion, and since then every religion practiced on earth has been used by Satan to defame the name of Jehovah God. “Religion,” as that word is properly used, means an outward form of worship which gives honor to men and to an unseen power. Many honest people believe that they are worshiping God, when in fact they are being misled by the Devil to defame God’s holy name. Some parts of the Bible are used by the clergy to support religions, and this affords another means of deceiving the people. All religions have indulged in the politics of this world, which is contrary to the Word of God. —James 1: 27.
True Christianity means the faithful following by men in the footsteps of Christ Jesus, the Anointed of God. (1 Pet. 2:21) That means entire devotion to Jehovah God, and not to any man or to any worldly organization directed by man. It means that the true Christians or followers of Christ Jesus must be witnesses to the majesty and supremacy of Jehovah God and bear testimony to the truth of God’s Word. (John 18: 37) In order to give testimony of the truth it is necessary for one to study and to understand the Word of God, the Holy Scriptures, which is the truth. —John 17:17.
“Organized Christian religionists” have entirely overlooked the Scriptural meaning of the second coming of Christ Jesus and his kingdom. The Bible testimony is all one way, to wit, that the coming of Christ Jesus and his kingdom is to vindicate Jehovah’s name by proving that Jehovah is the supreme and true God, that he is the God of wisdom, justice, love and power, and from whom all life and blessings flow. The Bible testimony further is that the kingdom of God under Christ is a righteous government, which kingdom or government will vindicate Jehovah’s name and is the only hope of the peoples of the world. In this year of 1934, when the nations and peoples all over the earth
are in great distress and perplexity, “organized Christian religionists” entirely ignore the Scriptural testimony as to the cause of this trouble, and how the world can be brought out of this depression, and in the place and stead of the Scriptures they follow the theories of men and join in all man-made schemes to relieve mankind. These religionists not only entirely ignore the cause of the trouble, but appear to be entirely blind to the divine remedy.
The clergy and the politicians pose before the people as followers of Christ and by word of mouth say, “We implicitly believe in divine guidance, ’ ’ and at the same time entirely ignore the Word of the divine God, who is Jehovah the Most High. No one who is truly devoted to Jehovah God and his kingdom can have any part in the political affairs of this world. If these men, as they say, did implicitly believe and trust in the divine God, then they would follow his Word and would see that the great climax of trouble and wickedness is now upon the earth because of Satan, and that soon God will destroy this wicked organization, and in its place there shall follow a rule of complete righteousness; and they would teach the people these truths, and inform them that the kingdom of God alone will bring relief and blessings. Any persons who would join forces with socialists or communists or any other political organization in this day would thereby furnish the conclusive proof that they are not the servants of Jehovah God.
OPPOSITION
At all times opposition to the truth has originated with and proceeded from the Devil, and “religionists” have been the chief instruments of the Devil used to carry forward this opposition on earth. At the very beginning of the ministry of Christ Jesus the Devil tried to cause the destruction of Jesus. (Matt. 4:1-11) Jesus was constantly persecuted by the religious leaders, the clergy of his time, and the proof in the divine Word is that such religionists, the clergymen, were the agents of the Devil. Those religionists claimed to be the representatives of God, but to them Jesus said: “But now ye seek to kill me, a man that hath told you the truth, which I have heard of God; this did not Abraham. Ye do the deeds of your father. Then said they to him, We be not bom of fornication; we have one Father, even God. Jesus said unto them, If God were your Father, ye would love me: for I proceeded forth and came from God; neither came I of myself, but he sent me. Why do ye not understand my speech? even because ye cannot hear my word. Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of Iris own; for he is a liar, and the father of it.” (John 8:40-44) Why has opposition to the Lord Jesus and his kingdom always been manifest ? Because the Devil had sworn to turn all men away from Jehovah God and he has taken every opportunity to oppose God and his servants. When Jesus came to earth as the special witness of Jehovah and to redeem the human race, and to begin the work of taking out from the nations a people to be witnesses to Jehovah, the Devil wicked
January 1, 1934
*3Te WATCHTOWER.
13
ly opposed every part of his work. In this opposition the Devil used his earthly agents, to wit, the religionists of that time, and he has continued to use such men ever since. Jesus plainly told his true followers that they would receive like persecution from the same source of religionists.—Matt. 10:24,25; John 15: 18-21.
It is therefore certainly to be expected that the witnesses of Jehovah, that is to say, the true followers of Christ Jesus who would be looking for the second coming of the Lord and his kingdom and testifying thereto, would be the objects of the Devil’s wrath and of his cruel opposition. Jesus told his faithful followers that they would be hated of all nations at that time for his name’s sake; and the facts that have come to pass in recent years completely prove the fulfilment of this prophecy. (Matt. 24:9) To his faithful followers Christ Jesus committed the work of giving testimony to the truth, and told them that they would be wickedly persecuted by the Devil and his earthly representatives; and it is even so to this day.—Rev. 12:17.
SEDITION
The false charge of sedition and blasphemy was made against Jesus by the religionists, and he was wrongfully and without any true evidence convicted of that crime and put to death. The clergy who were his persecutors were the very ones who tried to destroy the evidence of his resurrection, and in that it is manifest that they were the instruments of the Devil. (Matt. 27: 62-66) It is certain, therefore, that the second coming of Christ and his kingdom would be violently opposed by the Devil and his agents, even as we see it going on at this time.
“Organized Christian religion” had its origin in the day of Constantine, the emperor of Rome. Then it was that the Roman Catholic hierarchy came into existence. From that time to the present day the Roman Catholic hierarchy has been the most powerful religious organization on earth and also the chief instrument of the Devil in opposition to the kingdom of God under Christ. It not only practices religion, but is a powerful commercial organization and a cruel political organization. Its opposition to truth has been and is subtle and deceptive, and thereby many honest persons have been deceived. The Roman Catholic hierarchy has always appeared before the people as a representative of God and of Christ, and yet at the same time has been the chief instrument for the persecution of all who have told the truth concerning God’s Word. It has tried to keep the people in complete ignorance of the Bible and has induced them to follow, instead of the Scriptures, the teachings of the Papal “religious organization”. The Roman Catholic hierarchy has at all times indulged in politics and tried to control the nations of the world. It has collected fabulous sums of money from the people to carry on its works. All true witnesses for the Lord have been classed by the Roman Catholic hierarchy as bigots, blasphemers and enemies of the state, and the charge of sedition and blasphemy is often laid against the humble followers of Christ Jesus. Such wicked opposition to the truth, and such persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses, are made manifest today, par
ticularly in the countries of Italy, Germany, Canada and the United States, and that persecution is led by the religionists of so-called “organized Christianity”, the chief instrument of Satan on earth.
There was a time when ministers of the Protestant religious organization opposed the Roman Catholic hierarchy, and called attention to its ungodliness, but in modern times the so-called “Protestant religionists” have abandoned the “protest theory” and joined forces with the Roman Catholic hierarchy, and both organizations are in opposition to God and his kingdom under Christ. These opposers of God’s kingdom under Christ, in an effort to hide their own crookedness, falsely charge the faithful followers of Christ Jesus with the crime of sedition and blasphemy. Such opposers constantly indulge in a campaign of circulating slanderous and libelous reports to the effect that Jehovah’s witnesses are violators of the commercial laws of the land and are allied with communists to overthrow the government. All reasonable persons can readily see that such opposition and persecution originate and proceed from the Devil and therefore “organized religionists and religions” are instruments and servants of the Devil and do not serve God and his kingdom under Christ.
These statements are here made, not to provoke a controversy, but in order that honest persons who desire to know the truth may have a proper understanding of our Society and its work. The Society and its supporters are in no wise interested in the politics of the present world. Our work and devotion is entirely to Jehovah God’s kingdom under Christ, because such is the only hope of the human race, and because all blessings must proceed from God, and his witnesses delight to obey his commandments because such is right. Having devoted ourselves to Jehovah God, the divine commission and duty is laid upon us to bear testimony before the rulers and the peoples of earth of and concerning the great Jehovah and his kingdom. We have no fight with any person on earth, but in fulfilling our commission and duty of telling the truth as contained in the Word of God we draw upon us the fire of the visible agents of the Devil, and amidst such opposition and persecution we proceed with the work assigned to us. Knowing that this work is being done at the commandment of the Lord God we are certain that no opposition can destroy it, but that it will go on until Jehovah’s name is completely vindicated.—Isa. 54:17.
The Society has no formal creed, as that word is generally understood. It has no membership roll, but all who are truly devoted to God are asked to work together to the honor of Jehovah’s name. It is not in any wise engaged in propaganda, because it does not seek to propagate any doctrine or bring others into its fold. As the followers of Christ Jesus we believe and teach what is in the Scriptures, and nothing more and nothing less. That being God’s doctrine, no human creature could propagate it; hence our work is not propaganda, but merely bearing testimony to the truth.
ANNUAL REPORT
JEHOVAH has blessed the united efforts of his witnesses on the earth during the past year, and it is
14
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
a real joy to report the progress of that work. Having in mind that this witness work is carried forward in North America and South America, Europe, Asia, Africa and the isles of the sea, and that the printed message is distributed in fifty-eight different languages, you will appreciate the fact that in this report it is practically impossible to give the minute details of the work. We must be content to make mention of some of the more important facts. Even though the number of the witnesses in the field is small, and the opposition is much greater now than in times past, yet the results show that the work of bearing testimony to the name of Jehovah and his kingdom has gone steadily forward. This fact will serve as a comfort to each one who is privileged to have a part in that work.
Every one of Jehovah’s witnesses today and every day delights to sing forth the praises of the Most High. It could not be otherwise with them. For many centuries the lovers of righteousness have waited for the coming of Jehovah’s King and his kingdom, and now Christ is here and his reign has begun. Soon wickedness shall be eliminated from the earth, Jehovah’s name vindicated, and the people brought to a realization of the .fact that lasting peace has come to earth, and everlasting blessings to all who have good will toward God and righteousness. The fulfilment of the prophetic utterance at the time of the birth of Jesus is now being realized. (Luke 2:9-14) Jehovah’s witnesses are privileged not only to discern these truths, but to announce them to others and thus to declare amongst the people the gracious works of the Almighty God. With gladness they have received the truth, and with joy and boldness they tell the truth to others.—Isa. 12: 2-6.
First we delight to give thanks to Jehovah for the abundance of food provided for his own at the temple. He gave his word that all who are born of his organization shall be taught or fed by him and shall have great peace, and we have now abundant evidence that this precious promise is being fulfilled. Christ Jesus, the Head of Jehovah’s capital organization, has gathered unto himself at the temple those whom he has found faithful. Jehovah and Christ are the teachers, and Christ imparts to those of the temple company the present-day truths, and thus he teaches or feeds them upon food convenient for their upbuilding and consolation. All of the temple class fully appreciate the fact that no man is teaching them and that they need no man to teach them. Their strength comes from the Lord, because he is the great Shepherd of the sheep.
Among other precious things which the Lord has taught his people during the year is the truth that the church have ‘ come into the unity of faith and knowledge’ and ‘henceforth are no more carried away by every wind of doctrine and the craftiness of men’. (Eph. 4:11-14) The cleansing of the temple is an accomplished fact. Those of the temple class are at unity, and henceforth ‘ ‘ in his temple doth every one speak of his glory”.—Ps. 29: 9.
During the year among some of the companies there have been disturbances made by fault-finders and murmurers, but it is quite manifest that such faultfinders and trouble-makers are not of the temple. They
may be walking along in the company of some of the temple members, but in fact they are outside of God’s organization and cannot see what is on the inside. Only those of the temple class appreciate the truth and rejoice in their privileges just now. The temple class will proceed together in unity. They will not, and are not disposed to, waste any time in discussing foolish and unnecessary things, nor do they make an effort to justify themselves before men, knowing that such a course is displeasing to the Lord. (Luke 16:15) They know that Christ Jesus is their Judge and, if they are faithful in the performance of their divinely given commission, they will please him and please the Eternal Father, and that is all-sufficient. For this reason the faithful push forward in the work which has been assigned to them. They have and do manifest patience, which means that, knowing they are right and doing the Lord’s work according to his commandment, and have the approval of the Lord, even though suffering great inconvenience, persecution and contradiction of sinners, they steadfastly move on and boldly declare God’s truth as they go.
During the year the great Teacher has made known to his own the meaning of other prophecies not heretofore understood, and these truths have served as a great comfort and stimulus to the faithful, and thus the Lord has sustained them in making a hard battle. As you read here concerning some of the experiences of your brethren in other parts of the earth you will rejoice that you are privileged to be a part of the organization of the Lord that suffers at the hands of the wicked and yet amidst all such cruel opposition does not break its ranks but marches onward singing the praises of the Most High. Every one of the temple loves every other member of that blessed temple class, and all must be and are at complete unity. It is a little company united in the holy cause of Jehovah’s kingdom and in obedience to his commandments which continues to lift high the standard of the King that others may have the opportunity to know the true God and to set their hopes upon his King and kingdom.
During the year the message of truth has been ‘proclaimed from the housetops’ by means of radio, by other means of speech, and by the wide distribution of books, booklets and magazines. The factory in Brooklyn has run on full time. Likewise the factory in Switzerland has operated full time. The Society’s factory at Magdeburg, Germany, during the first part of the year operated three shifts of eight hours each per day, but about the middle of the year the enemy succeeded in closing it down. The production during the year, however, will be of great comfort and satisfaction to those who have had some part in the work. The distribution of the books and booklets amongst the people in all languages during the year has reached the aggregate of 24,074,401 volumes. Had not the enemy hindered the work in Germany the distribution would have been greater. We are not disturbed, however. The Lord is at the helm and he has good reason in permitting everything, and with this we are entirely content.
Jehovah has declared that all shall know that he is God. It seems clearly to appear that now is the time
January 1, 1934
3Te WATCHTOWER.
15
when those who have been taken out from the world for his name’s sake must deliver Jehovah’s message to the rulers and to the people that Jehovah is God and that his kingdom is here. The enemy and his agents on earth, particularly the Catholic hierarchy, continue to fight desperately against Jehovah’s witnesses. This is to be expected. Regardless of all opposition Jehovah’s organization, like a great war chariot, moves majestically forward. The world is in a great economic depression and steeped in crime, and this condition continues to grow worse. The people of good will desire to hear the message of truth; hence the work of advertising the King and the Kingdom has progressed.
For the year ending September 1932 slightly more than twenty-two million books and booklets were placed in the hands of the people. For the year ending September 1933 more than twenty-four million books and booklets were placed in the hands of the people; an increase of approximately two millions over the preceding year. In the report for 1932 it appeared that from the year 1922 to the year 1932 the distribution of the books and booklets carrying the message of the Kingdom aggregated 132,779,040. For the year 1933 the output exceeded any previous year, as above stated, bringing the total distribution since 1922 up to 156,853,441.
These figures do not take into consideration, however, The Watchtower, which during that period of time has been devoted exclusively to present-day truth published twice each month, and would aggregate the equivalent of 1,309,040 bound books. In addition thereto are also the Year Books, issued once each year since 1926, and the distribution of which up to the present time aggregates more than 214,204 volumes.
During the year the praise of Jehovah and his King has been sung by those who love him and his kingdom.
It is to be regretted, however, that with a few of the companies of Jehovah’s people there are some who formerly held the office of “elective elder” and who still think that they should spend their time by giving addresses before the companies or others that might be assembled. Such do not seem to have an appreciation of the way the Lord is carrying forward his work. Jehovah’s capital organization is functioning according to his will. Every one in that organization must be a witness, and the method which the Lord is blessing ought to be sufficient evidence that the work is being carried on according to his will. The radio and transcription machines advertise the truth and open the way for approach to the people, and then
the individual workers carry the message into the homes of those who wish to hear. Personalities do not enter into the matter at all. If the Lord has assigned one part of the work to some and another part to others, then each one should be glad to do his or her part and not covet the work that is assigned to another.
Some of the brethren have expressed their opinion that the president of the Society is given too much advertisement and that others should be advertised somewhat. Be assured that the advertisement is not of an individual, but only in connection with the truth. Probably somebody else could do it better, but let each one be content with what the Lord gives him to do. There are very few murmurers, however, walking along with the real ones. The Lord’s parable concerning the laborers in the vineyard clearly shows that there would be some murmurers, and we should expect to find some; but this will not at all disturb the ones who really delight to do with their might what their hands find to do and not worry about what somebody else is doing.
Jehovah and Christ Jesus are the teachers, and all in the temple are taught by them and not by men. Some in the organization are used to print and manufacture literature, while others are used to put it out; but there is no preference to anyone. All are one compact body engaged in a common cause, and those who really love Jehovah and his kingdom are following organization instructions without murmuring or complaining. With all such the year has been filled with joyful service, and the faithful workers today are strong in the Lord and in the power of his might.
The year concludes with Jehovah’s witnesses fully united in spirit and in the service of the Lord. Those really of the temple are avoiding all controversies with those who oppose the method of carrying on the work. The faithful fully appreciate the fact that the Lord Jesus is the Head of the capital organization of Jehovah, that he is the great Prophet, and it is the privilege and duty of each one of the faithful class to be obedient to his commandments; as it is written: “In his temple doth every one speak of his glory,” and not of the glory of men. The faithful remnant have but a single purpose, and that is to do faithfully the will of God. They keep in mind the precious words written for their comfort: “Jehovah sitteth as King for ever. Jehovah will give strength unto his people; Jehovah will bless his people with peace.” (Psalm 29: 9-11, A.R.V.) With full assurance of faith, and strong of hope, the faithful continue their onward march, giving praise to Jehovah’s name.
A TRULY BLESSED YEAR
Dear Brother Rutherford:
At our annual business meeting, last Sunday, we unanimously agreed to write you expressing once more our united love.
The service year just closed has been a truly blessed one for all who have put forth a sincere effort to exalt the name of Jehovah our God. We will not take up your time with details of our many happy experiences throughout a year filled with real, practical kingdom service. The Watchtowers, Bulletins and other literature repeatedly tell of the joy, peace and unity possessed by Jehovah’s witnesses as they march to the war, and because these things enter into our experiences we know that what is written is true.
Whilst acknowledging Jehovah as the author of all good, we are not so unthankful as to forget the means he is pleased to use to dispense his blessings. Accordingly, we desire to tell you of our appreciation of all your unselfish service, including the writing of the new book, Preparation, which is now in our hands and is going on our schedule as a topic of study.
We remember you always in our prayers, and are determined, by divine grace, to press on with you throughout the new year and as long as it is the Lord’s good pleasure to have us continue here.
Yours in Jehovah’s service, London (England) Company of Jehovah’s witnesses.
WATCHTOWER.
RADIO SERVICE
The good news of the kingdom of Jehovah is broadcast each week or oftener by these and other stations at time shown.
[Current local time is shown in each instance.]
AUSTRALASIA
NEW SOUTH WALES
Albury 2-AY Tu 9:15pm Broken Hill 2-XLSu 8:45pm Canberra 2-CA Su 8:45pm Goulburn 2-GN Su 7:30pm Gunnedah 2-MO Su 7:00pm Lismore 2-XNWe 7:15pm Newcastle 2-HD Su 9:30am
Su 7:15pm We 6:45pm Sydney 2-UE Su 7:00pm W’gaW’ga 2-WG We 7:45pm
QUEENSLAND
Brisbane 4-BC Su 10:15pm Mackay 4-MK Su II :00am Townsville 4-TOWe 8:00pm
VICTORIA
Ballarat 3-AC Su 10:15pm Ballarat 3-BA Su 1:15pm Bendigo 3-BO Tu 8:00pm Hamilton 3-HASu 8:30pm Melbourne 3-AW Su 4:45pm Melbourne. 3-YB Su 7:30pm Sale 3-TRSa 9:00 pm Swan Hill 3-SH Su 7:15pm Wangaratta 3-WR Su 8:15pm
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
Adelaide	5KA Su 10:30am
Su 7:10pm We 6:30pm
WEST AUSTRALIA
Kalgoorlie 6-KG Su 7:40pm Perth 6-MLSu 9:00pm
TASMANIA
Launceston 7-LA Fr 10:15pm
Ulverstone 7-UV Su 8:45pm
BELGIUM
Hainaut BONNE Sa 5:30pm (330 m) ESPERANCE
CANADA ALBERTA Calgary CFCN Su 5:45pm NOVA SCOTIA Sydney CJCBSu 9:00pm ONTARIO Hamilton CHOC Su 10:30am Su 1:30pm Su 8:15pm
CHINA
Shanghai XHHH Su 10:00am
CUBA
Havana CMK Su 11:30am also Spanish Su 9:00pm
Santa Cl’a CMHISul2:00nn
ESTHONIA
Reval RADIO-Su 3:30pm (296.1m) TALLINN
FRANCE
Beziers RADIO-Th 8:00pm (220.1 m) BEZIERS
Bordeaux RADIO- Mo 7:45pm
(237 m) SUD-OUEST
Fecamp RADIO-
(223 m) NORMANDIE
English: Su 4:00pm
French: Tu 8:00pm
Paris RADIO L L Fr 8:15pm (370 m)
Paris RADIO- Sul2:00nn
(312.8 m) VITUS
Th 7:30pm Sa 7:30pm
Toulouse RADIO- We 7:15pm (385.1 m) TOULOUSE
UNITED STATES
ALABAMA
Birm’ham WAPI Su 9:45am
Birm ’ham WBRC Su 10:00am
We 4:30pm
Dothan WHET Su 10:30am
We 1:15pm Fr 1:15pm
M ’tgomery WSFA Su 3:45pm
MuscleS. WNRASu 6:00pm
We 8:00pm Fr 8:00pm
Troy WHET Su 10:30am
We	1:15pm Fr	1:15pm
	ALASKA	
Anchorage KFQD We		9:30pm
Ketchikan KGBU Mo		7:15pm
Th	7:15pm Sa	7:15pm
	ARIZONA	
Bisbee	KSUN Su	4:00pm
We	4:00pm Fr	4:00pm
Jerome	KCRJ Mo	5:15pm
We	5:15pm Sa	5:15pm
	Spanish Th	4:30pm
Phoenix	KTAR Su	9:00am
Prescott	; KPJM Su	5:45pm
We	5:15pm Fr	5:15pm
Tucson	KGARSu	7:00pm
We	5:45pm Fr	5:45pm
Tucson	KVOA Su	8:45am
	Th	8:00pm
Yuma	KUMA Su	6:15pm
	Spanish Su	6:00pm
	ARKANSAS	
Fay’ville KUOA Su 12:45pm We 11:45am Fr 4:45pm
Little R’k K ARK Su 9:00am Little R’k KGHISu 7:00pm
We 5:45pm Fr 5:45pm Little R’k KLRA Su 10:30am Paragould KBTM Su 10:00am
Wo 11:30am
Texarkana KCMC Su 6:45pm
CALIFORNIA
El Centro KXO Su 10:00am Eureka KIEM Su 10:30am Fresno KM.T Su 3:45pm Hollywood KNX Su 9:15pm Long B’ch KGER Su 10:45am Los Angeles KTM Su 8:30atn
Su 8:00pm Th 8:00pm
Oakland KLS Su 11:15am Wo 2:45pm Fr 2:45pm
Oakland KROW Su 10:15am Su 6:15pm Tu 8:15pm
Th 8:15pm
Sa ’mento KFBK Su 9:30am S.F'cisco KT AB Su 9:30am
Sa 8:30am
Stockton KGDM Su 9:30am We 7:15am Fr 1:15pm
COLORADO
Col 'o Spr. KVOR Su 10:30am
We 5:30pm Sa 4:30pm
Denver	KFEL Su	7:00pm
Grand J'n KFXJ Su	1:15pm
Greeley	KFKA Mo	7:15pm
Lamar	KIDW Su	7:15pm
We 2:40pm Fr 2:40pm
Pueblo KGHFMo 8:30pm
We 10:45am
Yuma KGEK Su 12:45pm We 12:45pm Fr 12:45pm
CONNECTICUT
Bridgeport WICC Su 10:00am
DELAWARE
Wilm’ton WDEL Su 7:00pm We 8:30pm
Wilm’ton WILM Mo 8:45pm
FLORIDA
Miami WIOD Su 12:15pm
Miami	WQAM Su 4:30pm
Orlando WDBO Su 12:45pm
Pensacola WCOA Su 1:00pm We 7:30pm Fr 6:30pm
GEORGIA
Athens	WTFI Su 9:45am
Atlanta	WGST Su 5:45pm
Augusta WRDW Su 3:00pm ____________ Th 7:45pm
Columbus WRBL Su 9:30am
La Grange WKEU Su 3:00pm
We 3:00pm Frl0:00ain
Rome	WFDV Su 12:30pm
We 8:45pm Fr 8:45pm
Savannah WTOC Su 1:15pm Tho ’ville WQDX We 9:15am
We 7:30pm
HAWAII
Honolulu KGMB We 12:05pm Fr 7:15pm
IDAHO
Boise	KIDO Su 10:30am
We 8:30pm
Idaho Falls KID Mo 8:45pm Tu 8:45pm We 8:45pm
Th 8:45pm Fr 8:45pm Sa 8:45pm
Nampa KFXD Su 11:00am Pocatello KSEI Su 2:00pm
Su 9:00pm
Twin Falls KTFI Su 10:45am
ILLINOIS
Chicago WJJDSu 2:30pm
Cicero WHFCSu 5:00pm
We 5:00pm Fr 5:00pm
Decatur WJBL Su 10:00am ____________ Fr 7:30pm
Harrisb’g WEBQ Su 6:00pm
Mo 10:00pm Fr 10:00pm
Joliet WCLS Su 12:15pm
We 11:00am Fr 11:00am
LaSalle WJBC Su 10:15am
Rockford KFLV Su 10:00am
Su 10:00pm We 10:00pm
R’k Island WHBF Su 1:00pm W’e 6:30pm Sa 6:30pm Sp ’gfield WCBS Su 12:30pm Sa 11:15am
Tuscola WDZ Su 10:00am
INDIANA
Gary WIND Su 10:45am
Ind ’apolisWKBF Su 10:00am
We 2:00pm
Muncie WLBC Su 1:30pm
___ Fr 7:30pm
T. Haute WBOW Su 12:45pm
IOWA
Decorah KGCA Mo 9:00am
We 9:00am Sa 9:00am
Marshallt'nKFJB Su 8:45am
We 6:15pm Fr 6:15pm Shenandoah KMA Su 11:15am Waterloo WMT Su 6:45pm
KANSAS
Coffeyville KGGF Su 1:45pm Th 8:00pm
Kans.C’y WLBF Su 5:15pm We 5:15pm Fr 5:15pm
Wichita KFH Su 9:45am
MAINE
Bangor WLBZ Su 9:45am Portland WCSH Su 4:00pm Presque I. WAGM Mo 12:15pm Tu 12:15pm We 12:15pm Th 12:15pm Fr 12:15pm Sa 12:15pm
MARYLAND
Baltimore WB AL Su 4:15pm Cumberl’d WTBO Su 2:00pm We 2:00pm Fr 2:00pm
MASSACHUSETTS
Babson P. WBSO Su 12:30pm Boston WHDH Su 12:15pm Boston WNAC Su 16:30am Lex’gton WLEY Mo 1:30pm
We 1:30pm Th 1:30pm
Sp ’gfield WMAS Su 10:00am Worcester WORC Su 10:30am
MICHIGAN
Calumet WHDF Tu 6:45pm
Detroit WJRSu 9:45am
Ironwood WJMS Su 5:00pm
We 7:00pm Fr 7:15pm Jackson WIBM Su 10:00am Kalamazoo WKZO Su 3:00pm
We 3:15pm
MINNESOTA
F’gus Falls KGDE Su 10:00am Min’polis WRHM Tu 8:00pm Moorhead KGFK Su 7:30pm
We 5:15pm Fr 5:15pm St. Paul WRHM Su 12:30pm
Th 1:00pm
MISSISSIPPI
Hattiesb’gWPFB Su 1:30pm
We 7:45pm
Laurel	WAML Su 12:45pm
Meridian WCOC Su 10:00am We 6:45pm
Miss. City WGCMSu 9:45am
We 8:45pm
Sfa WATCHTOWER.
Published Semi-Monthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N. Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Buthebford President W. E. Van Ambuegh Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” ~ Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is tho only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that tho Logos was the beginning of his creation and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Cldef Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created per.'ect man for tho earth and placed him upon it; that man wilfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was mado human, and tho man Jesus suffered death in order to produce tho ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and tliat Christ Jesus is tho Chief Officer thereof and is tho rightful King of tho world; that tho anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus aro children of Zion, member;- of Jehovah’s organization, and aro his witnesses whoso duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear tho fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jcsa? Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throno of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ which has now begun; that tho Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization nnd the establishment of righteousness in tho earth, and that under tho kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall be restored and live on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses. It provides
systematic Bible study for all its readers and supplies teachers to aid any person or company of persons engaged in sincere Bible study. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in tho Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ .his Beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in tho light of tho Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
"Cnitto Stites, 11.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 7s. American remittances should be made by Express or Postal Money Order, or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, Soutli African and Australasian remittances should bo mado direct to the respective branch oflices. Itemittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British .......... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England Canadian ....... 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada .tuAfra/usion . . 7 Beresford Bead, St rath field, N. S. W., Australia South African .... Boston House, Capo Town, South Africa Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.}
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay tlie subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written npplication to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid tho needy, but the wrltb.n application once each year is requited by the postal regulations. Xotice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a now or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Chance of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration; will be rent, with the journal one month before the subscription expire,. Entered as Second Class Mail Matter at Brooklyn, X. Y., Postofflce.
Act of March 3, I8TO.
"DIVIDING THE PEOPLE” TESTIMONY PERIOD
As suggested by the name, the period from January 20 to 2?, inclusive, lias been set aside to specialize on ottering to the people the newest booklet, Dividing the People. During thc'e nine days Jehovah’s witnesses ns one man in Christ Jesus will be in action, and, whether privileged to distribute the above booklet in their respective languages or not, will be equally engaged in marking the foreheads of those hoping in the Lord’s name and thus be instruments of the Lord in his division work. All Watchtower readers, also all those /ns-isTii.d-owed by Jonadab, may participate. The importance of the campaign behooves that due preparation be begun without delay by companies and individuals alike.
“DIVIDING THE PEOPLE”
The title of this new booklet focuses attention on the work which Jehovah God, by his Judge at the temple, Christ Jesus, is now doing in view of the great slaughter to occur at Armageddon. The cover illustration is very expressive of the title and gives compelling force thereto. This booklet contains the three lectures “The True God”, “The Mimic God.” and “Why Serve Jehovah”, delivered within recent monthj'over both a coast-to-coast radio network and one along the Atlantic coast, nnd which deserve thoughtful study by all. Like all other booklets of the Society, it may be had for uc.
SOLICITING
Anyone soliciting money in behalf of the Society, its president or anyone connected with the Society, is doing wrong, and let all persons take notice that such persons are wholly unauthorized by the Society. Those engaged in the work of witnessing to the truth by means of the publications are authorized to do that work, but no one is authorized to go about and solicit money upon the pretext that he represents the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society or its president.
ADVERTISING WATCHTOWER PROGRAMS
Advertising the Kingdom helps also to advertise the radio stations which are broadcasting the kingdom message. lit nee all witnessing parties and all individuals engaging in the field service should mention the radio station in their vicinity which carries the Watchtower programs. This magnifies to the people called upon the message which Jehovah’s witnesses introduce, and often results in interest in the printed message on the part of the radio listener. This is one of the chief purports of sending out the message over the radio, to encourage tl.o people to read the literature. In this behalf the Society supplies radio folders, and all workers should make cone.triiit use of them in house-to-house calling, leaving one of them, if nothing else.
Vol. LV
January 15, 1934
No. 2
"SATISFIED WITH THY LIKENESS”
“As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness; I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeness.”
—Ps. 17:15.
JEHOVAH moved David to write this psalm, which now appears to be a prophecy which has had at least a partial fulfilment. It is to be confidently expected that this psalm would have some fulfilment while the remnant is yet on the earth, for the reason that those of the remnant are given the assurance that “whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope”. (Rom. 15:4) These things were written to be especially understood by those devoted to the Lord who should be on earth at the end of the world. That time is here. —1 Cor. 10:11.
a The greatest thing for which the Christian can hope must be realized after the end of his earthly journey. For this reason it is written by the faithful servant of Jehovah, the apostle: “And we desire that every one of you do shew the same diligence to the full assurance of hope unto the end.” (Hob. 6:11) That great hope is that the creature might receive eternal life in a spirit organism, be made partaker of the resurrection of Christ, and therefore “be like him” and be for ever in the favor and service of Jehovah God. (1 John 3:2; Titus 1:2; Phil. 3:10,11) Such is the “hope set before us” and which is “an anchor of the soul, both sure and stedfast, and which entereth into that within the vail; whither the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus, made an high priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec”. (Heb. 6:18-20) It is the crown of life which is given only to those who are faithful unto death. (Rev. 2:10; 2 Tim. 4:8) It follows, therefore, that if the prophecies, such as the seventeenth Psalm, are not to be fulfilled and understood by the remnant while on the earth such prophecies could not provide comfort to the remnant on earth that would strengthen the great hope of immortality. The reason is that there would be no occasion to give hope to those who had fully’ received the highest thing for which they could possible’ hope. This of itself, in view of the foregoing scriptures, shows that the prophecies are to be understood by the remnant while still in the organism of flesh.
3 The rule seems to be reasonable and certain, that prophecy cannot be understood until in the course of
fulfilment or until it has been fulfilled. Jehovah makes known the meaning of his prophecy in his due time, and speculation by men cannot bring to light the true meaning of prophecy. It is true that often a desire to have a thing come to pass is the inducement for placing a certain construction upon prophecy. Such a rule, however, is unsafe. When the Lord brings to pass events that fit the prophecy, then we know that that is his way of fulfilling it, and therefore the only way.
* For years the followers of Christ Jesus have thought that they had an understanding of the prophetic words of Psalm 17:15 and that the words of this text have fulfilment to the individual members of the company that follow Christ when each faithful one is blessed by a participation in the first resurrection. I" other words, the thought has been that the prophecy has no fulfilment until the resurrection change into the likeness of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. But is that the correct interpretation and understanding of the prophecy? It seems to be wholly unreasonable to so conclude. During the Elijah period of the church many consecrated ones were brought together in the knowledge and service of the Lord, and these faithful ones associated this prophecy with the resurrection change of the body members of Christ and relied upon it as a means of comfort.
sThe song number one hundred thirteen in the Song Book used by us, and which song we have time and again sung together, is supposed to find authority for the words thereof in the fifteenth verse of the seventeenth Psalm. Among other things in that poem or song are these words: “If I in thy likeness, O Lord, may awake, and shine a pure image of thee, then I shall be satisfied when I can break the fetters of flesh and be free.” The Lord’s children have sung this song with fervor and joy, having in mind the time when they would be rid of the cumbersome, fleshly organism, cease from their troubles, and receive a glorious spirit organism and be like the Lord Jesus in glory. Thus they have expressed themselves as dissatisfied with the condition in which the Lord had placed them and looked forward to the time when they might die and go to heaven. Doubtless the song
20
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
has served to fix the mind for the time being upon the anticipated joy of the great resurrection; but it now seems that such is not the true meaning of the psalm which Jehovah caused David to write, and such interpretation does not give honor to Jehovah God.
• Of course, it is true that the complete and glorious union of the members with Christ Jesus in the presence of Jehovah is the great desire and hope of the anointed, but the Scriptures were written for the learning of these while on earth and before they reach that glorious state. To look forward with joyful anticipation to the resurrection change and complete union with Christ Jesus in heaven and in the presence of Jehovah is a fond desire that should find a place in the heart of everyone who is in Christ Jesus. Since, however, that great desire cannot possibly be realized while in the flesh, the desire of itself would be no evidence that the psalm above mentioned applies and has its fulfilment at the resurrection.
’Because David wrote the Psalm the thought has been advanced that it is a manifestation of David’s desire to be free from all limitation and be resurrected as a perfect human creature. But that does not seem to be supported by any scripture. We..know that the hope of the resurrection was before the faithful men of old and that many died having that hope. (Ilcb. 11:13) But the Old Testament Scriptures do not state who hold such hope. It is stated only in the New Testament of the hope these faithful men had of a better resurrection. The Old Testament says very little about the resurrection of the dead. This lack of reference in the Old Testament to the resurrection of the dead is persuasive proof that it is hardly probable that Psalm 17:15 is a statement concerning the hope of the resurrection. It is not to be expected that the faithful prophets of old had a hope of being resurrected in the likeness of Jesus Christ, because that mystery was not made known to them, but was hid from them and first made manifest to the faithful followers of Christ Jesus. (Col. 1:26,27) Added to this is the positive statement that the prophecies were not written for the benefit of the faithful men of old but for the benefit of the remnant on earth at the end of the world. The evidence is overwhelming that this prophecy has its fulfilment in the present time.
HIS COMING
* Before leaving his disciples Jesus emphasized of.e great truth that they continually kept in mind, and that truth was concerning his return or second coming. Jesus said to them: “I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto myscii; that where I am, there ye may be also.” (John 14:2,3) The writings of the apostles are further and conclusive proof that the second coming of the Lord to them was of greatest importance and made the strongest impression upon their minds. Jesus did not say that he would prepare a place and then send for his faithful followers, but
he said, “I will come again, and receive you unto myself.” Among the many things Paul wrote to the church were these words: We are “waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ”. (1 Cor. 1:7) “For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? Are not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming?” (1 Thess. 2:19) “To the end he may stablish your hearts unblameable in holiness before God, even our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his saints.” (1 Thess. 3:13) Furthermore, one of the apostles wrote: “Be patient therefore, brethren, unto the coming of the Lord.” (Jas. 5:7) “For we have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses of his majesty.” (2 Pet. 1:16) To this testimony are added the words: “And now, little children, abide in him; that, when he shall appear, we may have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his coming.” (1 John 2:28) Surely no one will be ashamed at the time he participates in the first resurrection, but, according to the words of the text last above quoted, it is made sure that there is a possibility of some being ashamed at the time of the coming of the Lord, and the facts support this conclusion that some were ashamed and are still ashamed.
8 It was not long after the death of the apostles that an organization was formed and labeled “Christianity”, and which organization quickly began to teach that every one who dies goes to one of three places, to wit, purgatory, hell or heaven. We now know that such great errors as these, and like errors, were the products of Satan’s exercising his influence over min and that some are clearly contradictory of the Scriptures. During the Elijah period of the church many faithful ones came out from that Babylonish system named “organized Christianity”, but necessarily they broiight along with them some of the errors of that organization; and this is represented by their “filthy garments”. It is a fact that cannot be disputed that during the Elijah period of the church when meeting together the brethren would talk about the second coming of the Lord, but not much was said about the joy of his coming, and the meeting with him. That which was chiefly stressed at all such meetings of the brethren was that each one should be diligent to prepare himself that he might be found worthy of being taken to heaven.
18 There was a great restoration of the truth that had long been hid; but amongst all things discussed and relied upon by the brethren during the Elijah period of the church personal character development was held forth as the most important rattier than the service of the Lord and the rejoicing in his coming. The importance of his second coming and the joy that would come to his followers seem to have been largely overlooked. It was considered more in a general way, without reference to what the church might have to do while on the earth after his return. At almost all
Janvaby 15, 1934
Tfie WATCHTOWER.
21
meetings of the brethren during that time the question propounded one to another more than any other question was this: “How long will it be, and when shall we be taken home?” These facts are mentioned here as a support to the argument which shall follow.
ERROR
11 Why should the Lord have allowed this thought of “going to heaven” to have the chief place in the mind of so many of his people, if it was not the most important thing? It cannot be said positively why the Lord permitted such, but we do know that the Lord permits men to exercise their own free will. If one has a selfish motive in understanding the truth of God’s Word it is likely that he will fall into error. Jesus and the apostles stressed the importance of love for God, which means an unselfish devotion to Jehovah ; yet many deemed it of greatest importance to get themselves ready to go to heaven rather than to show their love for God, and they proceeded upon the theory that the truth was given that men might prepare themselves to go to heaven and meet the Lord and assist him in governing the world. Now we plainly see that such a conclusion was very erroneous, chiefly because the mind was more particularly set upon the welfare of the creature rather than upon full obedience to the great Creator.
11 It may be further asked: Does error or misconception matter much as long as the one is honest and docs the best he knows how? Does it affect one seriously? It certainly docs affect one seriously. Sincerity and honesty in following an error does not build one up. It is the truth that sanctifies. (John 17:17) The result of an erroneous conception of such a doctrine as character development as a condition precedent to getting into heaven was to turn the attention of the individual to himself, and this caused him to entirely miss the importance of ascertaining God’s purpose and being governed accordingly.
11 During the Elijah period of the church two classes, all of whom professed to be following Christ Jesus, were developed or became manifest. One of these classes was moved largely by a selfish desire to go to heaven and aid the Lord in operating the universe, and that is the class that developed into and forms the “evil servant”. The other class were the more humble ones who were moved by an unselfish desire to do the will of God whatsoever that is, whether they understood it or not; and although they realized their inability to develop a perfect character, and their unworthiness to go to heaven, they faithfully held to the promises of the Lord and continued to serve him as best they could. When Jesus came to the temple for examination he selected this class for his special service and designated it as the “faithful and wise servant”. The class first above named, that is, the selfish one, has never yet been able to discern the coming of the Lord to his temple and has failed to see the privilege of serving the Lord, which privilege is given to
those who are called to the kingdom. The error aforementioned had much to do with causing them to go wrong. Those who had a small estimation of themselves, and who were often discouraged because of their imperfections, but who were determined to serve the Lord even though imperfect, thereby showed their love for God, and these are the ones whom the Lord has approved upon coming to his temple and to whom he said: ‘You have been faithful over a few things; I will make you ruler over many things.’
11 Both of the aforementioned classes during the Elijah period of the church bore testimony before others of the second coming of the Lord, but they seemed to have missed the point that the coming of the Lord was to receive the faithful unto himself. It now appears to be certain that the clear understanding of the matter could not be had and appreciated until after the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple. Those whom he found faithful upon his coming to the temple of Jehovah, and who have continued faithful, are the ones who have had and continue to have an appreciation of the precious truths as God reveals them to his people. These, having been invited by the Lord to enter into his joy, now know that the joy of the Lord Jesus Christ is the vindication of his Father’s name. With them, therefore, the vindication of Jehovah’s name is of all importance, and the kingdom the greatest of the doctrines, because it is the kingdom that is used by him to vindicate his name.
1S	The faithful class whom the Lord invites into his joy see that upon his coming to the temple much work is to be done by the faithful ones as witnesses for the kingdom. Those who have been selfish do not see their privilege to be witnesses to the Lord and to his kingdom, and hence fail and refuse to obey the Lord’s commandment to give such witness. Concerning those whom the Lord would receive into his temple it is written: “And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” (Isa. 54:13) The remnant now realize that this prophecy of Isaiah is being fulfilled and therefore that none but the children of God in the temple can understand and appreciate the great truths now being revealed. This shows the close relationship of the remnant to the Lord Jesus Christ and Jehovah, and hence it is for these that the Scriptures are written that they might have a full assurance of faith that they have the Lord’s approval and, continuing thus, will ultimately be ushered into the presence of Jehovah.
TRUE MEANING
16	If we are looking for the coming of a person whom we love there is anxiety until that person arrives, but when he arrives safely and well we are satisfied and pleased. The true meaning of the foregoing, Psalm 17:15, therefore appears to be that of the faithful company of the followers of Christ Jesus waiting for the Lord Jesus to come and receive his own and being
<w
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. 7.
anxious for that coming. When he appears at the temple of Jehovah and gathers unto himself these faithful ones, and they hear, understand and appreciate that the Lord is at his temple and that they are gathered to him, then they arc satisfied and joyfully engage in his service as commanded. The true application of the psalm, therefore, is at the time of the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple of Jehovah and the gathering unto himself the faithful ones. Such an understanding of the prophecy brings much comfort to the faithful and greatly increases their hope of entering into eternal life and immortality. They know that they must continue faithful and obedient to the commandments of him whom Jehovah has placed at the head of his temple and that by so doing they may have a part in the vindication of Jehovah’s name and an opportunity of entering into heaven. In support of this conclusion, take note of this prophecy and other Scriptural texts discussed hereinafter.
17	The rendering of the text, Psalm 17:15, according to the Septuagint is: “But as for me, let me appear righteous before thee; let me be satisfied with the display of thy glory.” Mark the words “glory” and “righteous”, as used in this text. When is the glory of the Lord first displayed to his waiting followers? The Scriptural answer is, when Zion is assembled and builded up. “When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his glory.” (Ps. 102:16) The building up of Zion takes place when Jehovah sends the Head of that organization to assemble the faithful member's thereof. Speaking of this same, time the apostle wrote: “Now we beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto him.” (2 Thcss. 2:1) Without a question of doubt this latter text refers to the coming of the Lord to the temple, and the gathering of the faithful to the temple, at which time the “evil sen-ant” class is made manifest. (The Watchtower, February 15, 1927)
18	David, the writer of the seventeenth Psalm, pictures the speaker of the present time, that is to say, the true followers of Christ Jesus which constitute the remnant. The language according to the Septna-gint is: “Let me appear righteous before thee.” The speaker, therefore, must at that particular time of the application of the prophecy stand righteous before the Lord. And when does that take place? The Scriptural answer is, at the time the Lord provides and gives to the faithful the robe of righteousness at his appearing at the temple. “I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God: for he hath clothed me with the garments of salvation, he hath covered me with the robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments, and as a bride adorneth herself with her jewels.” (Tsi. 61:10) It is then that the remnant discern the presence of the Lord with his own. It is then that these
same faithful ones enter into the joy of the Lord and henceforth greatly rejoice. Not until they receive the robe of righteousness at his coming to the temple could they appear righteous before him. Now being in the temple, they are satisfied, because they have the assurance that the Lord has gathered them unto himself and if they continue faithful they are certain to enter fully into the kingdom.
HIS FACE
“The text under consideration, according to the Authorized Version, says: “I will behold thy face in righteousness.” According to Rotherham this part of the text reads: “Let me have vision of thy face.” The correct meaning of the word “face”, as here used, is important. Concerning this word “face”, Strong observes that the Hebrew word is ‘used in a variety of applications, literally and figuratively’. Among the applications thereof the word “presence” is used. When we say, ‘I spoke to the man face to face,’ we are understood as meaning that the other was present. It is at the temple that the remnant first discerned the presence of the Lord with his own, even though they did not sec him with natural eyes.
20	In harmony with the Rotherham rendering of the text the remnant there ‘have a vision of his face’, because they discern his presence with the anointed. In a similar manner is the word “face” used in Acts 3:19, Rotherham, wherein it is stated that there come “seasons of refreshing from the face of the Lord”. It is written concerning the Israelites at the time of the inauguration of the law covenant at Mount Sinai: “The Lord talked with you face to face in the mount, out of the midst of the fire.” (Deut. 5:4) The Israelites did not see with their natural eyes the face of Jehovah, because it is written that “no man hath seen, nor can see” his face by natural vision. (1 Tim. 6:16) What really occurred, the Israelites discerned the Lord’s presence and heard the message from him. Concerning that same occasion it is written: “With him will I speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in dark speeches; and the similitude of the Lord shall he behold: wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses?”—Num. 12:8.
21	According to this scripture and others there is no evidence that Moses saw with his natural eyes the face of Jehovah when God spoke to him “mouth to mouth, even apparently”. Moses knew of the presence of Jehovah, ‘and the similitude of the Lord he [Moses] beheld.’ The same Hebrew word here rendered “similitude” is rendered “likeness” in Psalm 17:15, A.F. Moses was the only man to whom Jehovah gave the great honor of speaking to him ‘ ‘ face to face”.—Ex. 33:11.
22	Moses, being a type of Christ, necessarily in that type at times includes the remnant as members of the bodj’ of Christ. Therefore there seems to be a direct connection between these scriptures concerning God's
January 15, 1934
WATCHTOWER.
23
speaking to Moses face to face and of the faithful remnant beholding the face or presence of the Lord after being clothed with the robe of righteousness at the temple. It shows a close relationship between the Lord and those of the temple class, which close relationship was not discernible until the Lord came to the temple, gathered the faithful ones there, and taught them; and it was then that they became satisfied. Doubts were removed, and in the place of doubt came full assurance; and since then joy has filled the heart of each one of the remnant and these have delighted to sing forth the praises of the Lord.
“AWAKE”
23	Because the Authorized Version says “when I awake, with thy likeness”, it has been held that the psalm applies to the resurrection. Both the Septua-pint and liotherham omit the word “awake”, which tends to negative the application of the text to those who have been in the grave and are awakened out of death. The Scriptures do not often apply the word “awake” to those in the grave, but more often to those who are in the favor of the Lord, enjoying the measure of life, yet who arc inactive and need to be stirred up. Jehovah by his prophet says: “Awake, awake; put on thy strength, O Zion; put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city; for henceforth there shall no more come into thee the uncircumeised and the unclean.” (Isa. 52:1) Undoubtedly this text applies to the members of God’s organization upon the coming of Christ to the temple and the building up of Zion, at which time they receive the beautiful garments. It is then that the Lord covers these faithful with the robe of righteousness and clothes them with the garments of salvation, by which they are identified as members of Jehovah’s organization.
24	Paul found the followers of Christ at Ephesus indifferent to their privileges, and to them he wrote: “Awake, thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light.” (Eph. 5:14) Undoubtedly this is a liberal quotation from the words of Isaiah’s prophecy above quoted and was meant to arouse the Ephesians to the performance of their duties and obligations. It has often been necessary to stir up the Lord’s people to greater zeal and activity.
23	In harmony with this Jesus spoke the parable of the virgins, which applies at the time of his coming to the temple. These virgins were looking for and waiting for the coming of the Lord, the Bridegroom, but according to the parable they had fallen asleep and were slumbering. “While the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept. And at midnight there was a cry made, Behold, the bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet him.” (Matt. 25:5,6) Some of the watchers were asleep, that is to say, lying down at rest, while others slumbered, that is to say, they were nodding because it was hard to keep awake; and when it was discovered that the Lord had come to his temple
there was a cry for them to awake and go out and meet the bridegroom. (The Watchtower, 1923, page 295) When these faithful ones were awakened and learned that the Lord Jesus was at the temple, and that they were gathered unto him at the temple and had the privilege of participating in the vindication of Jehovah’s name, they became satisfied and they continue to be satisfied to do whatsoever the head of the temple commands them to do, realizing now that they must be faithful unto death if they would receive the crown of life. (Rev. 2:10) It is for the benefit of these at the temple that the Scriptures were written, chiefly, that now in the time of great stress preceding Armageddon they may constantly have before them the evidence that gives full assurance of faith, confidence and hope of complete victory through Christ.
“MEET THE LORD”
20	Mark this important fact, to wit, that the Scriptures say much about the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ but say very little about the faithful’s going to heaven. The apostles stressed the coming of the Lord as a fact of great moment. At the time of his ascension into heaven angels from heaven stood by and said to the disciples: “This same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven.” (Acts 1:11) Thereafter the apostles earnestly and with anxiety looked forward to the coming of Christ and admonished their brethren so to do.
27	The following texts are in point: “And to wait for his Son from heaven.” (1 Thess. 1:10) Jesus had declared to his disciples what would be the evidence of his coming. (Matt. 24:3-14) “Waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.” (1 Cor. 1:7) “They that are Christ’s at his coming.” (1 Cor. 15:23) “For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? Are not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his eoming?” (1 Thess. 2:19) “To the end be may stablish your hearts unblamcable in holiness before God, even our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his saints.” (1 Thess. 3:13) “And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly; and I pray God your whole spirit and soul and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.” (1 Thess. 5:23) It is true that the Scriptures assure the faithful that for them there is in heaven an inheritance incorruptible that awaits them, but such texts do not say that the faithful are going to heaven to meet the Lord.-l Pct. 1: 4-11.
‘CAUGHT UP IN THE AIR’
28	It is written by the inspired apostle that “we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air”, and does not this text mean that the remnant go to heaven to meet the Lord ? It does not; but, on the contrary, says that those who remain, manifestly meaning the remnant, “meet the Lord in the
WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
M For several years this text has caused much confusion among some; and, of course, it could not be understood until God’s due time. One emphatic translation reads: “Because the Lord himself will come down from heaven with a shout, with an archangel’s voice, and with God’s trumpet; and the dead in Christ will be raised first; then we, the living, who are left over, shall at the same time with them, be caught away in clouds, for a meeting of the Lord in the air; and so we shall be always with the Lord.” (1 Thess. 4:16,17, Diag.) The difficulty arose because of the words appearing in the Diaglott, to wit, “at the same time with them,” the contention being that the resurrection of those dead in the grave and the change of the living on earth must take place at the same instant, and hence, because there appeared to be some faithful ones still on earth, that proved that the faithful dead had not been resurrected. That, however, is not what the Diaglott says. The words “at the same time with them” mean ‘within a specified time’, and not a twenty-four-hour day or even the same year, and certainly not the same instant. \Vh< n understood it will be seen that the “same time with them” is a period of time 'which began in 1914 and continues until Armageddon. It is the same as “the day of Jehovah”, and it is within that time that the faithful dead are resurrected and the faithful remnant changed.
” The above text of necessity must be in exact harmony with the apostle’s language in the following: “Behold! a secret I disclose to you; wc shall not all sleep, hut we shall all be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet; for it wdl sound, and the dead will be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed.” (1 Cor. 15: 51,52, Diag.) Note that the text last above quoted and that also of 1 Thessalonians 4:16,17 use the words “God’s trumpet” and “the last trumpet”, and also use the words “shout” and “an archangel’s voice”. These words must be considered together. A “trumpet” signifies that the execution of divine authority is taking place. It means the King has begun his reign; and with Christ Jesus that reign began in 1914, when Jehovah sent him forth to rule. (2 Ki. 11:1-14; Ps. 47: 5; 98: 6; 110: 2) The trumpet sounding also denotes a time of joy, because the King has come; and in this instance it is the great Vindicator of Jehovah’s name, the vindication of which name is the joy of the Lord Jesus Christ, and into that joy he invites his faithful followers. (Lev. 23: 24; 2 Chron. 15:12-14; Matt. 25:21) The sounding of the trumpet also signifies war. battle and victory, and with the coming of the Lord it means war against Satan and his organization, a great battle and complete victory for Christ. (Num. 31:1-6; 2 Chron. 13:12-16; Joel 2:1; Rev. 19:11-20) It is the trumpet of Jehovah God, because it sounds by the authority of Jehovah.
air.” What, then, is the meanin" of the words ‘‘in the air”? The words “air” and “wind”, in some scriptural texts, are used to convey the same meaning. Lexicographers give the best definition of words that they can, but when the Scriptures give the definition, that settles the question beyond controversy. The words of the Lord Jesus show the true meaning of the words “air” and “wind”. In addressing Nicodemus Jesus said: “The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearcst the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth: so is every one that is born of the spirit.”—John 3:8.
” The wind or air is invisible to human eyes, yet it is powerful and discernible. Likewise that which is born of the spirit, and hence in the spiritual realm, is invisible to human vision, yet discernible by creatures who are in close relationship to the Lord. The remnant while on earth are in the flesh ; and when they are gathered by the Lord to himself at the temple the organism of flesh is not that which is gathered, but the creature, which now has only an organism of flesh ; and the natural eyes of that organism cannot see that which is in the spirit, but those of the remnant can discern spiritual things. (1 Cor. 2: 10) The evidence is abundant that the anointed remnant are now gathered to the temple of the Lord. How do they know that they are there? Because they have the witness of the spirit, and the Scriptures and the facts in support thereof. The fact that they are gathered to the temple and are there taught of God, as the Scriptures declare, is proof conclusive that they are with the z Lord “in the air”, that is to say, in the condition where it is impossible for the natural eye to see that which is present. If they are at the temple with the Lord, then without a question of doubt they are with the Lord, and he is invisible to their natural eyes; therefore the words ‘caught up to meet the Lord in the air’ fully and completely describe the condition.
ORDER OF RESURRECTION
MThe apostle gives consideration to the resurrection in the texts that follow. The order of the resurrection and the building up of Zion is this, as shown by the apostle’s words: (1) the..awakening of the faithful dead, and (2) the assembling of the living remnant at Zion, and this takes place when the Lord appears at the temple of Jehovah. Says the apostle: “For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are alive, and remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them which are asleep. For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first: then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord.”—1 Thess. 4:14-17.
January 15, 1934
Tile WATCHTOWER,
25
” Why then should it be called “the last trumpet” I It is the last trumpet because it announces the beginning of the reign of Christ Jesus, earth’s rightful King, him “whose right it is’’ to rule and who shall rule thereafter, and never again will there be a king installed in office, and hence no occasion for the sounding ,of another trumpet. Never again will there be a necessity for vindicating Jehovah’s name, and never again will there be another war and victory, because it is declared that this shall be the last and righteousness will continue for ever under God and under Christ. The trumpet of God, which is the last trumpet, began to sound when Jesus went forth to begin his reign, in 1914, and must continue to sound until the organization of Satan is destroyed, the name of Jehovah is vindicated, and complete victory is given to Christ Jesus at the battle of the great day of God Almighty. It is within this period of time, hence “at the same time”, that the resurrection of the faithful dead and the gathering of the faithful living remnant to the temple at Zion take place.
s‘ If, as it has been contended by some, both the sleeping faithful saints and the faithful ones on earth are changed in the same instant, then the resurrection of the dead could not precede the change of the living; but when we understand that the wools “at the same time with them” really mean within “the day of Jehovah”, which began in 1914 and continues until the close of Armageddon, the matter is entirely clear and these texts are completely in harmony, as indeed they must be.
’’The Scriptural text reads that ‘Christ shall descend from heaven with the voice of an archangel’, which means the chief angel or chief messenger of Jehovah, which office Christ Jesus fills. lie comes “with a shout”, which means an authoritative command. Being sent forth as earth’s rightful ruler, to whom is committed all power in heaven and earlh, Christ Jesus is in command and his commandments are given with absolute authority. The shout and the sounding of the trumpet of God take place simultaneously. The trumpet of God mentioned in the above text is not the same as the “seven trumpets” mentioned in Revelation 8: o. The seven angels that had the seven trumpets are the angels of the Lord Jesus Christ at the temple who are sent out by him with a definite message, and this is done while the trumpet of Jehovah is sounding. Mark that the Scriptures make a clear distinction between the trumpet of God, which begins to sound at the coming of the King, and the seven trumpets which the King himself caused to be sounded by his angels sent out from the temple.
“ The facts and the Scriptures show that Christ Jesus appeared at the temple to build up Zion in 1918, and at which time the trumpet of Jehovah was sounding. The order of the building up of Zion, according to the Scriptures, is this: ‘The dead in Christ rise first’ and are made part of Zion, which is Jehovah’s
capital organization. Then, during that period of time, that is, “in the day of Jehovah,” “the living, who are left over, shall at the same time [that is, within that same time] with them be caught away [completely separated from the enemy organization and gathered into Zion] in clouds [that is, in the presence of Christ Jesus], for a meeting of the Lord in the air [that is to say, in his presence which is invisible to their natural eyes] ; and so we shall be always with the Lord.” (Diag.) In that order Zion the capital organization is builded and the Lord appears in his glory and the remnant appear before him in the temple in righteousness, and ‘they are satisfied with the display of his glory’ and are always with the Lord. The change from human to spirit organism of the faithful remnant takes place after they are gathered to the temple, and that change is “in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye”. If, however, they continue faithful they are for ever with the Lord from the time of being gathered into the temple.
ST It is the meeting with the Lord that is emphasized by the apostle when he wrote: “Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing.” (2 Tim. 4:8) Manifestly it is at the time of the gathering of his own to the temple that the Lord assigns to such the crown here mentioned by the apostle. This is assigned before they go to heaven, because Jesus said to the same faithful ones: “Hold that fast which thou hast, that no man take thy crown.” (Rev. 3:11) It is those who love the appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ, says the apostle, to whom crowns are assigned. These show their love by joyfully obeying the Lord, and they unselfishly devote, themselves to his service. If then they continue faithful unto death they receive the great reward of immortality. (Rev. 2:8-11) (See Light, Book One, page 21.) It is the faithful anointed (represented by the church at Smyrna) who receive the great reward of immortality, and this they receive after they “meet the Lord in the air”, that is to say, in the temple, and after they prove faithful in the performance of the duties assigned to them by the Lord. (Matt. 24:14) Without a question of doubt the apostle refers to the faithful remnant on earth when he writes, “Now we beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto him” (2 Thess. 2:1), which gathering is to the temple. Being thus gathered they “meet the Lord in the air”, that is to say, in the condition which is not discernible by natural sight. If gathered to the temple, then certainly they are with the Lord and have been awakened and know of his presence with them at the temple, and therefore these faithful ones have a spiritual vision of his likeness, his face or similitude, even as did Moses when speaking with Jehovah at Mount Sinai.—Num. 12:8.
23
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
APPLICATION
° The seventeenth Psalm is a prophecy written by David, and therefore finds its application and fulfilment upon those who are in Christ, formin" a part of the servant of Jehovah. David was. hard pressed by his enemies who had "really defamed the name of God. His enemies had wrongfully accused David and were seeking his life, and he cried unto God to hear the right of the matter and declaring his own sincerity in making this petition to the Host High. “Hear the right, 0 Lord, attend unto my cry; give ear unto my prayer, that gocth not out of feigned lips.”—Ps. 17:1.
30	In 1914 those who had responded to the call for the kingdom expected the kingdom to be set up and themselves taken to heaven, but in this they were disappointed. A few years later great tribulation came upon them. During the years 1917 and 1918 these faithful ones were wrongfully accused and betrayed by false brethren and cruelly persecuted by their enemies. They were determined, however, to be faithful to Jehovah and his King, and they cried unto the Lord for help and deliverance, insisting on their own sincerity and that the Lord hear the right of the matter. This psalm was among the prophecies written aforetime and for their comfort and hope. With these conditions in mind, note now the words of the psalm.
40	The speaker asked that his judgment or sentence come from the Lord and not from his enemies: “Let my sentence come forth from thy presence; let thine eyes behold the things that arc equal.” (Vs. 2) Receiving judgment from the righteous Judge they would know that it is right. This part of the prophecy had its fulfilment about the time, of the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ to the temple for judgment, even though the faithful did not at that time know and appreciate such fact. Those who had been faithful to the Lord knew their own heart condition, and they were confidently trusting in him.
41	The petition then requests that the course of action taken by God’s children up to the time being should be considered, and, it being so considered, it was insisted that nothing would be found showing unfaithfulness or a walling transgression of the Lord’s commandments: “Thou hast proved mine heart; thou hast visited me in the night; thou hast tried me, and shalt find nothing; I am purposed that my mouth shall not transgress.” (Vs. 3) Here is an expressed determination of the petitioners to maihtain’thcir integrity toward Jehovah God regardless of what others might do. In this we are reminded of the words of Job when he cried out at the time of great distress: “Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him.”
42	These faithful ones do not care for the approval of men, they not “having men’s persons in admiration”, but look to the words that have come from the Lord to be their own guide, and they continue to hold steadfastly to the Lord’s Word. Therefore they prayed: “As for the doings of men by word of thy
lips [do I regard them] ; I have watched the paths of the violent one; my steps hold fast to thy tracks, my footsteps slip not.” (Roth.) Tire faithful ones were standing firm in the Lord and in the power of his might, waiting and hoping for deliverance.
43	Viewing the condition of God’s faithful people about 1918 and since, how appropriate are these words of the petitioner: “I have called upon thee, for thou wilt answer me, 0 God; incline thine ear unto me. hear thou my speech: let thy lovingkindness be distinguished, thou Saviour of such as seek refuge from them who lift themselves up against thy right hand. Guard me as the pupil of the eye, under the shadow of thy wings wilt thou hide me: from the face of lawless ones who have treated me with violence, the foes of my soul who come round against me: their own fat [heart] have they shut up, with their mouth have they spoken proudly. As for our own goings now have they surrounded us, their eyes they fix, bending to the earth: his likeness is as a lion that longeth to rend, and as a young lion lurking in secret places. Rise, Jehovah! confront his face, bring him down, deliver my soul from the lawless one [who is| thy sword: from men [who are] thy hand, 0 Jehovah, from the men of this age, whose portion is amonu the living, and with thy- treasure thou fillest their bosom, they must be satisfied with sons, and must have their abundance to their children.”—Vss. G-14, Roth.
44	The psalmist, representing the faithful, God’s children, having completed his petition regarding the enemy, then gives expression to a fixed determination to be faithful to the Lord in service, and expresses his satisfaction and approval of the Lord and says: “I in righteousness shall behold thy face, shall be satisfied when awakened by a vision of thee.” (Vs. 15, Roth.) “Let me be satisfied with the display of thy glory. ’ ’—Septwigint.
45	The last verse of the psalm therefore appears to have no reference whatsoever to the satisfaction and joy that necessarily wall come to all who experience a part in the first resurrection, but clearly does have reference to the faithful’s meeting the Lord at the temple and learning that they have the Lord’s approval. Thus they appear before him righteous, having received the i-obe of righteousness and the garments of salvation; and this is evidence of approval. Such full assurance brings them great satisfaction, and in the words of the psalmist they exclaim: ‘We are satisfied.’ The reference is to the same time as when Christ Jesus says to those who have proved their integrity up to the time of examination and judgment at the temple: “His lord said unto him, Well done, thou good and faithful servant: thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy lord.” (Matt. 25: 21) All those who have thus ‘entered into the joy of the Lord’ are surely satisfied; otherwise they could not be joyful. These now know what is the
January 15, 1934
WATCHTOWER.
27
will of God concerning them, and delight, by the Lord’s grace, to put forth their best endeavors to do his will.
48	The words immediately following, and which appear in the opening of the eighteenth Psalm, show the same servant class greatly rejoicing because, having learned that Jehovah is their rock, refuge and deliverer, they sing forth with joyful heart: “I will love thee, 0 Jehovah, my strength.” The love of Jehovah means the joyful obedience to his commandments and to be wholly devoted to him. Being in the temple and taught of God, they know that they are his children and are members of his organization, and great is their peace and satisfaction. They have been awakened to their privilege, particularly the great privilege of being Jehovah’s witnesses and of having a part in the vindication of his holy name, and that brings to them great satisfaction and joy. "The joy of the Lord” Jesus Christ is the vindication of his Father’s name; and when he invites his faithful ones, gathered to him, to enter into that joy and they do so, satisfaction necessarily results, and clearly such is a fulfilment of the prophetic words of the psalm.
47	The song which appears in our Song Book at number one hundred thirteen is not in harmony with the truth and could not be sincerely repeated or sung by those who arc devoted to Jehovah. Those who are in the temple are with the Lord and are satisfied now with the privileges of singing forth his praises as he has commanded. They are not crying out and praying that they might die by breaking the fetters of flesh and be taken immediately to heaven and with only such things will they be satisfied. They recognize that the Bridegroom has come, he who is the great Vindicator of Jehovah’s name, and with him they rejoice, as commanded by Jehovah: “And in that day shall ye say, Praise the Lord, call upon his name, declare his doings among the people, make mention that his name is exalted. Sing unto the Lord ; for he hath done excellent things: this is known in all the earth. Cry out and shout, thou inhabitant of Zion: for great is the Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee.” (Isa. 12:4-6) With these faithful ones time is no more. (Rev. 10:6; Light, Book One, page 178) They are with the Lord, whether in the flesh or in the spirit, and are satisfied to do his will, looking forward with great anticipation to the complete vindication of Jehovah’s holy name.
48	This seventeenth Psalm was, according to the Scriptures, written aforetime for the assurance and comfort of the remnant, and the correct understanding thereof brings added assurance that the remnant are held safely in the hand of Jehovah and are his chosen ones. These members of “Laodicea” have the blessed privilege of the fulfilment and experience of the prayer of their brother Paul: “That their hearts might be comforted, being knit together in love, and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgment of the mystery of God, and of
the Father, and of Christ; in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.” (Col. 2:2,3) No longer are these faithful ones dissatisfied, in doubt and searching for the way in which to go. They know their Master’s house and their Father's organization, and, being satisfied and in the presence of the Lord Jesus Christ in the temple, they delight to sing forth the praises of the Most High, because “in his temple doth every one speak of his glory”.—Ps. 29: 9.
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
T 1,2. Show that the Scriptures themselves indicate the time of fulfilment of this psalm.
I 3-5. Account for the misunderstanding hitherto of this and other prophecies.
J 6,7. Explain (a) whether entertaining a desire for the resurrection change is Scripturally proper, (b) Whether David’s writing this psalm serves to identify those to whom this text applies. How does Paul’s statement (Col. 1:26,27) definitely prove Such identity as well as the time of fulfilment of this text?
f 8-10. Show (a) that Jesus and the apostles emphasized tiro importance of the second coming of the Lord, (b) That the application is while the Lord’s faithful followers are yet on the earth after his return.
f 11,12. Explain uhether cherishing the thought of “going to heaven’’ was helpful or harmful to the Lord’s people.
f 13-15. Account for the manifestation, at the close of the Elijah period of the church, of two classes professing to lx) followers of Christ Jesus. What contrast is now seen between those two classes!
5 16-18. In what are the faithful followers of Christ Jesus now “satisfied’’, and why! Point out the “righteousness” in which these appear before the Lord, and the reason why they are satisfied therein.
T 19-22. With illustration, make clear what is meant by the expression “I will behold thy face in righteousness”.
5 23-25. By applying other scriptures in which the term “awake” is used, show whether the members of God’s organization have “awoke” in fulfilment of this prophetic scripture.
f 2fi, 27. With scriptures in proof, show when and where the faithful would “meet the Lord”.
V 28, 29. Explain whether those who “are alive and remain” have been “caught up in the clouds” and have ‘met the Lord in the air’.
1 30,31. What do the words of the apostle reveal as to the order of the resurrection and the ‘building up of Zion’? Point out the harmony therewith of the statement that those who arc alive and remain will bo caught away in the clouds “at the same time with them” that have slept.
7 32-34. Explain the “secret” as ‘disclosed’ by the apostle in 1 Corinthians 15:51,52.	'
U 35. Apply 1 Thessalonians 4: 16.
f 36. Just what is meant by the ‘building up of Zion’? When does it take place?
K 37. What is the “crown” referred to in Revelation 3: 11? What further light thereon is seen in the words of Paul and of Peter, as to who shall receive the crown, and when?
T 38,39. Describe the circumstance in which Psalm 17 has its setting. Point out the prophetic application of verse 1.
1 40,41. What was the psalmist’s desire as expressed in his words of verse 2 and his plea in verse 3? How does this part of the psalm have fulfilment?
* 42. Point out the important instruction contained in verse 4, and that the course followed by the faithful has been in fine therewith.
f 43. Show that verses 6-14 fitly pictured the condition of God’s people in these latter days.
44. What is expressed in verse 15 for those whom the psalmist represented?
*[ 45-47. What, then, is clearly the meaning and application of verse 15 of this psalm? Point out the harmony therewith of the opening words of P.-alm IS and the words of Isaiah 12: 4-6.
3 48. What is the evidence that the seventeenth Psalm is serving the purpose for which it was provided by Jehosah?
THE SUPREME SACRIFICE FORESHADOWED
LONG centuries ago God began to foreshadow the means he would employ to bring obedient ones of the human race back to a state of perfection, and that means that he foreshadowed a “new creation”. This docs not mean that all the human race must be destroyed and a new race created; but it means the creation of something new, that through this creation the human race may be redeemed and restored.
After the flood Noah and his sons settled in different parts of the earth. Japhcth and his descendants took up their abode in Europe. Ham and his sons dw<>lt in North Africa. Shein and his offspring remained in Asia. Concerning Shein Noah prophesied, saying, “Blessed be the Lord [Jehovah] God of .Shem.” Thus he indicated that God had in store some special blessing for the descendants of Shem. The Scriptures disclose that this is what Noah did mean.
Two years after the flood Shorn begot a son and named him Arphaxad. (Gen. 11:10) Tcrah was a descendant of Arphaxad and of Shem. (Gen. 11:24) In due course a son was born unto Terah whom he named Abram. Afterwards God changed his name to Abraham. (Gen. 11:27) Terah and his family dwelt in the city Ur of the Chaldees. Abram was married to Sarai. “But Sarai was barren; she had no child.” (Genesis 11:30) Terah took bis family, including Abram and his wife Sarai, and went forth to go into the land of Canaan. From the Biblical account it appears that he would journey along the valley of the river Euphrates to Haran; and there Terah dwelt, and his family together with him, until he died.
Abram was now the most important man of the company dwelling in Haran. He had faith in God, and God had for him a duty to perform. “Now the Lord had said unto Abram, Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father’s, house, unto a land that I will shew thee: and I will make of thee a great nation, and J will bless thee, and make thy name great; and thou shalt be a blessing: and I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curscth thee; and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed.”—Gen. 12:1-3.
In obedience to the command of the Lord Abram gathered together all of his substance; and he took his wife Sarai, and his nephew Lot and his family, and Terah his father, and departed out of Ur of the Chaldees and went to Haran; and on the death of his father Terah he took all that he had taken to Haran and what he had accumulated there, and departed for the promised land. Behold, a caravan of camels and asses, cattle and sheep, men servants and maid servants, women and children, with faithful Abram riding in the van, journeying to the south and west into a strange land! Over the trackless desert and over the barren and rugged hills they went. It was a long, slow and tedious journey; and the importance of that
journey could not then be fully appreciated by Abram. They were moving in regular order. What did the march to that land, unknown to Abram, mean? The great God of the universe was now moving his faithful servant into action and beginning a moving picture which would reflect and foreshadow a new creation and the formation of a perfect nation and government, which would be God’s means used for the blessing of all the families of the earth.
For a continuous period of approximately two thousand years Jehovah God, from time to time, caused his faithful servants to produce various portions of his moving pictures, here begun by Abram, by which means he would teach mankind the way that leads to endless life. It is exceedingly interesting and instructive to visualize these pictures made long ago. The men who performed their respective parts therein did not fully understand, but they knew that Jehovah was the great Director and Commander; and for them that was sufficient. (1 Pet. 1:10, 12) A record thereof was made, that those living at the end of the world, where we now are, might learn and understand God’s way and be comforted bv this knowledge.—1 Cor. 10:11; Rom. 15:4.	”
God was now sending Abram on this journey to the land of Palestine, where the Lord in due time would complete his pictures; and that part of the earth has become sacred and holy to all those who love the Lord. The events that took place in the land of Palestine and adjacent territory foreshadowed the unfolding of the divine purpose.
The eastern frontier of the land of Palestine is guarded by a range of beautiful mountains. The entire range might well be called Pisgah, because of the vision had from the heights thereof. As Abram’s caravan approached from the east he would halt upon the crest of the mountain range, because from that point he would have the first view of the promised land. He would feast his eyes upon the marvelous scene that lay before him, and where soon was to be the place of the making of the greatest picture ever made on earth, and later the place of its fulfilment in completion.
From his vantage point on the crest of that mountain range Abram would behold Mount Lebanon, the Sea of Galilee, the plain of Esdraelon, Mount Carmel, the deep shade of the Jordan valley, and the rivers of less importance that empty into Jordan's turbulent waters, Mount Moriah, Mount Zion, and all the hills of Judea, and on to the deep blue Mediterranean sea. Travelers who have since journeyed this way, upon reaching the heights of this mountain range, have in ecstasy exclaimed: “The most wonderful and beautiful view in any part of the earth!”
There, as Abram beheld the wonderful scene spread out before him, he would call to mind the promise that God had made to him. The importance must have impressed Abram, but it was impossible then
Januaby 15, 1934
>3Tg WATCHTOWER.
29
for him to understand the full import of the promise and what he was doing in connection therewith. The promise which God made to Abram was: “In thee shall all families of the earth be blessed.” In this picture Abram represented Jehovah God, from whom proceeds every good and perfect gift, and by whom all of mankind who obey God shall in due time receive his blessing.
Descending from the mountain heights Abram journeyed on and entered into the land of Palestine and passed through it to the plain of Moreh. “And the Lord appeared unto Abram and said, Unto thy seed will I give this land.” (Gen. 12: 7) This promise indicated that God in his due time would give to obedient men the earth as an everlasting abiding-place. God made the earth for man’s habitation, and in due time man shall inherit it in the fullest sense.—Isa. 45:12,18.
Abram journeyed on to the south, through the land, and then went into Egypt. Later he returned from Egypt and pitched his tent in the plains of Mamre. There the Lord appeared unto him and said: “Neither shall thy name any more be called Abram, but thy name shall be Abraham; for a father of many nations have I made thee.” (Gen. 17:5) This promise must have sounded strange to Abram, yet he believed God. Sarah was now ninety years of age and was yet barren, for she had no children, and here the promise was that Abraham should be made the father of many nations. Later God said to Abraham that he should have a son by his wife Sarah, and that his name should be called Isaac.—Gen. 17:19.
When Abraham was one hundred years old, true to the promise that God had made, a son was born to him by his wife Sarah; and he called his name Isaac. (Gen. 21: 5) It must have cheered greatly the heart of Abraham and his wife Sarah when the son was born. The words of Sarah indicate that it was a time of joy to them. A son was born in whom they could center their hopes for the fulfilment of the promise which God had made. “And Sarah said, God hath made’me to laugh, so that all that hear will laugh with me. And she said, Who would have said unto Abraham, that Sarah should have given children suck? for I have born him a son in his old age. And the child grew, and was weaned: and Abraham made a great feast the same day that Isaac was weaned.” —Gen. 21:6-8.
The time arrived for Jehovah to make the picture foreshadowing his provision for the saving and blessing of the human race. The chief actors in this picture were Abraham and his beloved son Isaac. In the picture Abraham represented God, while Isaac, the only son of Abraham, represented the beloved and only begotten Son of God, Jesus, whom Jehovah brought into the world to be the Savior of mankind. Abraham could not know that this was a picture of something to take place in the future. It therefore must have
been a great test unto him; and it is recorded that it was a test of Abraham's faith.
Jehovah gave directions to Abraham: “Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee into the land of Moriah; and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of the mountains which I will tell thee of.” (Gen. 22:2) Isaac was the dearest treasure of Abraham’s heart, because he was the only begotten son of Abraham by his beloved wife; which son he loved. Uis love for God, however, was greater because he had faith that God would make provision for his son.—Heb. 11:19.
In obedience to God’s command Abraham provided himself with the things necessary to make the altar, and with wood for the fire; and, together with his son Isaac and his servants, he journeyed from the vicinity of Hebron to Mount Moriah, the present site of Jerusalem. There Abraham built an altar, bound his son Isaac and laid him upon the altar, and raised his knife to strike dead his beloved son Isaac that he might offer him as a burnt offering. At this crucial moment God, through his angel, spoke to Abraham and commanded that he should go no further in the picture, saying: “Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou any thing unto him: for now I know that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not withheld thy son, thine only son from me.”
The faith exhibited by Abraham on this occasion was pleasing to God; and so he spoke to Abraham again through his angel and said: “By myself have I sworn, saith the Lord; for because thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld thy son, thine only son; that in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiply, ing I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which is upon the sea shore; and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies: and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed: because thou hast obeyed my voice. ”—Gen. 22:12,16-18.
Why was this the greatest picture of all made on earth? Because it foreshadowed that the promise of God, pictured by Sarah the wife of Abraham, would produce a “seed” and that this “seed” would be the means of blessing all the families of the earth. The offering of Isaac foreshadowed that at some future time God would give his dearly beloved Son as a great sin-offering for the world, and that that Son would constitute the Savior and Deliverer of mankind.— John 3:16.
The original promise that God made to Abraham was: “In thee shall all families of the earth be blessed.” Now the promise made to Abraham at the time of the offering of Isaac, and there made for the first time, was: “In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.” These promises, in connection with the picture here enacted, foreshadow that the blessing must proceed from Jehovah and that the beloved Son Jesus will be the channel of blessing.—Rom. 9:7; Heb. 11:17-19.
30
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
The tendency amongst many has been to attribute all blessings to Christ Jesus, when in truth and in fact all blessings proceed from Jehovah God; and Christ Jesus, his beloved Son, is his chief executive officer in carrying out these blessings. This is clearly
indicated by the promise made to Abraham, above mentioned. Isaac, being the only child of Abraham and his beloved wife Sarah, would therefore picture The Christ. That he did picture Christ is plainly stated later in the Scriptures.—Gal. 3:16; 4:28.
LETTERS
PRISON-KEEPERS ALARMED, FEARFUL
Dear Brethren:
I enclose under separate cover the St. Lucia [B.W.I.] Catholic Magazine, October number. The editorial article commencing on the first page will be of interest to you.
Alarmed by the spread of the truth here the Roman Catholic vicar general began his howl Sunday 3d September at high mass. Getting more fearful still, on Sunday 24th September nt each of the three masses said, the topic was Judge Rutherford, the books, and myself; on which occasions the people were warned not to read the literature, and to destroy by burning whatever they had in possession. Some of the poor prisoners have been seared, while others beginning to see a little light are wanting to make a dash for liberty.
Still trying to cast more dust in the eyes of the people, the October number of that magazine contained an editorial on “Winds of Doctrine’’, as you will see from the copy X forward you. It is quite evident that they have received the witness straight enough: like a sharp arrow in their hearts.— Psalm 43: 5.
This place is ninetj'-p^reent Catholic. Dominated for years by the Roman Catholic religion, the people have had nothing of the pure word preached to them, and were eager and happy in receiving the truth of the kingdom. The people are very nice until the priests spoil them, after which one is looked upon ns the Devil’s imp going from door to door.
Their opposition has served to give greater publicity to the message, ami sonic have obtained the literature from me purely as a result of that. I do not think they could have selected n better quotation than that one taken from the Kingdom booklet: concise and clear, it is just what we want them to know.
The chief town, Castries, has about 6,000 souls, and in four montlis here I have placed over 1,700 books and booklets, besides G.A. copies, books taking a slight lead over booklets.
I am returning to Trinidad this week.
Yours in the joy of service,
Waldo Roberts, Pioneer.
WITH COURAGE PROCEED
Dear Brother Rutherford :
Fervent greetings to you and all the dear servants of Jehovah and Christ Jesus nt Brooklyn and everywhere.
In concluding two years’ pioneer service for the King of kings, am overflowing with grateful appreciation to Jehovah for his boundless blessings and mercies extended through you and his organization. While my first pioneer year was a most blessed one, the second was crammed with more spiritual blessings and greater opportunities of service. With pioneering, radio and transcription work, Psalm 92, verses one to five, fully expresses my experiences and joys.
Through you and the Society, Jehovah supplies rich spiritual food, giving strength and courage to his remnant, lie now crowns the year with Preparation for more strenuous service ahead, to vindicate his name!
The Towers and other publications are daily our delight as they chronicle the triumphant progress of our King and his kingdom, revealing his will to his anointed. He now takes us into his confidence and uses us in working out his purposes; this is thrilling beyond expression! Therefore with courage we can proceed, fully assured of his continued providences for his service and his servants.
With complete devotion to our Father Jehovah and our Lord Jesus Christ; assuring you and the Society of full cooperation, and with fervent Christian love in which Sister Howell joins, I remain
Ever yours for the vindication of Jehovah’s name,
W. W. Howell, Pioneer.
GRAND ARE THE VISIONS
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Please accept my many thanks for the new weapon Preparation, indeed meat in due season. As a result of that grand and most brilliant flash of lightning from the throne of Jehovah through his temple one can clearly seo the glimmering of the great battle and beyond, as though one had already passed through it.
‘The Sanctuary Cleansing’ is another marvel, and nothing but solid food in it. Jehovah seems to have been pleased to permit the so-called “elders” till his due time to clean them out, Satan being east out and using them to accuse the brethren. (Rev. 12: 10) Grand are all of the visions as explained in Preparation: ‘The Vessels,’ ‘Jehovah’s Militant Organization,’ ‘The Cleaving of the Mount of Olives.’ Yes, blessed are they that flee to the valley. One can’t help but express himself on all this blessed food.
Those words in Isaiah 52: 6; 42: 9, are so real. Nearly five years I have been blessed by the Lord, putting in most of that time as pioneer. Ilappy indeed in evenings and stormy days have been my hours in our little house, 10 x 6 feet, while my wife and boy, now five years, have been enjoying their sweet sleep. These feast hours were real as in the presence of God and his holy ones. Many tears of joy. But without service, which is getting sweeter and sweeter, I truly say it could not have been so true and joyous. This is only through the Lord ’» grace.	’
It gives one great courage to see Jehovah’s watch care over you, especially amidst trials as you passed through lately, and in 1918. 1 am sure none of us can imagine the mental sufferings and difficulties you have, out of which only Jehovah can deliver, and will all such as arc submissive to him as the clay to the potter. No doubt the greatest thorns have been the “man of sin” and “so-called elders”. May the Lord continue to use you and richly bless you, guide and protect you, even till we meet with those faithful ones of old; and then may you dwell in the glorious presence of that great, true and all-wise Creator Jehovah God.
By his grace your brother,
Leonard H. Strege, Pioneer.
GREATER JOY
Dear Brother Rutherford:
I must tell you that we were truly thrilled at the tones in your voice, during these last three national broadcasts. The message you sent out surely must have touched the hearts of all truth-hungry persons who were listening in. We went forth to service with greater joy than ever, and we fairly flew from house to house, so we could reach as many as possible while the message was so fresh and inspiring.
We remember you, and daily pray for you. And we are trying to be faithful to the smallest detail of work, in harmony with Jehovah’s organization. We send you our warmest love, and assure you of our appreciation of your labor of love for us all.
Faithfully yours,
Bro. and Sr. H. G. Babcock and Earle, Washington.
THANKFUL TO HAVE A PART
Dear Brother Rutherford:
We wish to express our appreciation for the beautiful new book Preparation. The message it contains is encouraging and thrilling. Truly thankful are we to our God for being privileged to have a part in carrying the message of the kingdom to the people.
May the Lord bless you until the enemy ia completely destroyed and His name vindicated.
Your brethren by His grace,
Bro. and Sr. Thompson, Pioneers.
January 15, 1934
*3Tie WATCHTOWER,
31
PREPARATION FOR THE BATTLE
My dear Brother Rutherford:
Just finished a careful reading of Preparation. I hasten to express my joy and appreciation. Without a doubt, a most loving gift of Jehovah in this hour of need, preparing us for “the battle of the great day of God Almighty”. The apostle expresses my thought in the matter: “O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!’’
Pondering in one’s heart these wonderful truths and promises of God, how I am thrilled with joy and greatly encouraged to press on in the witness work, bearing testimony to Jehovah’s purposes through his incoming kingdom. In the midst of our many joyful experiences, true, we also meet some strong opposition;’ but these things cannot move us, for the Lord God has made our foreheads as adamant.
Surely Preparation will prove to be an indispensable weapon in the hands of God’s ‘ ‘ little ones ’ ’ to ‘ fight for our lives The whole book is a marvelous storehouse of truth, so full of comfort, cheer and encouragement at this hour.
The chapter on “cleansing’’ is a marvelous array of scrip-tuies showing how complete must lie the work of separation, preparatory for the great fight just ahead.
The explanation given heretofore of Zechariah 14: 2 was never clear to me. I tried to understand, but could not, for it did not appear clear. But now, thanks be unto God! the whole matter is clarified, both by the Scriptures and by physical facts. What joy and comfort it brings! Never again shall the residue of God’s people bo trodden down nor the Holy City invaded. These facts bring great joy, confidence and encouragement to me. We know victory is certain, and both Jehovah’s naino ami his word shall be completely vindicated.
This book is written for us (Rom. 15:4) as expressed in the following quotation: “This advance information doubtless is given to the remnant that they may ... be strong in hope, and that they may continue without fear to sound a warning to the crowd that is antagonizing Jehovah’s work.”—Prcp~ oration, page 3 Hi.
Again thanking Jehovah God through Christ Jesus for this gift, and you, Brother Rutherford, for your work and labor of love thus pcrfoimed, 1 remain
Sincerely your fellow witness,
Hiram P. Kleinhans, Pennsylvania.
KNOWLEDGE AND UNDERSTANDING
Dear Sir:
I have just listened to your wonderful lecture, as well as the last three lectures; and words cannot express my feelings in being able to hear and understand them. I wish everyone would listen to the judge. Ue certainly explains the Bible in a very sensible way, and only those who are blind cannot understand it.
I can’t understand why the people remain in the church organizations. 1 learned more listening to Judge Rutherford in one month than in all the years I attended church. I sincerely hope and trust that God will preserve and keep you so that you will be able to deliver more of those inspiring lectures and so help the people in gaining a knowledge of the Bible.
I would like a copy of all your lectures, and, if you will let me know how much they will be, will gladly contribute the money. May God bless and keep you.
Very sincerely yours,
Mrs. O. Pomrenke, New Jersey.
JOY IN READING
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Love and kingdom greetings!
I have just read the new book, Preparation, and cannot refrain from expressing my gratitude and appreciation, not only to the heavenly Father, but unto you for your labor of love in his service.
Words fail me to express the joy I have in reading it, and I heartily endorse its precious contents of comfort and consolation to the “remnant”.
“Obedience is better than sacrifice.”
I have been sick for some time, but am better and shall resume my work in the pioneer service soon. Sister Rice joins in sending love and appreciation.
Your brother and servant by His grace,
V. C. Rice and Sister Rice, Pioneers.
ENDLESS TRAIN OF BLESSING
Dear Brother Rutherford:
At the general business meeting of our company a motion was put and unanimously carried that a message expressing our love for you and our deep appreciation to Jehovah for the rich food that he is placing before us through you as a willing instrument in his Lands.
What an endless train of blessing he is bestowing on the remnant in these last days which he has specially prepaied for them.—1 Cor. 2: 9.
We rejoice to have more ammunition in the new booklets that the Lord has provided for us to press forward in this aggressive fight, in which we are happy to be united with you.
When those three special broadcast lectures came to our ears we were thrilled, and more so still when we received instructions that we were to have these in a booklet for use during the Kingdom Proclamation Period. We had a very happy time in this campaign; the booklets went out splendidly.
We are also very thankful to the Lord for the transcription machine, another wonderful means or getting the message to the people. We have had some fine experiences in this feature of the work. Just to mention one: Each Sunday in August we had the use of the bandstand enclosure in the park. Much interest was aroused, and a good witness given.
We would like you to know, dear brother, how your courageous stand for the honor of Jehovah’s name inspires us, firing us with enthusiasm, and filling us with determination to bo ‘steadfast, immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord ’.
May the Lord give to you all needed grace, strength and wisdom to continue your unceasing labors to the praise of Jehovah’s name. Wo are
Your brethren in kingdom service,
Walsall (England) company of Jehovah’s witnesses.
GREAT JOY
Dear Brother by divine Favor:
Just a lino to express our great joy when my wife and I heard your voice over 1100 [kilocycles] tonight, and lust Sunday evening same time. The message is so wonderful, and Jehovah is surely using you to his glory. We bought a radio this year for the purpose of hearing God’s word of truth, and God has given us that wonderful privilege of doing so. He is sure feeding us in green pastures and, being filled, we need not hunger nor thirst. I often think of the measure of meal that the poor woman had in her barrel. It never failed; which shows how Jehovah God can sustain us. In this great time of oppression he is providing for us both spiritually and literally, and has provided better this year than ever. Praise to his holy name.
May Jehovah God guide and keep you, and open the way that your voice may continually speak over the radio and proclaim the wondrous truths that are to bo revealed to those who are hungering for an understanding of his Word.
Received Preparation, which is a wonderful book. We are both studying books Light, and can see und understand more than ever before.
The people where we live are beginning to like the books, and only three families object to it in our vicinity of thirty families.
We will be looking forward for next Sunday evening, when we hope to hear you again.
Your brother and sister by His grace,
Mr. and Mrs. Warren Nickerson, Cape Breton.
HIS ORGANIZATION
Dear Brother Rutherford:
We take this opportunity of sending you our sincere greetings, and to state we are truly thankful to our heavenly Father for his organization whereby we are taught of him and continually directed in a way that will ultimately bring unlimited blessings to all the obedient of the earth and honor to his holy name.
We are also thankful for our privilege of being coworkers with you and all his witnesses throughout the earth. We assure you of our cooperation in this wonderful work.
Your fellow servants.
Winnipeg .(Man.) Convention.
32	STie WATCHTOWER	Ee00™’ n. y.
JOY OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES
Beak Brother Rutherford:
How I do want to thank you for my copy of Preparation! Have very nearly finished reading it; am now reading and rereading about tho “fight”; and how it does indeed thrill us to learn in advance of what is to take place, and how our gracious heavenly Father nourishes us that we may be able to serve him! How truly grateful all the remnant are to him for the wonderful “meat in due season”! It does not make any difference on which side the vail we are; we can serve either way, but we shall be happy when we can serve perfectly.
My report for October is 156 hours of blessed service; the most I nave been able to accomplish (by His grace) since entering the pioneer service just two and one-half years ago.
The people do not hesitate to tell mo what they think of the NBA, the preachers, and conditions in general. It is a privilege of joy to be one of Jehovah’s Witnesses at this time, to take to the people this message, which is for their benefit, even if there were no other reward than the joy we experience here. In the night and other times, in pondering over his wonderful pul-poses and in silent communion with him it seems ouo can put out one’s hand and almost touch him; to bo just a small means in helping to vindicate his holy name brings a happiness and peace that nothing else can give.
Already people arc wanting Pieparation, and I am looking forward to presenting it to the public. This morning we received your letter with a testimony to be used for it, and I will learn it in order that the people will have a better understanding of what they need.	.
Two other pioneers and Brother Morrison and I witnessed at the State Soldiers’ Home of Indiana this week. Dear old souls, how gladly did they listen to the message! Some past eighty years old whose minds were very keen took tho books and said they wished every one would take one of them so they could exchange to rc->d. But, of course, the Devil would have to stir up some trouble. When it got to the colonel’s ears (newly ap
pointed Catholic official) that Jehovah’s witnesses were there, he promptly sent his men out hunting us and made us leave. However, the colonel accepted the Government book. We are awaiting instructions before going back to finish. There were fifty-eight testimonies given while we were there, and thirty-six books and booklets placed. Some do not get a pension. Those who had the money took readily. There are more than six hundred persons living there. We only wish every one of them could have the Preparation.
At last I am finishing this letter, which I started more than a week ago; most busy indeed in the Lord’s work. This morning the new Watchtower camo (November 15), and when I saw the topic, “Laborer’s Wages” (explaining Matthew 19: 29) — I can hardly wait until I can study it. Also the first article in the last Golden Age (November 8), “Preparation for Armageddon,” using 2 Kings 10: 15 for the text, speaking of the Jonadabs, how happy they are, and- the good they do for others. We are camped in our house-car on the bank of the Wabash river, on property of one of the Jonadabs. Just now Brother Morrison was going to row across the river for some fuel to burn in our little stove, when the Jonadab told him to take all the wood we needed from his own woodpile. Many times, after putting in a long day in the service, too tired to prepare the evening meal (having to lie dow-n and rest first), we hear a knock at the trailer door and on opening it there is a meal all cooked, warm, ready to eat, prepared by the hands of the faithful Jonadabs. Indeed tho Lord will richly bless them. They do not have any more than they need themselves, but they divide it with others just the same.
May our heavenly Father bless and keep you close to him. We know that you are indeed giving your life in his blessed service; and who knows but that you are now writing manuscript for another book, so that the Lord's little ones might be further nourished! We pray always for you and all the remnant.
Yours in joyful service,
Mbs. C. F. (Minnie) Morrison, Pioneer.
SERVICE APPOINTMENTS
T. E. BANKS
Dayton. Ohio _________Feb.	3, 4
Columbus. O’lio .......”	0,7
Pittsburgh. P.a........”	8, U
Steubenville. Ohio	10,11
Akron, Ohio ..........” 13, 14
Dickinson. Tex.....Feb.
Houston. Tex.........”
Dayton. Tex..........”
Wharton. Tex.........”
KI Campo. Tex...........”
Cuero. Tex. ............”
Corpus Christi, Tex.	.. ”
San Benito, Tex........."
Brownsville, Tex........”
Cleveland. Ohio ......Feb. 15-18
Toledo. Ohio ..........."	20. 21
Detroit. Mi<-h..........”	22,23
Buffalo, N.Y............”	24.2a
Boston. Mass. „........."	27, 28
G. H. DRAPER
1	McAllen, Tex.......Feb, 14,15
2-4	Edcouch, Tex............”	IB
0	San Dieno, Tex..........”	17
7	San Antonio. Tex. ______”	18-21
8	Cvalde. Tex..........	”	23
V	Bandera, Tex. ......... "	24
10	Kerrville. Tex..........”	23
11 Junction. Tex.	27
13	Llauo, Tex..............”	28
M. L. HERR
J. C. RAINBOW
Joplin, Mo............Tnn.	30
Butler, Mo...........Feb.	1
Clinton, Mo............”	2
Sedalia, Mo............"	3
Jefferson City, Mo.....”	4,5
Moberly, Mo............”	7
Levasy, Mo.............”	8
Warrensburg,	Mo.....”	9
Kansas City,	Mo.....”	10-12
St. Joseph, Mo.........”	14.15
W. J.
Masontown, Pa.......Feb.	1
Nemacolin, I’a......”	3. 4
Brave. Pa...........”	6
Waynesburg, I’a.....’’	7. 8
Homestead. Pa.......	9, 10
Duquesne. Pa........."	11-13
Turtle Creek, Pa....."	15
McKeesport, Pa.......”	16
Ridgeway, Mo.......Feb. 16
Kirksville, Mo.........”	17
Rutledge, Ato.........."	18
Fort Madison. Iowa .. ”	20
Burlington, Iowa ......”	21
Keosauqua, Iowa .......”	22
Ottumwa, Iowa .........”	23
Corydon, Iowa .........”	21
Chariton, Iowa ........”	25,26
Williamsburg, Iowa .... ”	28
THORN Irwin, Pa......................Feb.	IT
Jeannette, Pa...........” 18. 19
Forbes Road, Pa.............” 21
Latrobe. Pa.....................”	22
Blairsville, Pa.....23.21
Johnstown, Pa.........." 25, 2<1
Vintondale. I’a.................”	28
Colver. Pa...................Mar.	1
Milburn, Okla.......Feb.	1, 2
Durant. Okla..........”	3. 4
Wade, Okla..........."	«, 7
Caney, Okla...........”	8. 9
Atoka, Okla..........’’	10,11
Lehigh, Okla.........’’	13, 14
A. H. MACMILLAN
Winston-Salem, N. C. Feb. 3, 4
High Point, N. C.......”	0, 7
Salisbury, N. C........”	8, 9
Kannapolis, N. C, ...... ” 10,11
Charlotte, N. C. ......” 13, 14
Asheville, N. C. ______” 15,16
G. Y. M’CORMICK
Yuma, Ariz............Feb. 1, 2
El Centro, Calif. ______”	3
San Diego, Calif. ______”	4,	5
Santa Ana. Calif........”	6,	7
Fullerton, Calif. ......”	8,	9
Riverside, Calif. ______”	10,11
Dunbar, Okla. _______Feb. 15.16
Cloutlv, Okla. ...».....”	17.18
Valliant. Okla..........”	20.21
Idabel, Okla.........."	22. 23
Heavener, Okla..........”	24.23
McCurtain, Okla.........”	27, 28
Spartanburg. S. C..Feb.
Greenville, S. C......”
Greenwood, S. C. ....."
Athens, Ga...........  ”
Atlanta, Ga...........”
Macon, Ga. ...„......  ’’
Monrovia, Calif......Feb.	13,14
Pasadena. Calif.......’’	13 It:
Rosemead. Calif........”	1*. i-
Gleudale. Calif........”	2'1 21
Los Angeles, Calif..’’	J2-23
Long Beach, Calif.____”	27. 28
S. H. TOUTJIAN
New Orleans, La....Feb.
Ocean Springs, Miss. ’’ Lucedale. Miss........”
Waynesboro. Miss......”
Enterprise, Miss. ____”
Newton. Miss..........”
Lawrence. Miss........”
Braxton, Miss.......... ”
Laurel. Miss..........”
Heidelberg, Miss. ____"
J. C. WATT
Peru, Ind.............Feb.	3
Wabash, Ind.............”	4
Liberty Center, Ind....’’	6
Marion, Ind..........—. ”	7, 8
Sedalia, Ind............”	9
La Fayette. Ind.........”	11
zlttica, Ind............"	12
Roninev. Ind. _______... ”	13
Frankfort, Ind. ________”	14
2-4	Ellisville, Miss.....Feb.	16
0	Hattiesburg. Miss..” 17,18
7	Foxworth, Miss.........”	20
8	McComb, Miss...........”	21
9	Osyka, Miss............”	22
10	Natchez. Miss..........”	23
11	Church Hill. Miss......”	24
13-	Vicksburg, Miss........”	23
14	Yazoo City. Miss.......”	27
15	Shaw, Miss.............”	28
Elwood, Ind..........Feb.	15.	16
Muncie, Ind............”	17,	IS
Portland, Ind.........’’	20
T.'niou City, Ind......”	2i
Richmond, Ind..........”	22
Newcastle, Ind.........”	23
Indianapolis, Ind......”	24-20
London, Ind............”	27
Greensburg, Ind. ------”	28
WATCHTOWER.
Published Semi-Monthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N. Y., U.S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford President W. E. Van Ambct.gh Secretary ‘'And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.”-Isaiah 54:13-
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation and his active agent in the creation of all tilings; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovali.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man wilfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are bom sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce tho ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear tho fruits of the kingdom before all who win hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of tho peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great net is tho destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall ba restored and live on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his Beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in tho light of tho Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
■United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Austbalasia, and South Africa, 7s. American remittances should ba made by Express or Postal .Money Order, or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be ma<lo direct to the respectivo bran< .1 offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by international I’ohtal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British .......... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England Canadian ....... 40 Invia Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Australasian . . 7 Beresford Road, Stratbfleld, N. 3. W., Australia South African .... Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society In every case.
(TrtUMlarions of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students Of the Bible who by reason of InQrmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may hare The Watchtower free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid tho needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations. Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will ba sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may bo expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires. Entered as Second Class Mail Matter at Brooklyn, N. T., Postoffce, Act of March 3, 1879,
MEMORIAL
For the year 1934 the Memorial of the Lord’s supper will be held after six o’clock on the evening of March 28. The Watchtower hopes to contain some timely instruction for all those who partake, and we suggest that each one be prepared by thoroughly considering the matter in advance.
CONVENTION
Los Angeles, March 24-28 inclusive, are the place and time for a convention of Jehovah’s witnesses. All meetings except Sunday afternoon will be held in the Trinity Auditorium, Grand Ave. and 9th. Sunday afternoon, from 2 to 5 o’clock, the Shrine Auditorium will be used. At 3: 30 to 4 o’clock p.m. Brother Rutherford will deliver an address which will be broadcast from coast to coast. The convention will conclude on the night of the 28th with celebration of the Memorial. The forenoon of each day of the convention will be used for house-to-house witness work. This marks the beginning of the Thanksgiving Period. The booklet Dividing the People will be used throughout the entire world during that period. The brethren on the Pacific coast will have opportunity of a convention, and doubtless most of them will take advantage of it. For further information, address C. V. Kncmeyer, 3345 Fernwood St., Lynwood, Californio.	’
PUBLIC LECTURES BY TRANSCRIPTION
Jehovah’s blessing has been markedly upon the use of the portable transcription machine. He has plainly manifested that this machine meets the need of the hour, when the enemy, under Gog, is seeking to curtail the use of the radio by God’s anointed and when the people’s ears are eager to hear, not man’s message, but God’s. The transcription machine has increased the power of Jehovah’s witnesses afield to preach llis truth manyfold, so that the desire for the literature is stimulated and study classes of many interested hearers are being formed. Besides more than 300 such machines in the United States alone, great numbers are now being effectively used in countries near and afar. For more information, write tho Society.	-------------
YEAR BOOK
The Year Book for 1934 is now ready. The Society has had the grandest and most intense and effective service year of its history, and the annual report thereon as compiled by the president will be sure to delight all who have the kingdom interests at heart. Also, there is a pointed discussion of the 1934 year text, and a text and appropriate comment for each day of the year. The book is 50c a copy, mailed anywhere. Remittance to cover should accompany each order. Company members will place their orders with the local stockkeeper, that he may send in a group order. This will reduce shipping costs and also expedite filling of orders here.

HOPE OF A TREE
“For there iff hope of a tree, if it be cut down, that it ill sprout again, and that the tender branch thereof will not cease. Though the root thereof irax old in the earth, and the stock thereof die in the ground; get through the scent of water it will bud, and bring forth boughs like a plant.”—Job 14:7-9.
JEHOVAH is the source of life. That eternal truth all creation who live must learn. All, therefore, must know that Jehovah is the Almighty God, besides whom there is none. It is Jehovah who has placed his own great name upon his beloved Son and made him his Vindicator; and now he says to the peoples of the earth: “In his name shall the nations hope.” Those who come to an appreciation of God’s gracious provision for man are delighted to know that there is no other name given under heaven whereby life can come to the members of the human race save that of his beloved Son, which provision God has made.
1	Jehovah has caused his prophecies to be written that men of honest desires may see at this time and discern the purpose of the Most High to give everlasting life to those of the human race who love and serve him. The words recorded in the book of Job above quoted are prophetic and refer to the fall of mankind, and his overlord, and Jehovah’s gracious provision for the recovery of fallen man that he may again live.
‘ Job was a man of wide experience, and doubtless had walked through the forest where the trees grew by the water’s edge. The cedar tree is symbolic of a living creation and, being an evergreen, it symbolized that God’s creature, man, may have everlasting life; and this would be true with reference to all creation that live and obey Jehovah. Doubtless Job had observed the peculiarities of the cedar tree, which under certain conditions will produce a new tree out of a dead stump. If so, he saw where the cedar tree once stood and lifted its evergreen arms heavenward, and later its foliage had fallen to the earth, the trunk was cut down and decayed, and only the stump remained, and even it appeared to be entirely dead. The roots of the tree had grown old in the soil of the earth, and there appeared to be nothing remaining that indicated life about the tree. Again when he visited that old stump he saw a tender root had stretched its little arms out to the waters and had drunk deeply of that life-giving and life-sustaining substance, and now a new tree was growing up in the place of the one that
lay dead. Year after year he saw that new tree continuing to grow, its branches reaching out and it ever lifting its green arms heavenward in an expression of its gratitude to him who had provided water and had given it life. When the new tree had grown large, probably Job sat under that tree while listening to the song birds in its boughs singing the praises of the Giver of every good and perfect gift. Then the Lord God moved the mind of Job to write, and prophetically he wrote: “For there is hope of a tree, if it be cut down, that it will sprout again, and that the tender branch thereof will not cease. Though the root thereof wax old in the earth, and the stock thereof die in the ground; yet through the scent of water it will bud, and bring forth boughs like a plant.” (Job 14:7-9) That prophecy is an expression of Jehovah's purpose to again give life to the obedient ones of the human race, even as he caused the new tree to grow up out of the roots of the old stump. God works in a plain and simple though mysterious way his wondrous acts to perform and to reveal them to those who love him.
THE GREAT TREE
4	On another occasion more than 2,500 years prior to this present day Jehovah caused a man to have a dream which now we arc enabled to see related to the same thing about which Job prophetically wrote concerning the tree. Nebuchadnezzar was then the head of the third world power, hence the king over all the peoples, nations and languages that dwelt upon the earth. God had punished the unfaithful nation of Israel by permitting the king of Babylon to defeat the Israelites at war and to carry away the survivors as captives. Among those captives carried to Babylon was faithful Daniel. This occurred eleven years previous to the final destruction of Jerusalem by the Babylonish king. Daniel, who now was in the king's service by the king’s command, was honored by the king, and, doubtless by the Lord’s provision, he was there to perform his divinely appointed part in the prophetic picture which God had him record and which relates to the fall and restoration of the human race.
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
33
8	On a former occasion Daniel, at the request of Nebuchadnezzar, told him of his peculiar drcam and gave him the interpretation thereof. Nebuchadnezzar for that reason had confidence that Daniel was the servant of the Holy One. (Dan. 2:1-45) Again Nebuchadnezzar had a dream, and again the magicians of Babylon had been called and had failed to interpret the dream of the king, and again the king caused Daniel to be brought before him. Then Nebuchadnezzar told Daniel his drcam concerning ‘a great tree’ in these words: “I saw, and, behold, a tree in the midst of the earth, and the height thereof was great. The tree grew, and was strong, and the height thereof reached unto heaven, and the sight thereof to the end of all the earth. The leaves thereof were fair, and the fruit thereof much, and in it was meat for all: the beasts of the field had shadow under it, and the fowls of the heaven dwelt in the boughs thereof, and all flesh was fed of it. I saw in the visions of my head upon my bed, and, behold, a watcher and an holy one came down from heaven. He cried aloud, and said thus, Hew down the tree, and cut off his branches, shake off his leaves, and scatter his fruit: let the beasts get away from under it, and the fowls from his branches. Nevertheless, leave the stump of his roots in the earth, even with a band of iron and brass [copper], in the tender grass of the field; and let it be wet with the dew of heaven, and let his portion be with the beasts in the grass of the earth: let his heart be changed from man’s, and let a beast’s heart be given unto him; and let seven times pass over him.” —Daniel 4:10-16.
8	That dream of Nebuchadnezzar, and which was recorded in the book of Daniel, being a prophecy, must some day have its fulfilment. Since the Scriptures declare that whatsoever things were written aforetime were so written that God’s faithful people might in patience and comfort have hope, and that, this greater enlightenment would come to those at the end of the world, we may be sure that the Lord God, sometime while the remnant is on earth, would give to them an understanding of that prophecy and that such understanding would be had before the day of Armageddon. (Rom. 15:4) Jehovah God brings about the events that fulfil these prophetic visions, and they cannot be understood until his due time to have them understood. It now seems to be Jehovah’s due time to permit his people on earth to have an understanding of the prophetic dream concerning the “tree in the midst of the earth”, as recorded in the fourth chapter of Daniel’s prophecy. The understanding of this has come only at God’s appointed time and gives consolation to those who love him.
PROCLAMATION
T The fourth chapter of Daniel’s prophecy opens with a proclamation which appears to be made by the king of Babylon. That proclamation was made and published after Nebuchadnezzar had gone through the
humiliating experience of the “seven times”, as stated in the prophecy, and after the king had been fully restored to his right mind and was again upon his throne. That proclamation foretold and foreshadowed another far more important proclamation to be made and issued by earth’s rightful King. The vision or dream fulfilled makes known that the ‘seven times of the Gentiles’ had ended and that no longer will Satan be permitted to exercise unhindered the overlordship of man. It discloses the further and more important fact that Jehovah’s kingdom has come and that he has placed his beloved Son upon his holy hill in Zion, that the Son is sent forth to rule in the midst of his enemies, and that the time has come for the vindication of Jehovah’s name. The proclamation opens thus: “Nebuchadnezzar the king, unto all people, nations, and languages, that dwell in all the earth; Peace be multiplied unto you.” (Dan. 4:1) Nebuchadnezzar here pictures Christ Jesus enthroned in 1914, which is the end of the Gentile times, and his work that follows, particularly from the time of his coming to the temple of Jehovah. The name Nebuchadnezzar means ‘‘Nebo (that is, The Prophet) is the protector against misfortune”. The name properly applies to Christ Jesus, Jehovah’s great Prophet, and the one who is the protector of God’s people against their foes. It is to Jehovah’s faithful remnant that the Lord has committed “the testimony of Jesus Christ”, and for this reason Satan goes forth making war against them; and Satan would succeed in this warfare were it not for the fact that the Greater Nebo, Christ Jesus, shields and protects them. The time has come for the vindication of Jehovah’s name, and those who will have a part with Christ Jesus in that blessed work must suffer at the hands of Satan and his agents; but, now being with Christ in the temple, they have an assurance of his protection and complete deliverance from the enemy’s assaults.
8	The proclamation says (R.V.), “Unto all the peoples, nations, and languages,” and corresponds exactly to the command of Christ Jesus upon coming to God’s temple, to wit: “And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations: and then shall the end come.” (Matt. 24:14) “And the gospel must first be published among all nations.” (Mark 13:10) It is the time when the peoples of the earth must be told that Jehovah is the Almighty God and that the time has come for his judgment to be executed by his mighty right Arm, and that all who would live must worship him who is the Giver of life. “And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters.”—Rev. 14: 6,7.
February 1, 1934
£Fiie WATCHTOWER.
37
• Christ Jesus, the great Prophet and King, addresses his proclamation to “all peoples”, which means primarily to those peoples on the earth who as his followers are maintaining their integrity towards Jehovah, and secondarily to the Jonadab class, meaning all those of good will who desire to know and to do the will of the Almighty God. This includes particularly the “sheep” class who are pleased to do good unto others because they believe and understand that such others are servants of the Almighty God and his beloved Son. Here then are shown also the faithful followers of Christ Jesus as Jehovah’s witnesses bringing the message of the proclamation to all others who have a hearing ear. These are messengers of peace and, quoting the language of their Lord, say: “Peace be multiplied unto you.” So said the proclamation of Nebuchadnezzar the king.
10	The entire world is now in turmoil and distress and has nothing in which it can hope so far as the world’s schemes are concerned; but to those who desire to know God and his King the information is now given that “in his name shall the nations hope”. As Jonadab was brought into close contact with Jehu, so now the “sheep” class is brought into close contact with the bearers of this divine message of peace. Concerning this message and its messengers it is written: “How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace; that bringeth good tidings of good, that publisheth salvation; that saith unto Zion, Thy God rcigneth!” (Isa. 52:7) In order for the Jonadab class to hear, someone must tell them of the King’s proclamation; and this privilege is assigned to the faithful remnant. —Rom. 10:14,15.
11	It is certain that the Lord God gives an understanding of this prophecy and other prophecies at this time for the very purpose of giving assurance to his remnant, that they may have a strong hope of entering into eternal glory and secure the prize, the crown of life. Without such assurance the remnant would become discouraged by reason of the constant persecution suffered by them; but now they see that such opposition bi’ings upon them suffering and contradiction and this is essential for them that they may have opportunity to prove their integrity towards Jehovah and to have a part in the vindication of his name. This assurance increases their faith and hope, aud hence onward they march, holding high the standard of the Lord God, proclaiming his message to the people and informing them that they will find peace only in the name of the Lord God and his King and kingdom.
12	Further manifesting the goodness and loving-kindness of himself and his Father the King (Jesus) says: “I thought it good to shew the signs and wonders that the high God [Most High] hath wrought toward me.” (Dan. 4:2) Christ Jesus the King is elated that the time has come for the vindication of
Jehovah’s name before all creation, and hence he deems it good to make known to his faithful followers the manner of Jehovah’s dealing with creation, and particularly with Christ Jesus himself, since the day of the rebellion in Eden unto the bringing of Christ Jesus to the throne as the Head of Jehovah’s holy organization of Zion. This is further and conclusive proof that Jehovah is the Most High. In 1914 the great wonders or signs began to be made manifest when the mighty organization of Satan met in conflict the still mightier organization under Christ Jesus in the war in heaven that resulted in ousting Satan and his wicked crowd from heaven. Then thereafter it was that the great Vindicator at the temple of Jehovah began to make known to the remnant the ‘two great wonders or signs’ of the twelfth chapter of Revelation and these faithful ones began to discern and appreciate for the first time of and concerning Satan’s organization that is pitted against Jehovah’s organization, and that the final conflict will be had at Armageddon. It was early in the year 1925 that The Watchtower, by the grace of the Lord, published the meaning of these two great wonders of Revelation. (See The Watchtower, March 1, 1925.)
“Priorto the comingofthe Lord Jesus to the temple the faithful ones on earth saw Jesus Christ only as the Redeemer and Savior of man, but now they see him as the Vindicator of Jehovah’s name, who has gained that exalted place and has proved his qualifications for that place by reason of the things which he suffered and which things were necessary for him to suffer in order to maintain his integrity and to prove Jehovah’s side of the great question at issue. (Heb. 5:8,9) Now he would have his faithful followers to know the ‘great wonders that the Most High God hath wrought toward me’, that is, toward the Lord Jesus Christ, the beloved Son of God. Then Christ Jesus, in admiration of and giving expression to his boundless love for his Father, further says: “How great are his signs! and how mighty are his wonders! his kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and his dominion is from generation to generation.” (Dan. 4:3) Like as he has always been, he takes not the credit to himself but gives the honor and glory to Jehovah. Among the great and mighty wonders here mentioned are the manifestation of Jehovah’s foreknowledge, his supremacy, and his never-failing purpose. The display of his perfect wisdom and unlimited power causes all pure-hearted creatures to stand in amazement, fear, astonishment and consternation, so mighty are his wondrous works. Those who love God begin to appreciate the words of his prophet that all nations before him are as nothing and are accounted to him as less than nothing, and vanity. (Isa. 40:17) “None can stay his hand, or say unto him, What doest thou?” —Dan. 4:35.
14	The time has come now to settle the issue before all creation that Jehovah is supreme, that he is the
33
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. F.
King of Ilternity, and the One who shall rule the earth and make it a place of righteousness; and this fact the great Prophet and King, Christ Jesus, will make known to the peoples of earth. Satan and his wicked organization must go, and Jehovah God by his righteous King “shall reign for ever and ever”. (Rev. 11:15) Let the proclamation be sounded throughout all the earth, that Jehovah’s Vindicator will not back down but will march on to victory, continuing to exhibit the mighty works of the Most High God. The first three verses of the fourth chapter of Daniel’s prophecy are therefore a fitting tribute to Jehovah before the announcing of the dream. Since Nebuchadnezzar himself was a servant of Satan, this is further proof that the words of adoration and praise to the Most High God in the opening of the proclamation are prophetic and are in truth and in fact the words of Christ Jesus.
REGAL POWER
18	Nebuchadnezzar was not a type of Christ Jesus, but he was an illustration of regal power in the abstract. Now speaking of himself and his dream the king of ancient Babylon said: “I Nebuchadnezzar was at rest in mine house, and flourishing in my palace.” (Vs.4) Here he is merely the human Nebuchadnezzar of the history of 2,500 years ago, clothed with power by the permission of Jehovah God to rule over the world and to enforce Jehovah’s decree of punishment against the unfaithful Israelites. In such a capacity he is used by Jehovah as an illustration of regal power in the abstract or impersonally. He is a symltol of power to rule. The time of his dream was approximately eight years before the date of the issuing of the proclamation with which the chapter opens. Doubtless Nebuchadnezzar was at that time in the king’s “palace of the kingdom of Babylon”, as indicated by verse twenty-nine. This background of the picture is appropriate and fitting to show that Nebuchadnezzar was used to illustrate or to picture regal power.
PLACE OF THE DREAM
18	At the time of his proclamation Nebuchadnezzar relates again the dream which he had eight years previous, and after its miniature fulfilment. “I saw a dream which made me afraid, and the thoughts upon my bed and the visions of my head troubled me.” (Vs. 5) Clearly that drcam was caused and recorded by the power of Jehovah God and was a prophetic expression of his dealing with regal power as exercised both by his adversary and by his servant. Nebuchadnezzar at the time was the earthly head of Satan’s organization; and the dream that troubled Nebuchadnezzar, as he states, illustrates Jehovah’s duly serving notice upon Satan and his organization, which now disturbs their easy complacency and selfassurance. King Nebuchadnezzar at this point, therefore, pictures regal or ruling power as exercised by
the rulers of this earth who are a part of Satan’s organization. “Therefore made I a decree to bring in all the wise men of Babylon before me, that they might make known unto me the interpretation of the dream.” (Vs. 6) The earthly rulers under Satan now consult spirit mediums in their efforts to determine what course they should take; but as the magicians failed to give the answer to Nebuchadnezzar, even so the fallen angels cannot now give good advice to earthly rulers.
” All the members and operators of the world organization, not being for God and his kingdom under Christ, are therefore against the kingdom; and this is true regardless of whether they are sincere in their efforts to do good or not. (Matt. 12: 30) “Then came in the magicians, the astrologers, the Chaldeans, and the soothsayers: and I told the drcam before them; but they did not make known unto me the interpretation thereof.” (Vs. 7) The magicians, astrologers, enchanters and soothsayers here picture the pope, the cardinals, the clergy, the philosophers and other professed wise men of the world who attempt to give counsel and advice to earthly political rulers. As the magicians, enchanters and astrologers were representatives of Satan, so the present worldly wise men above mentioned arc the servants of Satan. These servants of Satan and so-called “wise men” of the world cannot unravel Jehovah’s purpose, even after he sets the same down in his Word. They shun the Word of God and follow the lead of foolish men and wicked angels. They are unrighteous, and for that reason they cannot understand;,as it is written: “His secret is with the righteous.” (Prov, 3:32) Therefore the “wiseacres” of the world now throw up their hands and give up the job in despair. Of them Jehovah’s prophet wrote: “The vision of all is become unto you as the words of a book that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I cannot; for it is sealed.”—Isa. 29:11.
18	All the heathen “wise men” having failed to interpret the dream, King Nebuchadnezzar sent for Daniel. “But at the last Daniel came in before me, whose name was Belteshazzar, according to the name of my god, and in whom is the spirit of the holy gods: and before him I told the dream.” (Vs. 8) The name given to Daniel by Nebuchadnezzar was Belteshazzar, that is, “Bel’s prince,” that is to say, “Confounder’s prince,” or, “one whom Bel favors”; and this corresponds somewhat with the meaning of the name of Daniel. Nebuchadnezzar had named Daniel “according to the name of my god, and in whom is the spirit of the holy gods”, thus showing the heathen way of saying that Daniel was favored by the supreme God and moved upon by God's power through “the mighty God”, that is, the Logos, now Christ Jesus. Daniel never confessed that he spoke in the name of Bel, even though he was called by that name. In the ac
Febkuaby I, 1934
Tfk WATCHTOWER.
39
count given by Nebuchadnezzar the name of Jehovah does not appear, and this shows that the account is from a pagan ruler and is another evidence of its genuineness. The fact that Nebuchadnezzar had to send for Daniel to interpret his dream shows that he was obliged to apply indirectly to Jehovah for enlightenment. Ue could not get it from his own servants but could receive enlightenment only from the servant of Jehovah God.
19	The name Daniel means “God’s Judge”. Daniel at this point foreshadows Christ Jesus the great Judge, whom Jehovah has appointed as such and to whom He has ‘committed all judgment, and given him power to execute judgment'. (John 5:22,27) The sending for Daniel corresponds to the time of sending forth Christ Jesus by Jehovah to begin his reign amidst his enemies, and therefore relates to the year 1914. (Ps. 110:2) The worldly “wise men” of Satan’s religious, commercial and political organization had completely failed at that time to solve the mystery concerning the human race, and in 1914 God sent his Son forth to rule and in 1918 installed him as Judge at his temple and gave commandment to the nations that they should hear him. “But the Lord is in his holy temple: let all the earth keep silence before him.” (Hab. 2:20) The worldly wise men had an opportunity from that time forward to hear the message from the Lord God, but they gave no heed to it. God’s use of Daniel in giving the interpretation to the dream shows that Jehovah through his chief representative, Christ Jesus, will make known his purpose to his remnant people “upon whom the ends of the world are come”, for the reason that these things were written for their aid, comfort and hope. (1 Cor. 10:11; Rom. 15:4) The day of judgment of the nations having come, the time is due for the Lord to give the interpretation of the prophecy herein considered to those who love and serve him, and for that reason we may confidently look for the interpretation thereof from the Lord.
20	Nebuchadnezzar told the dream before Daniel, and evidently the heathen “wise men” were present, since Nebuchadnezzar addressed Daniel as “master of the magicians”. That language of the king did not signify that Daniel had anything in common with the magicians and soothsayers, but, being superior to them, he did have the mastery over them in interpreting; hence the king addressed Daniel thus: “0 Belte-shazzar, master of the magicians, because I know that the spirit of the holy gods is in thee, and no secret troubleth thee, tell me the visions of mj- dream that I have seen, and the interpretation thereof.” (Vs. 9) Nebuchadnezzar called to mind that the almighty God on a previous occasion had used Daniel to make known and interpret his dream concerning the great image. (Dan. 2:1-45) He had confidence that Daniel, the servant of the great God, could now interpret this dream.
THE TREE
21	Nebuchadnezzar was familiar with trees; but the vision of a great tree in the midst of the earth, and which vision came to him in a drcam, made him afraid, and its being recorded in the prophecy of God’s Word shows that the dream was from Jehovah and given to illustrate his purpose toward particularly the creation of earth and its overlord. Nebuchadnezzar then tells the dream and says: “ I saw, and, behold, a tree in the midst of the earth, and the height thereof was great. The tree grew, and was strong, and the height thereof reached unto heaven, and the sight thereof to the end of all the earth.”—Vss. 10,11.
22	The tree towering above the earth pictures in the abstract the overlordship of the earth together with the organization of the earth beneath it. It therefore pictured a living creation of Jehovah. When God created man and the other animals of the earth he assigned the overlordship of the earth’s creation to Lucifer. (Ezek. 28:13-15) The position of overlord of man was a very exalted place and is pictured by the great tree towering high above the earth. This overlordship and its organization beneath is shown to apply originally to Lucifer and thereafter Satan, as stated by the prophet Ezekiel, in chapter 31, verses 2 and 3: “Son of man, speak unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, and to his multitude; Whom art thou like in thy greatness? Behold, the Assyrian was a cedar in Lebanon with fair branches, and with a shadowing shroud, and of an high stature; and his top was among the thick boughs.” The third verse quoted above, according to the Rotherham, margin, reads: “Lo! a shorbin cedar in Lebanon.” This sherbin cedar pictured Satan and his organization. (See Vindication, Book Two, page 149.)
23	When Lucifer was appointed by Jehovah to the exalted position of overlord of man he at first exercised that office over only Adam and Eve, so far as the human family was concerned. He then saw the possibility of extending his regal power over many peoples that should spring from Adam and Eve by reason of God’s commandment given to them to “be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it”. (Gen. 1:28) Greed for selfish gain or 'the love for money’ moved Lucifer to commercialize mankind. That was the beginning or the root of all evil. (1 Tim. 6:10) Regal power or overlordship, together with the organization under it, the tree, there began to expand; and so it is written: “The tree grew, and was strong, and the height thereof reached unto heaven, and the siirht thereof to the end of all the earth.” (Vs. 11) That the office of overlordship was a heavenly one is here shown by the fact that the tree “reached unto heaven, and the sight thereof to the end of all the earth”. This is also pictured in the prophecy of Daniel concerning the great image, the head of which was of gold, representing Satan, while the silver and copper immediately under the head
40
^D.e WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
represented the invisible part of Satan’s organization. (Dan. 2:35; Light, Book Two, page 292-319) The office of overlord, like the lofty top of the cedar tree, dominated everything on earth and was visible from all parts of the earth. That does not mean that Satan was visible, but his power or overlordship was discernible throughout the earth. The overlord supervised all the earth and must be looked up to and recognized by all the earth. In this manner Satan exalted himself over all the earth and made men look up to him.
24	The leaves of a tree are for the benefit of the creatures that come in contact therewith. (Rev. 22:2) Describing the tree in the vision the prophecy reads: “The leaves thereof were fair, and the fruit thereof much, and in it was meat for all: the beasts of the field had shadow under it, and the fowls of the heaven dwelt in the boughs thereof, and all flesh was fed of it.” (Vs. 12) The base or root stock of the tree was in the earth, and thus pictured man, and shows that it is the man whom God created and concerning whom he commanded: “Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepcth upon the earth.” (Gen. 1: 26) The dominion of man was and is limited to the earth, but above man was the invisible organization, headed or topped by Lucifer, who afterwards became Satan, and to whom the words of Jehovah apply: “Thou, O king, art a king of kings: for the God of heaven hath given thee a kingdom, power, and strength, and glory.” (Dan. 2: 37) This is proof that Nebuchadnezzar represented or illustrated regal power that was granted to Lucifer and which power he abused and turned to wickedness.
25	The prophetic vision states that the fruit of the tree was much, and that in it was meat for all and all flesh was fed of it. Even after iniquity was found in Lucifer and he became Satan, and since, all the earth has been compelled to feed from that tree. This is corroborated by the Scriptural statement that the whole world lieth in the wicked one. (1 John 5:19, Diag.) The creation of earth has been under the shadow of that wicked organization.
THE WATCHER
28	Lucifer, when appointed to the high office of overlordship, was a part of Jehovah’s organization, and hence formed a part of the “higher powers”. Lucifer was made God’s watcher over the interests of the things of the earth, but he became unfaithful, rebellious and unholy and no longer was a watcher. On the contrary, he opposed the interests of Jehovah and the interests of man and has attempted to turn everything to his own wicked use. There was another watcher over and above Lucifer, and this is the one whom Nebuchadnezzar saw in vision. “I saw in the visions of my head upon my bed, and, behold, a watcher and an holy one came down from heaven.”
(Vs. 13) This one Watcher was watching the tree, and hence he was higher than Lucifer. That one watcher was and ever has been “an holy one” and is the Logos or the Word of God, the only begotten and beloved Son of Jehovah God. This holy Watcher has ever remained fully a d completely devoted to Jehovah God and has always maintained his integrity toward him. ,The vision discloses this watcher coming down from heaven, which manifestly means that the Logos, Jesus, the beloved One and faithful One of Jehovah, turned his attention to the things which pertain to and affect the earth, and particularly man.
THE DECREE
2T	This holy one, the Watcher, being the spokesman of Jehovah God, makes known the decree of the Most High. “He cried aloud, and said thus, Hew down the tree, and cut off his branches, shake off his leaves, and scatter his fruit: let the beasts get away from under it, and the fowls from his branches.” (Vs. 14) That decree, means that the RIGHT to the overlordship was then and there taken away from Lucifer, now Satan, and that he (Satan) and his spirit subordinates were cut off from Jehovah’s organization and were henceforth outlaws and that no earthly creature was required to remain under Satan’s organization, for the reason that he was no longer any part of the “higher powers” and no more furnishes protection and nourishment and help for mankind. All those who would have the blessings of life must give their allegiance and devotion to Jehovah God and his holy Watcher. This divine judgment or decree did not mean that at the time of Adam’s sin and the fall of Lucifer, now Satan, the judgment was to be executed immediately and that Satan and his invisible organization were then cast out of heaven and down to the earth; but that decree declares God’s purpose concerning the same. It is the final judgment then and there made and written against Satan and his organization, which judgment began to be executed at the time when Christ Jesus was sent forth to rule and to cast Satan and his wicked angels out of heaven. The execution of that decree, therefore, began in 1914 and shall be fully and completely executed at Armageddon. The destruction of the tree as described by the prophet Ezekiel, in the thirty-first chapter, shows what will come to pass at Armageddon.
28	Satan has exercised overlordship in his wicked organization, which includes the human race, even to the present time; but he has exercised that regal power without divine authority and has rebelled against Jehovah God. Jehovah’s purpose was announced in the decree, but that decree he did not execute immediately and completely destroy Satan and his organization but has permitted him to go on in his wicked efforts to prove his side of the challenge flung into the face of Jehovah God. The wisdom and supremacy of Jehovah are here exhibited by proving that he bides his own due time to vindicate his name. Peter refers
February 1, 1934
<FKe WATCHTOWER.
41
to this matter of Satan’s wicked organization and its continued operation when he says: “Which sometime were disobedient, when once the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls, were saved by water.” (1 Pet. 3: 20) The language of the apostle here used docs not mean that Jehovah God suffered bodily pain or mental anguish by reason of the wrongdoing of his creatures. Jehovah God is at all times serene and self-contained. There would be no reason why he should suffer bodily or mentally. The word 'suffer’, as used concerning Jehovah, means that he thus permitted without hindrance the wicked one’s continuing his work. In other words, Satan operated by the sufferance or permission of Jehovah. Alan has been left to exercise his own free will to serve either God or Satan, and almost all of human creation have yielded to Satan and followed him, and to that extent it would seem that Satan had largely succeeded in his boastful challenge. Jehovah in his due time will prove to all creation that lives that he is the only true and almighty God and that he is the Giver and sustainer of everlasting life and that he gives life to those who love and serve and obey him.
THE STUMP
10	The divine decree announced by the holy Watcher further discloses Jehovah’s purposes concerning fallen man and his recovery. Never could it be possible for man to have sustenance and life from that old “tree in the midst of the earth”, because such had become wicked and now must be cut down, its leaves shaken eft, and its fruit scattered; but the decree declares that the stump of its roots in the earth must be left. “Nevertheless, leave the stump of his roots in the earth, even with a band of iron and brass, in the tender grass of the field; and let it be wet with the dew of heaven, and let his portion be with the beasts in the grass of the earth.” (Vs. 15) The “stump of his roots in the earth” represented or pictured original man, made a part of the organization over which Lucifer was given overlordship. The leaving of the stump signified Jehovah’s purpose to provide an organization or a new tree by and through which obedient mankind might have life everlasting. Such of mankind, however, must meet the conditions imposed by the new tree or holy organization. This hope for man would come, not by reason of his own efforts, but by and through the kingdom of God with Christ Jesus as the Savior and enthroned King and Overlord of earth’s creation. The “band of iron and brass” around the stump shows that a long period of time would elapse before the opportunity for the restoration of obedient man under God’s organization would come and in that period of time man would be under the restraining rule of wicked spirit creatures, which are pictured by the copper or brass, and also under earthly rule of imperfect men, pictured by the iron. This is corroborated by the prophecy of the Great
Image showing that wicked spirits and wicked men have ruled the world and that this earthly rule of iron has been and is harsh and selfish and cruel. (See Daniel 2:32,33; Light, Book Two, page 309.) This entire organization, of course, has been dominated by Satan. Furthermore, this band about the stump shows that such period of time of waiting must continue until God's due time to remove the restraining power of Satan and his organization and that also Christ Jesus must wait until God's due time when he should be sent forth to place the enemy under his feet. (Ps. 110:1, 2 ; Ileb. 10:13) During that period of waiting the stump is in the “grass of the field” and “wet with the dew of heaven”. This shows that while mankind is alienated from God, out in the world with no proper habitation, yet God would not permit the race to perish and become entirely hopeless, but that it should be kept wet with the dew from heaven, that is to say, the refreshing promises which could be laid hold upon by those who love God and righteousness. This is in harmony with the declaration of the Scriptures: “My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distil as the dew.” (Dent. 32:2) This refreshing coming from heaven would work beneficially to those of the human race who during that long period of waiting would have and exercise faith in God and his precious promises and who would endeavor to maintain their integrity toward him. The whole race would be restrained and bound in a cruel rule, and those who would have faith in God would receive benefit and hope, illustrated by the dew.
30	Jehovah caused to be written both the words of the dream of Nebuchadnezzar and the prophecy of Job, and both are in exact harmony. The tree in its entirety is symbolic of a living creation or organization of Jehovah both invisible and visible to human eyes. The stump and the root forming a part of the stump picture the visible part of that living creation, which is mankind. Now the human race has grown old in the earth, yet there are some of the roots of that stump that, as Job says, have had a scent of the water, which water is symbolic of Jehovah’s life-giving and life-sustaining truths, and those of humankind who have had faith in Jehovah and his precious promises have reached out for that life-giving and life-sustaining water of truth and have continued to have hope. Some of these creatures have maintained their integrity towards Jehovah God and constitute the basis for a new earthly organization. The faithful men from Abel to the last of the prophets looked for a new heavenly organization, even though they did not understand it: and those faithful men will constitute the base for the new earthly part of the living creation pictured b.v the new tree which grows up and rules the world. (Hcb. 11:13-16) Truly, therefore, according to the prophecy of Job, there is hope of a tree. The stump of the original tree, representing man, and the roots thereof in the earth have waxed old and yet
42
Mo. WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
there have been some men in the earth, pictured by the roots, that have scented the truth and reached out for it and have clung to Jehovah and his precious promises, and these have promise and hope of being brought into the new tree.
31	This part of the prophetic tree proves that Jehovah would not utterly destroy man, but that in his due time he would bring back into his organization the reconciled ones who would maintain their integrity toward him. The original tree trunk or stock must be for ever cut off from the stump and can never be replaced thereon. Had not God created man on the earth there would have existed no reason for a superhuman overlordship. That overlordship was given to Lucifer, and had Lucifer remained faithful there would have been no occasion for the vindication of Jehovah’s name. Because of Lucifer’s rebellion and wickedness his organization must now be for ever destroyed, but the hope of obedient man is in another tree, that is to say, the righteous organization which Jehovah God has provided for those who love and obey him. The prophetic words of Job constitute a promise from Jehovah that he will provide for the redemption and deliverance of man and that he will give to all of his obedient ones life through another.
"A cedar tree is seen growing near the water’s edge. Its trunk is cut off and severed from the earth ; the stump is left in the earth and dies, but some of the tender roots survive and reach out for the water, and these are revived and an entirely new tree grows up and takes in obedient man, and it is more beautiful than the original or first tree. This is exactly in harmony with the facts and the prophecy as they are now observed. A tree is symbolic of a living creation or organization, the slump of which particularly pictures the earthly or visible part of that organization. The human race, by reason of sin and alienation from God, has wasted away and died, and yet through the centuries past there have been some of mankind who have exercised faith in God and in his precious promises and these have been sustained by his waters of truth and have maintained their integrity toward him. From these great truths is there a reason to expect
that Jehovah will bring forth a-new tree by and through which the people of the nations of the earth may have the hope of life? If so, what constitutes that new tree? What is the chief purpose of its creation and growth? Is it a tree of hope?
(To &« continued)
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
7 1. Point out the great importance of knowledge of Jehovah and of his beloved Son.
7 2,3. What was the purpose of the words of this text, and to what do they refer? What doubtless was Job's observation which Jehovah here used to provide expression 4— prophetic of his purpose concerning mankind?
7 4-6. Relate another prophecy pertaining to the same thing about which Job here writes, and the circumstances under which that prophecy was spoken.
7 7-10. By whom, and  when, was the proclamation made which is recorded at Daniel 4: 1? What was therein foretold and foreshadowed? Tho vision discloses what facts? Apply that proclamation as a prophecy.
If 11. To whom and for what purpose does Jehovah give an understanding of this prophecy, and other prophecies, at this time?
If 12-14. Point out in particular the application of verse 2 as a prophecy.
7 15,16. Whut purpose is served by the words of verse 4? Referring to verses 4-6: Point out here the prophetic position of Nebuchadnezzar, and the application of the statements made.
7 17. When and how is verse 7 fulfilled? Compare this with what is foretold in Isaiah 29: 11.
If 18. Account for Nebuchadnezzar’s referring to Daniel as Belteshazzar and ns having the favor of the “holy gods’’. What purpose is served by this part of the record?
7 19,20. “At the last Daniel came in before me’’: when, where, how, and for what purpose, in the fulfihnent of this prophecy?
If 21-23. Explain what is prophetically referred to in verse 10. Apply verse 11. How is this supported by Ezekiel’s prophecy and that recorded in Daniel 2?
If 24, 25. What important facts as to tho application of this prophecy are shown in the statements appearing in verse 12?
7 26. Prove the identity of the “watcher” seen in the vision. Apply the statement that he “came down from heaven”.
f 27,28. Explain the decree declared by tho “watcher”. How and when is that decree executed? Account for Jehovah's so long deferring execution thereof.
7 29. Apply the expression: (a) “Leave the stump of his roots in the earth.” (b) “With a band of iron and brass.” (c) “In the tender grass of the field . . . wet with the dew of heaven.” (d) “Let his portion be with the beasts in the grass of the earth.”
7 30-32. What, then, is tho application of the prophetic picture presented in Job 14: 7-9?
PURPOSE OF THE COVENANT BY SACRIFICE
WHATSOEVER Jehovah does is right. All life and all authority proceed from him. The sacrifices which he required in the law given to his typical people Israel were shadows of tilings to come.
In Psalm 50:5 it is written: “Gather my saints together unto me, those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice.’’ Even though the covenant by sacrifice is abnormal, it is fully in keeping with exact justice and is an expression of complete unselfishness. God’s creature, the perfect man Adam, had sinned
and thereby made forefeiture of his right to life. He must die and for ever remain dead unless another, perfect as he was, should take Adam’s place in death. Justice required the forfeiture of the life of Adam. Love provided for the corresponding one for sacrifice. Jehovah arranged a covenant to accomplish that purpose.
No creature of heaven or earth could originate that covenant of sacrifice, but Jehovah only, “the purpose of him [Jehovah] who worketh all things after the counsel of his own will.” (Eph. 1:11) “For who
February I, 1934
STe WATCHTOWER.
43
hath known the mind of the Lord? or who hath been his counsellor?” (Rom. 11:34) “Who hath directed the spirit of the Lord [Jehovah], or being his counsellor hath taught him? With whom took he counsel, and who instructed him, and taught him in the path of judgment, and taught him knowledge, and shewed to him the way of understanding?” (Isa. 40:13,14) No one gave Jehovah instruction, and he took counsel with no one.
That covenant by sacrifice and the purpose to make it was secret unto all until God’s due time to reveal it. “Which things the angels desire to look into.” (1 Pet. 1:12) Doubtless this included the Logos, the chief of all angels. “The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him; and his covenant to make them know it.” (Ps. 25:14, margin) This text and others strongly support the conclusion that the covenant by sacrifice was not known to any creature in the universe until the time for making it. The covenant is sacred to Jehovah. lie says: “My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips.”— Ps. 89:34.
The covenant and its outworking required the service of a high priest to perform the sacrificial duties in the priest’s office. “And no man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron.” (Ileb. 5:4) If no man could take the sacrificial office of priest upon himself, much less could the creature propose the covenant with Jehovah by sacrifice. The proof is therefore conclusive that it was Jehovah alone who originated the covenant by sacrifice and made it known in his own good time.
What was the occasion for this extraordinary covenant? Not any desire on the part of God for blood. With him is the fountain of life. (Ps. 36:9) He did not need blood for self-gratification. “If I were hungry, I would not tell thee: for the world is mine, and the fulness thereof. Will I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of goats?” (Ps. 50:12, 13) “To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me? saith the Lord: I am full of the burnt offerings of rams, and the fat of fed beasts; and I delight not in the blood of bullocks, or of lambs, or of he goats.” —Isa. 1:11.
The occasion was love and grace exercised by Jehovah. The honor of Jehovah’s name was involved, and love and grace acted with wisdom to provide the need. Life of man is a sacred right or privilege. (Gen. 9:5) Adam violated the sacredness of God-given life. Now Jehovah would afford a sacrificial course to be taken by some one, that the sinner might have that sacred gift of life renewed. Jehovah required no one to sacrifice; therefore the sacrificial arrangement was the outgrowth of love. The sacrifice would be just as much on the part of God as on the part of the other party to the covenant, because God alone provided and arranged for the sacrifice. The entire arrangement must be of God’s own volition and by the voluntary agreement on the part of the other one to the cove
nant. For this reason the covenant was the only arrangement that could fitly serve the purpose of providing a basis for man’s reconciliation. The liberty and free moral agency of the one sacrificed is not interfered with.
In determining where tne covenant by sacrifice was made, the purpose of the covenant may be said to control the conclusion. A perfect man had sinned and lost his right to life. God now would have that right to life purchased by another perfect man. Uis law required a life for a life. (Deut. 19:21) That man with a human life must be the one that should be sacrificed. A spirit creature could not enter into a covenant by sacrifice and redeem a human creature, because that would not be a corresponding price. It is true that the life of the Logos was transferred from the spirit to human, but there is no Scriptural evidence that a covenant by sacrifice was known to the Logos at the time of the transfer. Being fully conformable to Jehovah’s will, he came to earth in harmony with his will, being made a perfect man. He was begotten, not by fallen man, but by the power of Jehovah. When he reached his majority as a man he doubtless knew that he was to do something in connection with man’s recovery to life. Whatsoever the will of his Father might be in that respect or any other, he was ready to do it. This is shown by his use of the words: “Lo, I come: in the volume of the book it is written of me, I delight to do thy will.” (Ps. 40:7,8) Paul fixes the time of the covenant as at the Jordan when the words above quoted were made effective. (Ileb. 10:5-7) There Jesus came into the world as a mature man and must determine whether or not he would be of the world. Prior to that time, although he was the heir, his position was nothing different from that of a servant, because he was under the discipline of the law covenant.—Gal. 4:1, 2.
When ‘the appointed time of the Father’ arrived there was a feature of God’s will to be carried out which prior to that time was secret to all. At the Jordan, which fixes the time of the consecration of the man Jesus, was the appointed time of the Father. That clearly, therefore, seems to be the proper and due time for the making of the covenant which resulted in the sacrifice of the man Jesus. The unconditional agreement there on the part of Jesus was to do his Father’s will, whatsoever that might be; and if it meant that he must die, he was agreeable to that. The sacrifice was primarily the sacrifice of Jehovah, because it was Jehovah who gave his dearly beloved Son, him who belonged to Jehovah exclusively, to be sacrificed. This was shown in the picture on Mount Moriah when Abraham, representing Jehovah, offered his only son Isaac, who at that time represented Jesus.
It was the love of God that provided the sacrifice which the sacrifice on Mount Moriah pictured. This is further proved by the words: "For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but
44
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
have everlasting life.” (John 3:16) The irresistible conclusion, therefore, is that the covenant by sacrifice was made on earth, and not in heaven, and that it was made at the Jordan when Jesus consecrated and was baptized. It hardly seems reasonable that Jesus understood prior thereto that he was to be sacrificed. Immediately following his consecration at the Jordan he went into the wilderness to study the divine purpose. There Jesus undoubtedly learned the full meaning and importance of his covenant with his Father. It was in the wilderness that Satan placed before him the great temptations in an effort to induce Jesus to abandon his covenant. At that test Jesus declared in substance that eternal life depends upon full obedience unto God and the faithful performance of his covenant with God. (Matt. 4:4,10) Without doubt the perfect man Jesus continued to study his Father’s purpose and to fully appreciate that his covenant required his death. He said that he came to give his life for men. (Matt. 20:28) Again, he said: “I am that bread of life. I am the living bread which came down from heaven: if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his
life for the sheep. As the Father knoweth me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down my life for the sheep. Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again.”— John 6:48,51; 10:11,15,17.
That Jesus was taking this course of action in keeping with the terms of his covenant with his Father is proved by his words: ‘‘No man taketh it [my life] from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This commandment have I received of my Father.” (John 10:18) When Peter recognized Jesus as the anointed One of God and so stated to him Jesus replied: ‘‘The Son of man must suffer many things, and be rejected of the ciders and chief priests and scribes, and be slain, and be raised the third day.” (Luke 9:22) Thus he showed that he understood his covenant was that he should be slain and that he should be raised from the dead. Undoubtedly Jesus understood that his baptism in the waters of the Jordan symbolically represented his death and that his real baptism meant his sacrificial death. ‘‘I have a baptism to be baptized with; and how ami straitened till it be accomplished!”—Luke 12:50.
JOB’S EXPERIENCES PROPHETIC
THE sufferings of Job, painful beyond almost any comparison, had a most unusual beginning. Highly interesting is the account of these sufferings which, as the Scriptures show, are deeply significant to the perplexed and weary peoples who live in this day of uncertainty and distress that afflicts the world.
The Scriptural proof is positive that God used the people of Israel to make pictures of the outworking of his purpose of salvation. The law which God gave to the Israelites foreshadowed better things to come to humanity. What came to pass with the Jews was recorded for examples or ensamples for the benefit of those who will learn of the outworking of God’s purpose. Although Job was not a Jew, that would in no wise mean that God did not use him as an example or picture. Job being the greatest man of the east, and seeing that many creatures of heaven and earth were involved, even the great Creator himself, we are warranted in the conclusion that the picture of Job must have even a greater scope than the one in which Israel was involved. If so, then the picture would have to do with all mankind, both Jews and Gentiles. It is deemed advantageous to the student in the examination of the book of Job to state here in general terms what are some of the pictures that plainly appear, and then to show from the Scriptural proof the correctness of that conclusion.
Job in the day of his prosperity pictured Adam, the perfect and prosperous prince in Eden.
Job in his adversity pictured the entire human race suffering loss, sickness and death by reason of sin, which sin the enemy Satan put in operation through Adam.
Job suffering the loss of all his children pictures Adam losing all his offspring by reason of sin which was put in operation by Satan the enemy through Adam’s wrongful act.
Job maintaining his integrity under test pictures a class of men who under test do prove their fidelity and devotion to God.
Job as the servant of God maintaining his fidelity pictured all the servants of God who through adversity steadfastly and immovably hold their faith in God.
The three men, Eliphaz, Bildad and Zophar, who posed as friends of Job, were in fact not his friends. They can better be classed as three frauds. They, therefore, picture the Devil’s agencies, or his organization, attempting to direct man as to what is the course for him to take.
Elihu, the young man, well pictures or represents God’s anointed messengers who magnify the name of Jehovah and, as God's messengers, speak his message of truth to those who will hear.
The wife of Job also pictures an instrument that
Febbuaey 1, 1934
WATCHTOWER,
45
Satan the Devil employs to induce men to curse God, and therefore well represents Satan’s organization passing under the name or symbol of a woman.
Job fully restored to health and happiness and to all and even more than he had in former days pictures the great truth that God in his due time will restore the human race to health, happiness and life.
One great lesson taught by the book of Job is that of life from the dead by means of resurrection and regeneration; also that life, which is the greatest desire of man, may be had only through the office of a redeemer and mediator whom God provides.
The presumption is here indulged that all students will carefully study the Scriptural record designated in the Bible as the book of Job. Reference to the text is made here, but a proper consideration cannot be given thereto by anyone without a careful studying of all the texts of the book.
From the very beginning of the experience of man the controversy was between the great Creator and his son Lucifer concerning man. The record shows that Lucifer was one of the “morning stars” who, being informed of God’s purpose to create the earth and the creature man for the earth, joined in a song of praise to Jehovah. Man was created and placed in Eden and was put there under the supervision of Lucifer by Jehovah’s appointment. Lucifer knew that it was the duty and privilege of man to worship his Creator. Lucifer selfishly desired and coveted the worship of man for himself. He rebelled against God and led man to his downfall. Then his name was changed to Satan, which means adversary of God. Ever thereafter Satan has striven to turn man against God that he, Satan, might have the worship of man and hold man in subjection to him. This great fact should always be kept in mind in examining the Scriptures, and particularly the book of Job.
At the time of the assembly of the sons of God to present themselves to the great Creator, as mentioned in the record under consideration, almost all men on earth had turned to evil by yielding to the wicked influence of Satan. God had not removed from Satan the lordship of earth, but permitted him to continue to exercise his power over man, and thereby afforded a full opportunity for the testing of all his creatures. It must have been with much arrogance that Satan appeared in the presence of God, boasting and proud of the fact that he had turned almost all men away from God the great Creator. Jehovah called upon Satan to report his own movements, and the response of the adversary was that he had been about the earth. While the record is silent upon the point, it is reasonable to conclude that by his very arrogance in the presence of God, Satan declared, in substance, that no man would willingly continue to serve God, and in fact would not serve him at all, unless there were some selfish reason therefor.
What, then, was the issue in the controversy at that time? Doubtless it was this: Will man maintain
his integrity before Jehovah? Can God place a man on earth who will be faithful and true to him? Satan would insist that no man would do so, but that all, under certain conditions, would turn against God. Manifestly it was the purpose of God to demonstrate that man, by the grace of God, and acting under his counsel, can maintain his integrity and, by meeting the divine requirements and being obedient to God’s provided way, obtain life everlasting.
To determine the issue God would therefore permit Satan to go to the full limit in his attempt to turn all men against the Lord, and then in his own due time and good way God would demonstrate his own absolute supremacy. Thereby he would teach all creation the all-important lesson that Jehovah is the only true God and there is none besides him. At this point in the controversy Job pictured a class of men who do maintain a perfect condition of heart and hold the confidence of Jehovah. Therefore at the proper occasion Jehovah offered Satan the opportunity to do his worst. “And the Lord said unto Satan, Ilast thou considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that feareth God, and escheweth evil?”—Job 1: 8.
Satan denied that Job really loved God. He accused God of so hedging Job about that Satan did not have an opportunity to put him to the test. “Then Satan answered the Lord, and said, Doth Job fear God for nought? Hast not thou made an hedge about him, and about his house, and about all that he hath on every side? Thou hast blessed the work of his hands, and his substance is increased in the land: but put forth thine hand now, and touch all that he hath, and he will curse thee to thy face.”—Job 1:9-11.
That was a challenge to Jehovah; and the Lord did not permit the challenge to pass, but told Satan that he might take what Job had. Satan went out from the presence of the Lord and devised ways and means for the destruction of Job’s property and family and carried out his wicked purpose. When he had thus brought great disaster upon Job’s household, he failed because Job still trusted in God and worshiped him.
At a subsequent meeting of the sons of God to present themselves to Jehovah, Satan being there also, God reminded Satan that Job still “holdeth fast his integrity, although thou movedst me against him to destroy him without cause”. With arrogance and cruel sarcasm Satan replied to the Lord: ‘A man will give his skin for his skin, but all that man hath will he give for his life.’ “But put forth thine hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh, and he will curse thee to thy face.” (Job 2:4,5) Again the test was on: “And the Lord said unto Satan, Behold, he is in thine hand; but save his life. So went Satan forth from the presence of the Lord, and smote Job with sore boils, from the sole of his foot unto his crown.” —Job 2:6,7.
Notwithstanding this terrible calamity Job humbled himself before God, as shown by the fact of his sitting
46
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
down in the ashes. Again Satan had failed to turn Job against the Creator. Satan must have been somewhat disturbed at this turn of affairs. Then he bethought himself of how he had reached Adam through his wife. He injected the thought into the mind of Job’s wife and induced her to make an effort to influence Job to forsake God; and she, acting as Satan’s instrument, called upon Job to forsake God, renounce him, and suffer the consequences. But Job
did not yield to the evil devices of his wife. Turning upon her, he rebuked her and said: ‘ ‘ Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil?” Again Satan had failed in his attempt to turn Job against the Lord. In this experience Job must have pictured that small number of men who throughout the ages have withstood all manner of persecution and have still maintained their faith and devotion to the Lord God.
LET
UNDERSTANDING TO HONOR JEHOVAH
Dear Sir:
I would like to write a few lines to you and tell how comforting your messages have been to me. I have always wanted greater understanding of the Bible, which a person does not seem to get in a church. It seems as if my prayers are answered, because your books have been so helpful to me. Of course, some of the interpretations are a little different than we learn in Sunday school and church, but it is all plain in the Bible with your Bible helps. There is quite a lot I have to learn yet, but I would be glad to be classed as one of Jehovah’s witnesses, and I only pray my family will all come over.
I have been studying since last spring, and I would just like to say God seems nearer than he has all my life. Would you please pray for me that I may have greater understanding to help others to the honor nnd glory of Jehovah?
Yours sincerely,
if. Wright, Ontario.
REJOICING IN HAVING A PART
Dear Brother Rutherford:
At our last meeting under the sharpshooter arrangement, August 13, we reorganized under the company arrangement to further the activities of the Kingdom service in this territory. At the same time we adopted the resolution in the September 1 (1933) Tower, and are fully in accord with it. We assure you, dear brother, you have our full cooperation, love and confidence.
We are glad to inform you that we are rejoicing in our privilege of service to Jehovah. Our desire is to put forth all our energy in the witness work, singing praises to His great name.
We wish to express our gratitude for the meat in season which exposes Satan and his organization, and gives great comfort to the remnant.
We are greatly rejoicing in the privilege of having a part in announcing the King and the kingdom, and pray that Jehovah will extend his loving-kindness toward you till the end.
Sincerely your brethren and coworkers, Steubenville (Ohio) company of Jehovah’s witnesses.
ADMONITION, ENCOURAGEMENT
Dear Brother Rutherford:
In the name of our Father Jehovah God, and our Savior and King Christ Jesus, I greet you, while praying that the joy and peace of the kingdom’s blessings may be multiplied toward you and all of like precious faith to be strengthened for the exact zeal in the service royal that is needed in this time of Jehovah’s preparation through his great Executive Christ Jesus. The object of this letter is, first, to thank you for the book Preparation, and, second, to express my gratitude to the Lord Jehovah for the abundant admonition, encouragement and marvelous truth expounded in that book, while I fully decide in the strength of the Lord to put myself on the offensive side with our Leader Christ Jesus and not to lose a single minute in this great preparation work and press the battle to the very gates of the enemy. 1 will not take more of your time, for I know that same is precious, as it is the Lord’s; but I pray the Lord his blessings unto you and all of like zeal in the service.
Accept my gratitude, while I remain
Your fellow servant by His grace,
Lionel E. Callendar, Pioneer, Cuba.
TERS
JEHOVAH WILL EXULT
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Your time is precious. I will take but little of it, but I wish to thank you for the book Preparation. I thank Jehovah for the truth which it contains. That is his. You, as his servant, have lovingly and generously provided for us, the scattered ones, who must eat if we continue to carry “the fruits of the kingdom” to the people.
Preparation defies description. It must be felt. One must eat it and drink it to understand it. Chapter XII, WAR, is like the shout of the victor, a triumph in which Jehovah will exult.
The “remnant” need it now. The strain is heavy, but they are joyful in what is the best of all the years of service. We think of and pray for you who we believe are faithfully serving the great Shepherd's flock.
Yours by his favor,
Bertha Eller, North Carolina.
GOD’S BOUNTEOUS BLESSINGS
Dear Brother Rutherford:
We are glad to be able to send in the enclosed to be used in kingdom work, and pray it may redound to His honor who has now come to His temple.
How thankful we are to our gracious heavenly Father for the wonderful food that he is providing for us at this time, and we wish to thank you, and the dear brethren at the otfiee, for your loving faithfulness in dispensing it to us. The Lord surely knows how sorely the remnant are in need of this to strengthen them in these days of trial, when Satan and pnnce Gog and his host are doing all they can to destroy us and disrupt the work.
But greater is He that is for us than all they that be against us. Though even the brethren fail us, just when wo need them the most, yet we know that God is just and right and true, and he will never leave nor forsake us if we continue to put our trust fully in him.
And as wo partake of God's bounteous blessings we are glad, yea, anxious, to tell the kingdom message to others until the great battle is fought and our King is victorious!
With Christian love and greetings from
Mrs. Mary Schlatter and Family, Kfinsas.
KINGDOM JEWELS
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Since I have had a knowledge of the great truths which the Lord has provided for his servant through The Watchtower there have been many times I have offered a prayer of thanksgiving to Jehovah for his bountiful provision for his faithful ones. And now the remnant have been given the new joy of the kingdom in the book Preparation.
As each part appeared in The Watchtower it became apparent that these gems of truth were the most brilliant that the anointed have yet received. In fact, these truths appear as jewels which have now been placed in the book Preparation and carefully set by a Master Workman, as shown by your letter to the faithful, and the Preface. This setting adds much to the brilliance of these gems of truth.
I am indeed grateful to you, Brother Rutherford, and all the coworkers for these truths which have been provided by Jehovah through you at this time of preparation for Armageddon.
Your brother in His service,
F. K. Southworth, Kansas.
Febi'.uaey 1, 1934
6Tle WATCHTOWER.
47
KNEW THE TRUTH
My dear Brother Rutheevoru:
May I take a moment of your valuable time to tell you of an incident that came to me a few days ago while in the house-to-house work, and proving the radio is doing a wonderful work? This day out in service I came to a neat colored home, found the man, his wife, and aged mother of seventy years enjoying the Watchtower program. The mother cannot read or write, but she knew the truth. She has learned it from your voice over the radio. She told me that every Sunday when ii was time for you to come on she sat close to the radio to batch each word; and that the message was so sweet, so beautiful, so wonderful, that the tears flowed freely; and that she longs for the kingdom you tell about.
I asked her if she ever heard the ministers of the various churches that come over the air. She said, “Yes, yes. I some
times hear one that comes after the judge; but, honey, he can't talk like the judge. Judge Rutherford is learned of God and has godly wisdom; the other man is learned of the world and has worldly wisdom.” The other man is the pastor of one of the largest and richest churches here.
I thought the old colored woman had a unique way of telling the truth. ‘The other man is not learned of God,’ not in his temple, has not a seat at his table to partake of the wonderful food provided.
The November 1 Watchtower is “meat in due season”. A man told me Sunday, when out in the service, to ‘ get out before he killed me'. It is my desire to be faithful to the end. God bless and keep you, dear brother.
Your sister by His grace,
Mrs. A. F. Hollowell, North Carolina.
(Continued from page 48)
Scottsbl’f KGKY Su 10:15am We 5:45pm Fr 5:45pm York KGBZ Su 5:45pm Th 2:00pm
NEVADA Reno KOH Su 10:30am
NEW HAMPSHIRE Manch 'ter WFE A Su 2:45pm Wo 7:00pm
NEW JERSEY Atlantic C’y WPG Su 10:00am Paterson WODA Su 10:00am We 7:45pm Fr 7:45pm
NEW MEXICO
Albuq 'que KOB Su 5:45pm
Roswell KGFLSu 5:15pm We 4:30pm Fr 4:30pm
NEW YORK
Auburn WMBO Su 6:30pm Su 2:15pm
Bing 'mtonWNBF Su 7:00pm Brooklyn WBBB Su 10:15am
Su 6:30pm Mo 10:30am Tu 10:30am Tu C:30pm We 10:30am We 6:30pm Th 10:30am Th 6:3«pm Fr 10:30am Fr 6:30pm
Brooklyn WCNW Mo 0:45pm Th 6:30pm Sa 5:00pm
Buffalo WGR Su 10:00am Buffalo wKBW We 10:00am Freeport WGBB Su 0:00am
Tu 7:00pm Th 7:00pm
Hudson F. WGL2 Su 10:45am Jamestown WOOL Su 7:00pm New York WMCA Su 10:45am Saranac L. WNBZ Su 10:15am
Tu 4:15pm Th 4:15pm Syracuse WSYR Su 10:30am Tupper L. WHDL Su 10:45am Th 10:00am Wh. Fl’ns WFASSu 6:00pm
Mo 1:00pm Sa 9:00am
NORTH CAROLINA
Asheville WWNC Th 5:30pm Charlotte WBT Su 10:30am Greensboro WHIG Su 9:45am Raleigh WPTF Su 10:00am Wilm’ton WB AM Su 10:00am
Wo 7:00pm
NORTH DAKOTA
Devils L. KDLR Su 12:30pm We 6:00pm Fr 6:00pm
Fargo WDAYSulO:00am
G *d Forks KFJM Su 5:00pm We 5:00pm Fr 5:00pm Mandan KGCU Su 11:30am
Wo 8:45pm Fr 8:45pm
OHIO
Akron WADCSu 1:45pm We 1:00 pm
Cleveland WHK Su 6:30pm
Tu 3:15pm Th 9:15pm Cleveland WJAY Su 9:45am Columbus WAHI Su 10:00am
Th 7:30pm
Columbus WCAH Su 9:45am
Mo 2:00pm Wo 2:00pm
Fr 2:00pm
MtOrab WHBDSu 4:45pm
We 4:45pm Fr 4:45pm
Toledo WSPDSu 9:30am
Sa 8:15am
Youngst 'nWKBN Sa 10:00am
We 4:00pm
Zanesville WALR Su 10:00am
We 4:15pm
OKLAHOMA
Elk City KASA Su 1:15pm
Enid KCRCSu 2:45pm
We 5:00pm Fr 5:00pm
Oki'a City KOMA Su 1:45pm PoncaCity WBBZ Su 10:00am
We 9:00pm
Shawnee KGFF Mo 8:45pm
We 8:45pm Fr 8:45pm
OREGON
Klamath F. KF JT Mo 8:15pm
Marshfield KOOSMo 1:30pm Medford KMED Su 10:00am
Th 4:00pm Portland KWJJ Su 9:30am Portland KXL Tu 7:00am
PENNSYLVANIA
Altoona WFBG Su 10:30am
Tu 8:15pm
Erie WLBW Su 10:30am
Glcnside WIBG Su 12:15pm
We 12:15pm Fr 12:15pm Johnstown WJAC Su 4:30pm Phil 'a WCAU Su 12:00 nn Pittsb 'gh KQV Su 10:30am
Wo 1:45pm Fr 1:45pm
Pittsb'gh W WSW We 5:15pm
Reading WEEU Su 3:45pm
We 3:45pm
Wash'ton WNBOSu 9:45am W 'msport WRAK Su 9:15pm
Th 7:15pm
SOUTH CAROLINA
Charleston WCSC Su 1:00pm We 7:00pm Fr 7:00pm
Columbia WISSu 1:00pm
Fr 6:45pm
Greenville WFBCSu 9:30am
Spart'b’g WSPASu 6:30pm
SOUTH DAKOTA
Pierre KGFX Su 1:00pm Tu 4:00pm Th 4:00pm
Sioux F’ls KSOO Su 10:00am Th 2:45pm
Watertown KGCR Su 9:15am We 8:45pm . Fr 8:45pm
TENNESSEE
Bristol WOPIWe 6:45pm
Sa 0:45pm
Cha’noogaWDODSu 1:00pm
Th 8:00am
Jackson WTJSSu 1:30pm
We 5:00pm Fr 5:30pm
Knoxville WNOX Su 1:45pm
We 5:30pm
Memphis WMC Su 4:00pm Memphis WREC Su 9:30am
TEXAS
Amarillo KGRS Su 9:00am Austin KNOW Su 10:00am Beaumont KFDM Su 10:00am
Tu 7:45pm
Borger KSRB Su 5:00pm We 5:00pm Fr 5:00pm
CorpuaChr. KGFISu 9:00am
We 6:45pm Fr (J :45pm
Cuero VOC Su 2:45pm
We 4:45pm Fr 4:45pm
Dallas	KRLD Su 5:45pm
Dublin	KFPLTh 8:00pm
Fr 10:00am
El Paso	KTSMSa 7:30pm
Ft Worth KTATMo5:15pm
We 5:15pm Fr 5:15pm
Galveston KLUF Su 10:15am
We 2:15pm
Houston KPRC Su 10:00am
S. Angelo KGKL Su 1:45pm Th 8:45am
S.	Antonio KTSA Su 10:45am
Wichita F. KGKO Su 12:30pm Th 8:45pm
UTAH
Ogden KLOSu 3:00pm We 5:00pm Fr 5:00pm
Sait L. City KSL Su 11:15am
VERMONT
Rutland WSYB Su 10:00am
Th 5:30pm
Waterb’y WDEV Mo 9:45am We 9:45am Fr 9:45am
VIRGINIA
Ch’lottesv. WEIIC Su 10:45am
Danville WBTMSu 9:15pm
Lynchb’g WLVA Su 12:45pm
Petersb 'g WPHK Su 6:45pm
We 10:00am Fr 10:00am
Richmond WRVA Su 12:15pm
Roanoke WDBJ Su 12:30pm W'e 5:00pm
WASHINGTON
Aberdeen KXROSu l:I5pm Bell ’ham KVOS Su 10:00am Th 5:30pm
Seattle	KJR S u 10:00am
Seattle KVLMo 6:45pm Tu 6:45pm We 6:45pm Th 6:45pm Fr 6:45pm Sa 6:45pm
Spokane KFIOSu 9:15am We 7:45am Fr 7:45am
Tacoma KMO Su 10:30am We 5:00pm Fr 5:00pm
Tacoma KVI Su 2:30pm Walla Walla KUJ Su 7:45am Su 1:30 pm
Wenatchee KPQ Su 10:00am We 7:00am
Yakima KIT Su 10:00am Th 7:00am
WEST VIRGINIA
Bluefield WHISSu 9:00am
Fr 8:00aa:
Cha’ston WOBU Su 4:00pm
Hunt'ton WSAZTh 4:00pm
Wheeling WWVA Su 10:00am
WISCONSIN
Eau Claire WTAQ Su 9:15am ____________ We 6:15pm
La Crosse WKBTI Su 1:00pm Madison WIBA Su 10:00am
Fr 2:15pm
Ma 'towoc WOMT Mo 7: OOpin Th 1:00pm
WYOMING
Casper KDFN Su 10:30am Th 8:45am
WATCHTOWER.
RADIO SERVICE
The good news of the kingdom of Jehovah is broadcast each week or oftener by these and other stations at time shown.
[Current local time is shown In each instance.]
AUSTRALASIA
NEW SOUTH WALES
Albury	2-AY Tu	9:15pm
Broken Hill	2-XL Su	8:45pm
Canberra	2-CA Su	8:45pm
Goulburn	2-GN Su	7:30pm
Gunnedah	2-MO Su	7:00pm
Lismore	2-XN We	7:15pm
New Castle	2-HD Su	9:30am
Su 7:15pm Wo 6:45pm Sydney	2-UE Su 7:00pra
W 'ga W’ga 2-WG We 7:45pm
QUEENSLAND
Brisbane	4-BC Su 10:15pm
Mackay	4-MK Su 11:00am
Townsville 4-TOWe 8:00pm
VICTORIA
Ballarat 3-AC Su 10:15pm
Ballarat	3-BA Su	1:15pm
Bendigo	3-BOTu	8:00pm
Hamilton	3-HA Su	8:30pm
Melbourne	3-AWSu	4:45pm
Salo	3-TBSa	9:00pm
Swan Hill	3-SIISu	7:15pm
Wangaratta3-WRSu 8:15pm
WEST AUSTRALIA
Kalgoorlie 6 KG Su 7:40pm
Perth 6-MLSu 9:00pm
CANADA
ALBERTA
Calgary CFCN Su 5:45pm
NOVA SCOTIA
Sydney CJCBSu 9:00pm
ONTARIO
Hamilton CKOC Su 10:30am Su 1:30pm Su 8:15pm
CHINA
Shanghai XIIHH Su 10:00am
CUBA
Havana CMK Su 11:30am also Spanish Su 9:00pm
Santa Cl’a CMHI Su 12:00 nn
ESTHONIA
Reval RADIO-Su 3:30pm (296.1m) TALLINN
FRANCE
Beziers RADIO-Th 8:00pm (220.1 m) BEZIERS
Bordeaux RADIO- Mo 7:45pm (237 m) SUD-OUEST
Fecamp RADIO-NOR-(223 m) MANDIE
English: Su 4:00pm
French: Tu 8:00pm
Paris RADIO L LFr 8:15pm (370 m)
Paris RADIO- Su 12:00 nn
(312.8 m) VITUS
Th 7:30pm Sa 7:30pm
Toulouse RADIO-We 7:15pm (385.1 m) TOULOUSE
UNITED STATES
ALABAMA
Birm’ham WAPI Su 9:45am Birm’ham WBRC Su 10:00am We 4:30pm Dothan WHET Su 10:30am
We 1:15pm Fr 1:15pm
M’tgomery WSFA Su 3:45pm
Muscle S. WNRA Su 6:00pm Wo 8:00pm Fr 8:00pm
ALASKA
Anchorage KFQD We Ketchikan KGBU Mo Th 7:15pm Sa
9:30pm
7:15pm 7:15pm
TASMANIA
Launceston 7-L A Fr 10:15pm
BELGIUM
Hainaut BONNE Sa 5:30pm (330 m) ESPERANCE
ARIZONA
Bisbee	KSUNSu	4:00pm
Wo	4:00pm Fr	4:00pm
Jerome	KCRJ Mo	5:15pm
We	5:15pm Sa Spanish Th	5:15pm 4:30pm
Phoenix	KTARSu	9:00am
Prescott	; KPJMSu	5:45 pm
Wo	5:15pm Fr	5:15pm
Tucson	KGAR Su	7:00pm
Wo	5:45pm Fr	5:45pm
Tucson	KVOA Su Th	8:45am 8:00pm
Yuma	KUMA Su Spanish Su	6:15pm 6:00pm
ARKANSAS
Fay’ville KUOA Su 12:45pm
We 11:45am Fr 6:00pm HotSp’gs KTHS Su 12:15pm Little R’k KARK Su 9:00am Little R’k KGHI Su 7:00pm
We 5:45pm Fr 5:45pm LittleR’k KLRA Su 10:30am Paragould KBTM Su 10:00am
We 11:30am
Texarkana KCMC Su 6:45pm
CALIFORNIA
El Centro KXO Su 10:00am Eureka KIEM Su 10:30am
Fresno KM.T Su 3:45pm Hollywood KNX Su 9:15pm Long B'ch KGER Su 10:45am
Los Angeles KTM Su 9:30am
Su 8:00pm Th 8:00pn>
Oakland KLS Su 11:15am
We 2:45pm Fr 2:45pm
Oakland KROW Su 10:15am
Su 6:15pm Tu 8:15pm
Fr 8:15pm
Sa’mento KFBK Su 9:30am
S.F’cisco KTABSu 9:30am Sa 8:30am
Stockton KGDMSu 9:30am We 7:15am Fr 1:15pm
COLORADO
Col’oSpr. KVORSu 10:30am We 4:30pm Sa 4:30pm
Denver KFELSu 7:00pm
Grand J’n KFXJ Su 1:15pm Greeley KF KA Mo 7:15pm Lamar KIDW Su 7:15pm
We 2:40pm Fr 2:40pm
Pueblo KGHF Mo 8:15pm
We 10:45am
Yuma KGEK Su 12:45pm We 12:45pm Fr 12:45pm
CONNECTICUT
Bridgeport WICC Su 10:00am
DELAWARE
Wilm’ton WDEL Su 7:00pm
We 8:30pm
Wilm’ton WILM Mo 8:45pm
FLORIDA
Miami WIOD Su 12:15pm Miami WQAM Su 4:30pm Orlando WDBO Su 12:45pm Pensacola WCOA Su 1:00pm
Wo 7:30pm Fr 6:30pm
GEORGIA
Athens	WTFI Su 9:45um
Atlanta	WGST Su 5:45pm
Augusta WRDWSu 3:00pm
Th 7:45pm Columbus WRBLSu 9:30am LaGrange WKEU Su 3:00pm
Wo 3:00pm Fr 10:00am
Rome WFDV Su 12:30pm Wo 8:45pm Fr 8:45pm
Savannah WTOC Su 1:15pm Tho ’ville WQDX We 9:15am
W’e 7:30pm
HAWAII
Honolulu KGMB We 12:05pm
Fr 7:15pm
IDAHO
Boise KIDO Su 10:30am
Wo 8:30pm
Nampa KFXD Su 11:00am
Pocatello KSEI Su 2:00pm Su 9:00pm
Twin Falls KTFI Su 10:45am
ILLINOIS
Chicago WJJDSu 2:30pm
Cicero WHFC Su 5:00pm
We 5:00pm Fr 5:00pm Decatur W JBL Su 10:00am
Mo 7:30pm
Harrisb’g WEBQSu 6:00pm
Mo 10:00pm Fr 10:00pm
Joliet WCLS Su 12:15pm
We 12:45pm Fr 12:45pm La Salle WJBC Su 10:15am Rockford WROK Su 10:00am
Su 10:00pm We 10:00pm
Sp ’gfield WCBS Su 12:30pm
Sa 11:15am
Tuscola WDZ Su 10:00am
INDIANA
Gary WIND Su 10:45am
Ind ’apolis WKBF Su 10:09am
We 2:00pm
Muncie WLBC Su 1:30pm
Fr 7:30pm
T.	Haute WBOW Su 12:45pm
IOWA
Decorah KGCA Mo 9:00am
Wo 9:00am Sa 9:00am
Des Moines WHO Su 5:30pm Marshall!’nKFJB Su 8:45am
We 6:15pm Fr 6:15pm
Shenandoah KMA Su 11:15am Waterloo WMT Su 6:45pm
KANSAS
Coffeyville KGGF Su 1:45pm Th 8:00pm
Kans.C’y WLBF Su 5:15pm Wo 5:15pm Fr 5:15pm
MAINE
Bangor WLBZ Su 9:45am
Portland WCSII Su 4:00pm
MARYLAND
Baltimore WB AI. Su 4:15pm
Cumberl’d WTBO Su 2:00pm
Wo 2:00pm Fr 2:00pm
Hagerst’n WJEJ Su 10:15am
MASSACHUSETTS
Babson P. WBSO Su 12:30pm
Boston WNACSu 10:00am
Lex’gton WLEY Mo 1 ;3<>pm
We 1:30pm Th l;30pm
Sp’gfield WMAS Su 10:00am
Worcester WORC Su 10:30ain
MICHIGAN
Calumet WHDFTu 6:45pm Detroit ■ WJRSu 9:45am Ironwood W.JMSSu 5:00pm
We 7:00pm Fr 7:15pm Jackson WIBM Su 10:00am KalaiuazooWKZO Su 9:45am
Wo 3:00pm
MINNESOTA
F’gusFallsKGDE Su 10:00am Min’polisWRUM Tu 8:00pm Moorhead KGFK Su 7:30pm
Wo 5:15pm Fr 5:15pm
St. Paul WK1IM Su 12:30pm Th 1:00pm
MISSISSIPPI
Hattiesb’gWPFB Su 1:30pm
We 7:45pm
Laurel WAML Su 12:45pm
Meridian WCOC Su 10:00am Wo 6:45pm
Miss. City WGCM Su 9:45am Wo 8:45pm
MISSOURI
Columbia KFRU Su 4:30pm
We 7:15am
Kans.C’y KWKC Su 8:45ain
Tu 7:00am
MONTANA
Billings KGIIL Su 12:15pm
G’t Falls KFBB Su 10:00am
NEBRASKA
Kearney KGFWSu 9:00am
We 6:45pm Fr 6:45pm
Lincoln	KFAB Su 9:30am
Lincoln	KFOR Su 10:15am
(Continued on page 47)
We WATCHTOWER.
Published Semi-Monthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street « Brooklyn, N. Y., U. S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford President W. E. Van Am burgh Secretary “And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.”~ Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only,true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation and his active agent in the creation of all things; that tho Logos is now tho Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and tho Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created tho earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man wilfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce tho ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with ail power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, nnd that Christ Jesus is, tho Chief Officer thereof and is tho rightful King of tho world; that tho anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whoso duty and privilege it is to testify to tho supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear tho fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and tho Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of tho peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is tho destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in tho earth, and that under tho kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall bo restored and live on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to tho Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his Beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of tho Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, JI.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Cheat Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 7s. American remittances should bo made by Express or Bo.,tai .Money Order, or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should bo mads direct to the respective branch ofiices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn ofilce, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British . ....... ..31 Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England Canadian ....... 40 Irwin Avenue, Ti^onto, Ontario, Canada Australasian . . 7 Beresford Hoad, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia South African .... Boston House, Capa Town, South Africa Please address the Society in every car.e.
{Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adver-lty are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtoicer free upon written application to tho publishers, made once each year, stating the rerp-on far so requesting It- We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by tho postal regulations. Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will bo sent only when requested. Change r.f address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before tho subscription expires. Entered a* Second Class Mail Matter at Brooklyn, N. Y., Postofjice.
Act of March S, 1379.
TRANSCRIPTION MACHINES
The Society has made arrangements to construct and assemble portable transcription machines at our own factory at 117 Adams Street. These machines will be somewhat different in construction from those previously furnished. They will be spring-wound, and operated from a 6-volt wet-cell battery. Every machine will be furnished complete with the battery and a battery charger, so that it can be kept up to its full strength. We are pleased to announce that this machine can be offered at $100, complete, to brethren in the United States.
ADVERTISING WATCHTOWER PROGRAMS
Advertising the Kingdom helps also to advertise the radio stations which are broadcasting the kingdom message. Hence all witnessing parties and all individuals engaging in the field Service should mention the radio station in their vicinity which carries the Watchtower progiatns. This magnifies to the people called upon the message which Jehovah’s witnesses introduce, and often results in interest in the printed message on the part of the radio listener. This is one of the chief purposes of sending out the message oxer the radio, to encourage the people to read the literature. In this behalf the Society supplies radio folders, and all workers should make constant nse of them in house-to-house calling, leaving one of them, if nothing else.
MEMORIAL
For the year 1934 the Memorial of tho Lord’s supper will be held after six o’clock on the evening of March 28. The Watchtower hopes to contain some timely instruction for all those who partake, and we suggest that each one be prepared by thorougldy considering the matter in advance.
CONVENTION
Los Angeles, March 24-2S inclusive, are the place and time for a convention of Jehovah’s witnesses. All meetings except Sunday afternoon will bo held in the Trinity Auditorium, Grand Ave. and Sth. Sunday afternoon, from 2 to 5 o’clock, the Shrine Auditorium will be used. At 3:30 to 4 o’clock p.m. Brother Rutherford will deliver an address which will be broadcast from coast to eoast. The convention will conclude on the night of the 2Sth with celebration of the Memorial. The forenoon of each day of the convention will be used for house-to-house witness work. This marks tho beginning of the Thanksgiving Period. The booklet Dividing the People will be used throughout the entire wot Id during that period. The brethren on the Pacific const will have opportunity of n convention, and doubtless most of them will take advantage of it. For further information, address C. V. Kuemeyer, 3345 Fernwood St., Lynwood, California.	'
Vol. LV	February 15, 1934	No. 4
TREE OF HOPE
“And whereas they commanded to leave the stump of the tree roots; thy kingdom shall he sure unto thee, after that thou shalt have knotvn that the heavens do rule.”—Daniel 4:26.
JEHOVAH’S name shall be vindicated. That is the all-important truth. IIe..Jias made Christ Jesus his Vindicator and made him to be the ruler over his kingdom, and by and through his kingdom he will make known to all creation that he, Jehovah, is supreme and that besides him there is none. It is by and through the King and kingdom that men shall be brought into harmony with Jehovah. Upon his beloved Son Jehovah has placed his name, and there is no other name given under heaven whereby men must be saved. (Acts 4:12) The kingdom is Jehovah’s capital organization, and of that organization Christ Jesus is the Head. Jehovah has caused to be written in his Word that his purpose is to make Christ Jesus man’s Redeemer and earth’s rightful ruler and gather all obedient ones under him. Therefore it is written: “That in the dispensation of the fulness of times he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which arc in heaven, and which are on earth; even in him.’’—Eph. 1:10.
’ In the dream of Nebuchadnezzar the leaving of the stump in the ground, which represents the human part of the original organization, would picture Jehovah’s purpose of making provision for the redemption and final deliverance of the obedient ones of mankind and that these may grow up into another organization and live for ever. The language of Daniel 4: 26 proves that the stump must have a close relationship to the kingdom of Christ. These Scriptural texts prove beyond all doubt that the “tree in the midst of the earth’’, which Nebuchadnezzar saw in his dream, pictures Satan’s organization which must perish for ever and that then Jehovah would cause a new tree to grow up which is his capital and righteous organization and of which Christ Jesus is the Head and overlord; that the hope of man, who was a part of the original tree, is in the new tree or holy organization. Therefore Christ Jesus is the tree of hope, because the organization is his by the will of Jehovah God and only by and through Christ Jesus and the kingdom can the people have a hope for life, for the reason that such is the will of the Almighty God.
8	Since the expulsion from Eden man’s portion has
been “with the beasts in the grass of the earth’’, even as portrayed in the dream of Nebuchadnezzar. Rulers under Satan _have been bestial, brutish, inhuman, cruel and oppressive, and the human race has been subjected to such cruel rule. These earthly rulers, being a part of Satan’s organization, are likened to ferocious beasts. (Dan. 7:3-17) This is in harmony with the divine decree of Daniel 4:16: “Let his heart be changed from man’s, and let a beast’s heart be given unto him; and let seven times pass over him.’’ Such beastly rulers have had no understanding or appreciation of Jehovah’s ways. “0 Lord, how great are thy works! and thy thoughts arc very deep. A brutish man knoweth not; neither doth a fool understand this.” (Ps. 92:5,6) As a part of the roots of the old stump in the earth these rulers have not reached out for the life-giving waters of truth, and henee have learned nothing. Concerning them it is written: “Surely I am more brutish than any man, and have not the understanding of a man. I neither learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of the holy.” (Prov; 30:2,3) As rulers and a part of Satan’s organization they too shall perish.
“SEVEN TIMES”
4	The words of the prophetic dream, to wit, “seven times,” should not be confused with the period of time elapsing from Eden to Armageddon, and there is a definite reason for this. The meaning of “time” is “a set or fixed time”; technically, “a year,” which according to the Bible is 360 days. The miniature fulfilment was upon the man Nebuchadnezzar, and the complete fulfilment must be upon a far greater scale. These “seven times” must pass over the stump by reason of the decree of Jehovah God, not as times of punishment of mankind, but to mark a period of time during which Satan, who was pictured by Nebuchadnezzar, the head of the earthly government and who at that time exercised regal power as ruler of the world and as Satan’s representative, has exercised the power as god of the whole earth. The “seven times”, therefore, must be symbolic of and hence equal to the times of the Gentiles, to wit, 2,520 years. This whole
52
Sne WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
period of time is represented by multiplying the days of one year, 360, by seven (times), equaling 2,520; and as the Scriptures fix a day as a symbol of a year, the period of “seven times’’ therefore equals 2,520 years.
5	The ‘seven years’ did not begin to count from the date of the decree condemning the tree to destruction, which decree would be from the time of the fall of man onward. Thereafter and during the time of Melchizcdek, and of Israel as God’s covenant people, there was at least during those times typically the kingdom of God on the earth, and as long as these existed the “seven times” could not begin to count. The reason is that the stump (picturing mankind) with bands of iron and copper around it shows the non-existence or non-activity of the kingdom of God in the earth. The beginning of the counting of the seven times must wait until the overturning of Israel’s last king, which took place in the year 606 B.C. From that time the scripture applies which says: “It shall be no more, until he come whose right it is” to have the kingdom and rulership of the world. (Ezek. 21:27) It was at the overthrow of Zedekiah that this decree against Israel was entered, and there it was that Satan became 'the god of the whole world’, and it was then and there that the seven times, mentioned in Daniel's prophecy, in the fourth chapter, began to count; meaning that God would not interfere with the beastly rule of earth until, the end of that specific period of time. That period of seven, times, beginning in 606 B.C. and extending over a period of 2,520 years, ended in 1914, when Christ was enthroned by Jehovah and sent forth to rule amongst his enemies. —Ps. 110: 2.
THE DECREE
’ The decree heard by Nebuchadnezzar, recorded by Daniel, was a divine judgment: “This matter [question at law] is by the decree of the watchers [Jehovah and his Logos], and the demand [the judicial decision, Strong] by the word of the holy ones; to the intent that the living may know that the Most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will, and setteth up over it the basest of men.” (Vs. 17) Jehovah and Christ Jesus are the only “holy Ones”. (Isa. 57:15; Rev. 3:7) The judicial decree is rendered by Jehovah and is announced and executed by the Vindicator of Jehovah’s name. Jehovah and Christ Jesus are the watchers named in this verse, as it will be noted that the word is in the plural. They are the watchers over Jehovah’s name, and that pertains to its vindication. The intent or purpose is made certain by the words: “To the intent that the living may know that the Most High ruleth in the kingdom of men.” Therefore the supreme purpose is the vindication of Jehovah's name and the settlement for ever of the question of his supremacy and his inherent rulership. Again the vindication of Jehovah’s name is magnified as the most
important of all doctrines taught in the Scriptures. When Christ Jesus comes to the temple of Jehovah that marks the beginning of the time when the rulers of the world shall no longer plead ignorance but they must know that Jehovah is God. “That men may know that thou, whose name alone is JEHOVAH, art the Most High over all the earth.”—Ps. 83:18.
T The words of the text “kingdom of men” do not refer to the petty kingdoms of Satan’s wicked world, but to the kingdom or invisible lordship set up over man. Jehovah has no responsibility for the national governments of the present wicked world, and certainly not as to who gets into office or is put out of office by the votes of men. Those who arc wholly devoted to Jehovah, therefore, can have no part in the selection of such rulers. The fact that Satan has been permitted to continue to exercise overlordship of man is no contradiction of this. He has so exercised ruk r-ship, not because his power was superior to Jehovah’s, nor because he is higher than Jehovah, but Satan has exercised the overlordship because Jehovah has suffered it to be so, having fixed a time certain to permit Satan to work out his strongest practical argument in support of his beastly challenge of Jehovah’s position. Otherwise, stated, Jehovah has stood by and let Satan do his worst and hided his own good time to prove Satan the most fertile liar in the universe. Jehovah in due time shows his supremacy, first making known to Ids faithful witnesses why he has waited: “But for this cause have I allowed thee to remain, in order to show thee my power; and in order that they may proclaim my name throughout all the earth.” (Ex. 9:16, TAcscr) The fact that Jehovah directed Jesus to remain inactive and wait until 1914 to begin his work of interference with the enemy proves that Jehovah is “the Most High [that] ruleth in the kingdom of men”, and that he is therefore supreme. In his own due time he delegates this power of rulership to whomsoever he pleases, and he makes known now that he has given it to Christ Jesus and that he will associate with Christ Jesus in that organization 144,000 others, the true and faithful footstep followers of Christ Jesus, who maintain their integrity to the end. (Dan. 7:13-27) “Fear not. little flock: for it is your Father’s good pleasure to give you the kingdom.” (Luke 12:32) In this latter text the words of Jesus are not only strong but conclusive proof that the giving of the kingdom over mankind is exclusively within the power of Jehovah the Most High.
“LOWEST OF MEN”
8	Jesus, although the beloved Son of Jehovah, must suffer humiliation in order to prove Jehovah’s side of the question at issue and in order to demonstrate his own qualification to become Jehovah’s Vindicator. (Heb. 5: 8, 9) Concerning Jesus it is written that he was meek and lowly. (Matt. 11: 29) “He was despised, and we esteemed him not.” (Isa. 53:3) He made
February 15, 1934
Tfc. WATCHTOWER,
53
himself of no reputation and humbled himself even unto an ignominious death, and was therefore brought low. (Phil. 2:7,8) Therefore in harmony with the prophetic dream it is seen that it pleased Jehovah to ‘set up over it [the kingdom or rulership of men] the basest [the low One] amongst men’. “Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name: that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth; and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.” (Phil. 2: 9-11) Jehovah thus fixes the qualification of the One to whom he gives the kingdom. Those associated with Christ Jesus in the kingdom must possess similar qualifications and hence these are the low ones of earth whom the Lord uses for his purposes: “For ye see your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called: but God hath chosen the foolish things of the world, to confound the wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world, to confound the things which are mighty; and base things of the world, and things which are despised, hath God chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring to nought things that are; that no flesh should glory in his presence.”—1 Cor. 1:26-29.
• Nebuchadnezzar as Satan’s representative boasted and fell. Self-exaltation led to his fall and complete abasement. “Though the Lord be high, yet hath he respect unto the lowly: but the proud he knoweth afar off.” (Ps. 138:6) Exaltation comes from Jehovah and is given only to those who are entirclj' obedient to him. (Isa. 57:15) In harmony with this divine rule Ezekiel was caused to write: “I [Jehovah] have brought down the high tree, have exalted the low tree, . . . Exalt him that is low, and abase him that is high.” (Ezck. 17:24; 21:26) The overlordship of earth is changed, but this change of overlordship does not take place until the end of the “seven times”, which occurred in 1914, at which time Jehovah placed his Son upon his holy hill of Zion and sent him forth to rule. (Ps. 2:6; 110:2) This is further proof that the great “tree in the midst of the earth” described in the dream of Nebuchadnezzar is Satan and his organization over men, and that Jehovah’s capital organization is Christ Jesus and those under him and that such is the new tree or organization in which the nations must hope. Upon Jehovah’s witnesses now on earth the obligation is laid to toll these great truths to those of mankind who have a desire to hear, and at the same time to serve notice of warning upon others that Jehovah is God and the ruler of the entire universe, and that his kingdom is here.
INTERPRETATION
10	Nebuchadnezzar called upon Daniel to give an interpretation of his dream, because none of his own
wise men could interpret it. To Daniel he said: “This dream I king Nebuchadnezzar have seen. Now thou, 0 Bclteshazzar, declare the interpretation thereof, forasmuch as all the wise men of my kingdom are not able to make known unto me the interpretation: but thou art able; for the spirit of the holy gods is in thee.” Here the name of Jehovah was at stake, because if Daniel the servant of Jehovah God could not give the interpretation of the dream then Nebuchadnezzar would have to retract his words on this and on a former occasion, to wit: “Of a truth it is, that your God is a God of gods, and a Lord of kings, and a revealer of secrets,” and, “the spirit of the holy gods is in thee.” (Dan. 2:47) The fact that Nebuchadnezzar, the representative of the Devil, gave expression to these words concerning Jehovah is no proof whatsoever that he was Jehovah’s servant. Jehovah caused him to be used to illustrate regal power and to perform a part in the srreat prophetic picture that he was making. Would Jehovah now show his power by giving Daniel the interpretation?
11	Daniel seemed to be disturbed in his mind and was silent for a while. “Then Daniel, whose name was Bclteshazzar, was astonied for one hour, and his thoughts troubled him. The king spake and said, Bclteshazzar, let not the dream, or the interpretation thereof, trouble thee. Bclteshazzar answ’ered and said, My lord, the dream be to them that hate thee, and the interpretation thereof to thine enemies.” (Vs. 19) The “one hour” mentioned in this verse is in fact a short while or short period of time. Probably Daniel hesitated to proceed with the interpretation because that part of the drcam which applied to Nebuchadnezzar was unfavorable to the king and Daniel needed courage to proceed to disclose that fact to the king. It is more likely, however, that his short silence was due to the fact that God was withholding the interpretation for a short season for his own purposes, one of which would be to more sharply draw attention to the fact that Daniel represented the Most High. His hesitancy would make those who stood by conclude that Daniel was not able to give the interpretation, but in his own due time Jehovah showed his favor to Daniel and his power over Daniel. The king signified his desire to hear the interpretation even though it were unfavorable. Daniel therefore replied to the king, “the dream be to them that hate thee, and the interpretation thereof to thine enemies.” These words show that Daniel was guided by wisdom from on high. His words fit the fulfilment of the prophecy now. Seeing that Nebuchadnezzar at this particular point pictured regal power in Christ’s hand, therefore the unfavorable part of the dream and its fulfilment is in fact upon the enemies of Christ. Daniel’s prayer was therefore a true one.
12	The record then shows that Daniel repeated the description of the tree which Nebuchadnezzar had seen in his dream. (Vss. 20, 21) Then Daniel said to
54
<3Tfe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N.Y.
the king: “It is thou, 0 king, that art grown and become strong: for thy greatness is grown, and reach-eth unto heaven, and thy dominion to the end of the earth.” (Vs. 22) This reference to the tree’s reaching “unto heaven” show’s that the words could apply only to the unfaithful Lucifer when he was made overlord, and who is now Satan, and that Nebuchadnezzar w’as the visible representative of Satan on the earth. The tree as a whole could not refer to the human race, but pictures particularly the overlordship of Satan and those under him forming his organization. This is exactly in harmony with the great image described in Daniel 2:37, 38. Bear in mind that it was after Nebuchadnezzar dcstroj’cd Jerusalem, in 606 B.C., that Satan became the god of this world and Nebuchadnezzar, as then head of the world power, was Satan’s representative on earth in his organization.
13	At Eden God had foretold the destruction of Satan. (G'en. 3:15) Now the judicial decree recorded in Daniel’s prophecy foretells the destruction of Satan and his organization: “And whereas the king saw a watcher and an holy one coming down from heaven, and saying, Hew the tree down, and destroy it; yet leave the stump of the roots thereof in the earth, even with a band of iron and brass, in the tender grass of the field; and let it be wet with the dew of heaven, and let his portion be with the beasts of the field, till seven times pass over him.” (Vs. 23) Although, the decree was made and entered of record immediately following the rebellion, Satan’s overlordship of man was not at that time taken away, but Jehovah suffered Satan to continue in that office until his own due time, that is, until the coming of him “whose right it is” to take the overlordship. This period of time is the same mentioned in Exodus 9:16, during which Jehovah permits Satan to remain in order that He might demonstrate his own great power and in order that his witnesses might proclaim this fact throughout the earth before Satan’s destruction.
H Daniel then tells the king that the decree is from the Most High and that part of it would come upon Nebuchadnezzar: “This is the interpretation, 0 king, and this is the decree of the Most High, which is come upon my lord the king: that they shall drive thee from men, and thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field, and they shall make thee to eat grass as oxen, and they shall wet thee with the dew of heaven, and seven times shall pass over thee, till thou know that the Most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will.” (Vss. 24,25) Nebuchadnezzar refused to serve the Most High, was proud and boastful, and became insane, all due to Devil religion, and therefore he was driven from his palace, his power being taken away from him. Likewise mankind was cut off from the princedom of the earth and was put out of God’s organization, lost his true manhood, and became brutish, which qualities have been specifically exhibited by the rulers
of earth. (Gen. 3:23,24) Also the overlord, Lucifer, was cut off from Jehovah’s organization and became as a serpent and dragon and wild beast, seeking whom he may devour. (1 Pet. 5:8) The execution of the sentence or divine decree against Satan and his organization was suspended until 1914, the end of which time is definitely marked by the “seven times”. During the suspension of the execution of the judgment Satan continued to have contact with “the sons of God”. (Job 1:6-12; 2:1-7) As Nebuchadnezzar was made to eat grass as the oxen, so in general mankind has fed upon what the beastly rulers and Satan’s priests have served up to them. Only those who have diligently sought the Lord God through Christ Jesus have been permitted to feed upon the precious promises of God’s Word. The prophecy adds: “Till thou know that the Most High ruleth in the kingdom of men.” These words of the prophecy show that at the end of the “seven times” Jehovah would send forth and did send forth his beloved Son to compel all opposers and all others to know that Jehovah is the Most High, and that the rulership of the world has been placed in the hands of the One who vindicates Jehovah’s name. This corroborative proof further shows that Jehovah’s witnesses, in order to maintain their integrity towards Jehovah, must now amidst much opposition and suffering make known to tho peoples that Jehovah is the Most High and that the time for his kingdom is here, and that the King has come and is upon his throne. Jehovah now makes known the meaning of his prophecies, including this one, to the faithful remnant, his witnesses, and this gives them a full assurance that they are on the side of Jehovah God; and thus they have comfort and are strong in hope that they shall fully realize all that God has promised to those that love and serve him.
KINGDOM SURE
15	“The watchers,” that is to say, Jehovah and his Logos, commanded that the stump of the tree should remain, and the manifest reason is for the vindication of Jehovah’s name. “And whereas they commanded to leave the stump of the tree roots; thy kingdom shall be sure unto thee, after that thou shalt have known that the heavens do rule.” (Vs. 26) The original stump pictured the human part of the organization, of which Lucifer was made the overlord. It remains under the restraint, pictured by the bands of copper and iron, and in God’s due time out from the roots of that stump come some who reach out for the lifegiving waters of truth, take their stand on Jehovah’s side, and maintain their integrity toward Jehovah God, and this constitutes a vindication of Jehovah’s name and a proof that Satan is a liar. This is in harmony with the decree of Jehovah uttered at Eden that ‘the seed shall bruise thy head’. (Gen. 3:15) The leaving of the stump was a guarantee that mankind and his home on the earth would not be finally
February 15, 1934
WATCHTOWER.
55
destroyed, but that Jehovah would create another overlordship which would guarantee to the obedient ones of men a righteous government, under which they might live forever. This verse twenty-six of the prophecy shows that the stump is directly related to the kingdom of Christ and that the recovery of mankind must be by and through the redemptive blood of Christ Jesus and his kingdom, administered beneficially for the obedient ones of the race.
18	“Thy kingdom shall be sure unto thee” further shows that Nebuchadnezzar pictured regal power, sometimes in the hand of the adversary and sometimes in the hand of God’s Servant, and that at the appointed time such regal power would come into and remain in the hands of Jehovah’s anointed King, Christ Jesus. The Devil shall never recover his overlordship or be recovered from his insane total depravity, any more than the original tree trunk was to be placed back upon the old original stump, now dead and decayed. The new tree must grow up, which is the organization under Christ. “And thou, 0 tower of the flock, the strong hold of the daughter of Zion, unto thee shall it come, even the first dominion; the kingdom shall come to the daughter of Jerusalem.” (Micah 4:8) That which is left in the roots of the old stump pictured the men of the human race who have a desire for righteousness and who arc feeling after God that they might find him. (Acts 17:27) Such men of a righteous desire, like the roots of the old stump, reach out for the life-giving waters of truth which comes from Jehovah through Christ Jesus. This is in harmony with the prophetic utterance of Job: “There is hope of a tree, if it be cut down. . . . Though the root thereof wax old in the earth, . . . yet through the scent of water it will bud, and bring forth boughs like a plant.” This is a further corroboration that these obedient ones of mankind in God’s due time will be gathered into and form a part of the new tree, being brought under the Head, Christ Jesus, who is the Head and Ruler over all. (Eph. 1:10) Now Satan, having been hurled from heaven, together with his angels, Las been forced to know the truth that “the Heavens do rule”; and so all creation shall know that Jehovah and his Christ “do rule”.
17	Nebuchadnezzar, the representative of Satan, was given counsel by the prophet Daniel, which counsel was ignored. Likewise counsel was given to Lucifer when iniquity first appeared in him: “Wherefore, 0 king, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, and break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by shewing mercy to the poor; if it may be a lengthening of thy tranquillity.” (Vs. 27) Had Lucifer not persisted in his iniquitous scheme to commercialize mankind and oppress the people the vindication of Jehovah’s name would not have been necessary. Satan refused to profit by the counsel. Also his visible representatives, the rulers of earth, have received time and again and have ignored the counsel of the Most
High, and that particularly given at the close of the World War; therefore Armageddon shall see their finish.
FULFILMENT
18	The prophetic dream wrns fulfilled upon Nebuchadnezzar in miniature only. The major fulfilment takes place on Satan and his organization, reaching a climax with the reign of Christ and the fall of the enemy organization. (Vs. 28) Nebuchadnezzar had twelve months to consider the prophetic drcam and to reform, but he failed to do so. Probably this sho ws that Jehovah gave Lucifer some time to reform, but Lucifer did not fear God, had no respect for him, and gave no heed to his word. (Vs. 29) To himself Nebuchadnezzar boasted that he had built great Babylon by his own power and for his own majesty. (Vs. 30) Satan made the similar boast concerning the world organization, that it wrns his own. (Ezek. 29: 3) It appears that Nebuchadnezzar had destroyed Jerusalem before this boastful statement was made. (Jer. 52:12-29) Now self-conceited, haughty and proud he boasted of his own greatness, and “while the word was in the king’s mouth, there fell a voice from heaven, saying, O king Nebuchadnezzar, to thee it is spoken ; The kingdom is departed from thee”.—Vs. 31.
10	The proud of heart arc abominable in the sight of God. “Every one that is proud in heart is an abomination to the Lord: though hand join in hand, he shall not be unpunished. Pride goclh before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fall.” (Prov. 16:5,18) When Nebuchadnezzar’s heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened in pride, he was immediately deposed. So declared Daniel at the fall of Babylon: “But when his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened in pride, he was deposed from his kingly throne, and they took his glory from him: and he was driven from the sons of men; and his heart was made like the beasts, and his dwelling was with the wild asses: they fed him with grass like oxen, and his body was wet with the dew’ of heaven; till he knew that the most high God ruled in the kingdom of men, and that he appointeth over it whomsoever he will.” (Dan. 5: 20, 21) The kingdom was taken from Nebuchadnezzar, even as the right of overlordship departed from Lucifer at the time of his rebellion, and man was then and there moved out from under the protection of the “higher powers” of Jehovah's organization; and since only those of mankind who have maintained their integrity toward Jehovah have had his favor.
20	After Nebuchadnezzar had accomplished the destruction of Jerusalem there was not even a typical kingdom of God on the earth. Satan became the god of the entire world, but could have no part in Jehovah’s organization: “I will overturn, overturn, overturn it; and it shall be no more, until he come whose right it is; and I will give it him.” (Ezek. 21:27) The destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar con
56
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
stituted full grounds for Jehovah to overthrow the kingdom of Babylon. “And I will render unto Babylon, and to all the inhabitants of Chaldea, all their evil that they have done in Zion in your sight, saith the Lord. And the land shall tremble and sorrow: for every purpose of the Lord shall be performed against Babylon, to make the land of Babylon a desolation without an inhabitant.” (Jer. 51:24,29) Satan destroyed typical Zion, and in God’s due time he was hurled out of heaven, and soon shall be destroyed, both he and all of his organization.
BEASTLY RULERS
21	Jehovah has caused the ruling powers of the world to be described as beastly. (Revelation 13) Nebuchadnezzar, in miniature fulfilment of the divine decree, “was driven from men, and did cat grass as oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven, till his hairs were grown like eagles’ feathers, and his nails like birds’ claws.” (Vss. 32,33) What a fall from his exalted position as king and ruler of the world! Lucifer fell from his exalted position of overlordship of earth and became totally depraved. Likewise his official representatives on earth, who have ruled mankind, have been at all times beastly in their rulership. The religious, commercial and political combine that has ruled the world under Satan has been and is ferocious, harsh, cruel and beastly. These have not eaten that which God provides for those who love him, but they have fed upon the provender which Satan and his earthly representatives have provided. These- earthly representatives, and particularly the religious clement thereof, although claiming to represent God, are fraudulently so claiming; but they have had no part, and can have no part, in God’s kingdom. They are proud and cannot hear and understand the words of the Most High. The religious organizations known as Catholic, under the leadership of the pope, and the Protestant organizations under the leadership of the clergy, have exercised pride and mutual admiration of men and have ignored God’s Word and have made themselves abominable in the sight of God. They have fed, like the wild beasts, upon the elements of Satan’s world.
22	At the end of the seven symbolic times, to wit, in 1914, the Gentile ruling powers, and particularly that part of it called “Christendom”, were certainly a beastly-looking lot, and they went forth and made war upon each other like wild beasts, even as the prophecy foretells. Since then these earthly representatives of Satan have been warned concerning God’s purpose; but they refuse to give heed to that divine counsel and all of them “walk on in darkness”.—Ps. 82:5.
"UNDERSTANDING RETURNED”
23	For centuries man has been in need of a righteous overlordship or kingdom, but this need could not be
supplied until the end of Jehovah’s fixed time, within which fixed time Satan has been permitted to do all within his power to prove his boast. In that time mankind has been ruled by Satan’s invisible and visible organization, pictured by the band of copper (mistranslated “brass”) and iron about the stump. At the end of the ‘seven years’ of humiliation Nebuchadnezzar appears in a different role. His reason having returned, he now pictures regal power as exercised by Christ Jesus. “And at the end of the days I Nebuchadnezzar lifted up mine eyes unto heaven, and mine understanding returned unto me, and I blessed the Most High; and I praised and honoured him that liveth for ever, whose dominion is an everlasting dominion, and his kingdom is from generation to generation.” (Vs. 34) The time limit having been reached, the tree stump must be released from the band of copper and iron. The time had come for the inauguration of earth’s rightful King as ruler, and as such he is pictured by one acknowledging and extolling the name of Jehovah and declaring Him to be the Supreme One, besides whom there is none. In 1914 that time limit ended, and Christ Jesus, the King of righteousness, was installed upon his holy throne.
24	The end of the Gentile times, and the coming of earth’s King, was the great event to which the faithful followers of Christ had looked forward. By the grace of God these faithful ones are made Jehovah’s witnesses. The human rulers of earth were then also informed of the coming of Christ, his kingdom and his reign, but these earthly rulers refused to give heed to such information. The proclamation with which the prophecy of Daniel in the fourth chapter opens was issued by the Lord Jesus Christ. The prophet Daniel there pictures the faithful followers of Christ Jesus on earth in the service of Jehovah, and these on earth are the ones privileged to give publication to this proclamation amongst the people. At this point, therefore, Nebuchadnezzar giving the proclamation pictures regal power exercised by Christ, the King of kings and Lord of lords, filled with knowledge and understanding and the spirit of Jehovah God.
25	When Christ Jesus was installed as King, in 1914, he proceeded immediately to ‘praise and honor Him that liveth for ever’, the Supreme One, the Most High, the King of Eternity. Immediately Christ began the work of vindicating his Father’s name by ousting Satan and his hordes from heaven and casting them down to the earth. In 1918 he came to the temple, gathered unto himself his faithful followers, and committed to them his testimony and commanded them to go forth and tell this great truth to the nations of earth, and thus to participate in the praise and honor of Jehovah’s name. This great privilege Jehovah’s witnesses have since enjoyed and do now enjoy.
28	The restoration of Nebuchadnezzar was a vindi
Fi:3:;uaey 15, 1934
WATCHTOWER-
57
cation of Jehovah’s word as announced by his servant Daniel. Likewise at the close of the Gentile times the enthronement of Christ Jesus was a vindication of God’s word as spoken by his holy prophets. Upon the coming of Christ to the temple he made known to his faithful followers the name of Jehovah and its meaning, and since then these faithful ones have appreciated the fact that their chief privilege and duty is to make known the name of Jehovah in all the earth and declare his works, and to continue to sing forth his praises.—Isa. 12:2-6.
ST Jehovah will now make known to all creation his own supremacy and that he doeth at all times according to his own sovereign will. “And all the inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing: and he doeth according to his will in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth; and none can stay his hand, or say unto him, What doest thou?” (Vs.35) The present-day earthly rulers consider themselves to be very important and able to provide for, feed and rule mankind. They are arrogant and wise in their own conceits. This proves that Nebuchadnezzar when restored to his reason did not picture the earthly present-day rulers. These self-constituted earthly rulers utterly ignore the Word of God and they are as nothing, as declared by his prophet. “Behold, the nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the small dust of the balance: behold, he taketh up the isles as a very little thing. And Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, nor the beasts thereof sufficient for a burnt offering. ”-Isa. 40:15,16.
28No creature can properly say to Jehovah, “What doest thou?” because his power is supreme and absolute. Having purposed a thing he will do it regardless of all opposition, and he will accomplish his purpose in his own due time. It was his will that Satan and all of his army should remain in heaven until the end of the waiting period, when he would send forth Christ Jesus to rule. (Job 1:6; Ps. 110:1,2) It was God’s will that the rebel army should then be ousted from heaven, and this was promptly done by Christ Jesus. It is his will that Satan’s organization shall be blotted out of existence. It is Jehovah’s will to destroy all earthly ruling factors which now form a part of Satan’s organization, and in all these things his will shall be done. He will spare only those of good will and shield them in the time of the battle of the great day of God Almighty. (Jer. 25:31-36; Matt. 25:31-46) His will shall be done and “none can stay his hand”. At the present day the earthly ruling powers, acting wrongfully, try to interfere with the giving of the testimony which Jehovah through Christ has commanded shall be given by his witnesses on the earth, and by so doing these earthly rulers are saying to Jehovah, “What doest thou?” but they shall certainly be brought low and learn that Jehovah is supreme. Armageddon will demonstrate that the power of this evil world is as nothing.
29	The rightful overlordship of earth came into the hands of Christ in 1914, as the decree states. “At the same time my reason returned unto me,” said Nebuchadnezzar. This proves that Nebuchadnezzar did not there picture the earthly rulers who at that time went stark insane and who continue in that insane condition. “At the same time my reason returned unto me; and for the glory of my kingdom, mine honour and brightness returned unto me; and my counsellors and my lords sought unto me; and I was established in my kingdom, and excellent majesty was added unto me.”—Vs, 36.
30	Nebuchadnezzar there represented regal power exercised by Christ Jesus. Then was set up the royal court of Christ Jesus. “And again, when he [Jehovah] bringeth in the firstbegoiten into the world [in 1914], he [Jehovah] saith, And let all the angels of God worship him.” (Hcb. 1:6) Then followed the awakening or resurrection of the faithful followers of Christ Jesus who had died and who must await God’s due time to be resurrected. These were awakened out of death and gathered unto Christ and made a part of his organization or royal courts. “And when he had taken the book, the four beasts and four and twenty elders fell down before the Lamb, having every one of them harps, and golden vials full of odours, which are the prayers of saints. And they sung a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the book, and to open the seals thereof: for thou wast slain, and hast redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people and nation; and hast made us unto our God kings and priests: and we shall reign on the earth.” “And the seventh angel sounded; and there were great voices in heaven, saying, The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ; and he shall reign for ever and ever.”—Kev. 5:8-10; 11:15.
NEW TREE
31	Christ Jesus is the righteous and rightful overlord of the earth. His is the capital organization of Jehovah and is therefore the new cedar tree, to which the people must look for hope. In harmony with this Jehovah caused Ezekiel to write: “Thus saith the Lord God, I will also take of the highest branch of the high cedar, and will set it; I will crop off from the top of his young twigs a tender one, and will plant it upon an high mountain and eminent: in the mountain of the height of Israel will I plant it; and it shall bring forth boughs, and bear fruit, and be a goodly cedar: and under it shall dwell all fowl of every wing; in the shadow of the branches thereof shall they dwell. And all the trees of the field shall know that I the Lord have brought down the high tree, have exalted the low tree, have dried up the green tree, and have made the dry tree to flourish: I the Lord have spoken, and have done it.”—Ezek. 17:2224; see Vindication, Book One, page 232.
58
SFfie WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
” The bands of copper and iron being removed from the old stump, no more shall the human race be ruled by wicked spirit and cruel human creatures. The new cedar tree, the righteous overlordship and government with Christ as Head, King and Savior, is made available for all of the human race who will be obedient to God. The One who was lowly and despised of men and by wicked angels is now exalted to the highest place, and thus Jehovah creates a new tree; and enthroning his Son as King and Overlord of man he has thus set up him who was “the basest of men” in the eyes of others of creation. This new tree is far more excellent than the original tree. It is the planting of Jehovah God and for ever continues righteous. It makes ample provision for all the obedient ones and “in it [is] meat for all”. Under its righteous shadow all creation that is obedient to Jehovah shall find shelter and rest and shall feed upon its life-giving fruits.
33 The people of good will now on earth, and otherwise designated the Jonadab class, are pictured in the tender roots in the old stump which “through the scent of water” reach out after God and lay hold upon the precious truths of his Word and render themselves in obedience to his righteous organization under Christ; and, doing so, they shall live. Into this new tree are first brought the faithful oody members
of Christ who are blessed with the privilege of being made a part of the tree or organization that shall administer blessings to the obedient ones of mankind. Under the organization, and as servants thereto, comes the “great multitude” class. The faithful prophets of old were pictured by the tender roots left in the old stump, and because of their faithfulness they will form a part of the new tree; and into that organization shall be gathered all those of good will who will give themselves wholly to Jehovah God and bis righteous government. The new tree is truly a tree of hope. That tree bears the name that Jehovah gives; it is Jehovah’s organization. He has put his holy name upon Christ Jesus, the Redeemer of man and Jeho
This etching is from an actual photograph taken on the bank of a Canadian lake. It shows a dead cedar stump, and a young tree growing out of the roots that have reached down near the water’s edge. It illustrates the articles foregoing.
vah's Vindicator, and now he commands that the message shall be declared, that “in his name shall the nations hope”.
81 The prophecy of Daniel, chapter four, concludes with the words: “Now I Nebuchadnezzar praise and extol and honour the King of heaven, all whose works are truth, and his ways judgment: and those that walk in pride he is able to abase.” (Vs. 37) Now Jehovah’s witnesses as heirs of the kingdom do also “praise and extol and honour the King of heaven” and delight to bear his truths to the people. His truth and judgments are now being made known in the earth and must continue to be made known until all shall know that Jehovah is the Most High overall the earth and that all those like Satan, who continue to walk on in pride, Jehovah is able to and will completely abase and destroy.
35 Jehovah uses t he things of the creation of earth to teach important lessons to those who have an honest desire to learn the truth. Now he makes known that pride and the love of selfgain led Lucifer to rebellion and to his destruction. As we observe the new cedar tree raised up by Jehovah in the place of that one that goes into complete destruction let us give thanks unto Jehovah God that he has made provision for the reestablishing of an organization that will be true and faithful to him for
ever and which will bring endless blessings to obedient ones of his creation. The great tree of the earth, which Nebuchadnezzar saw, pictured Satan’s organization which now shortly shall pass away. The new great tree of hope is the organization under Christ Jesus into which obedient man shall be brought and find life everlasting. The name of Christ Jesus is the hope of the world, and there is no other name in which men can hope. Let all those, who have responded to the call for the kingdom give thanks and rejoice that they are now favored with the great opportunity of knowing Jehovah and having the privilege of being his witnesses and thus have some part in the vindication of his name. All such will continue,
February 15, 1934
WATCHTOWER.
59
under the leadership of Christ Jesus and amidst great opposition, to bear the message concerning Jehovah, his King and kingdom to the people of the earth. Happy is the lot of Jehovah’s witnesses who are now privileged to declare his works, sing his praises and have a part in the vindication of his holy name.
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
7 1. What provision has Jehovah made for the vindication of his name!
7 2. What was here prophetically pictured by the tree that was hewn down and destroyed? By leaving the stump in the ground? By the new tree?
7 3-5. Show that Daniel 4: 16 has been fulfilled.
7 6, 7. How does verse 17 emphasize the supreme purpose of Jehovah? In view of the statement set forth in this verse, account for Satan’s so long exercising overlordship of man.
7 8,9. With corroborative scriptures, make clear the identity of the “lowest of men’’, here mentioned, and how the Most High gives to him “the kingdom of men’’. Also show how the Scriptures' reveal the rule governing true exaltation of Jehovah’s creatures.
7 10,11. Why was it important that Daniel be able to interpret this dream? Account for Daniel’s being astonished and troubled concerning the dream. What, in Daniel’s words to Nebuchadnezzar, was evidence of divine guidance? Apply Daniel’s words of verse 19.
7 12. Apply the words of Daniel (verse 22) which he used to make known the identity of the “tree’’ and to interpret the description thereof. Just what was pictured by this tree?
7 13. The decree declared in verse 23 applies to whom? With scriptures, account for this tree’s being so long permitted to stand.
7 14. Since Nebuchadnezzar recognized Daniel's God as “a God of gods, and a Lord of kings’’, why was he now to be dealt with as described in verses 21,25? Point out the application of the prophetic interpretation and decree here recorded.
7 15,16. What is clearly the application of the prophetic statement of verse 26?
7 17-22. Explain whether Nebuchadnezzar could have profited by the counsel (verse 27) offered to him by Daniel. Instead, what did he do, and with what result? How does this apply to those whom Nebuchadnezzar there represented — or pictured?
7 23-26. What was pictured by the band of iron and copper about the stump? How and when does the prophecy of verse 34 have fulfilment? Referring to Daniel 4:1: Who is here speaking, and when, and how?
7 27,28. When and how will Jehovah bring about recognition of his supremacy as expressed in verse 35?
7 29,30. Describe fulfilment of verse 36, quoting other prophecies finding fulfilment in the same events.
7 31,32. Identify the new ‘cedar tree’. What is said in Ezekiel’s prophecy concerning this “goodly cedar’’? How is the creation of the new tree accomplished, and what does it mean for the obedient ones of the human race?
7 33. When and how will the obedient of mankind be brought into the new tree?
7 34. How has verse 37 already found a measure of fulfilment?
7 35. Point out the important lessons which, in this prophecy, Jehovah presents to those honestly desiring to know tho truth. How will those respond who are favored with knowledge of Jehovah and his purposes and with tho privilege of having some part in the vindication of his name?
JEHOVAH’S LAW COVENANT PROPHETIC
FOR a long time there has been a general tendency to think and speak of the writings of the Old Testament, or Hebrew Scriptures, as being not worthy of consideration by people living today. The clergy have impressed upon many the thought that the Old Testament writings belong entirely to the Jews.
Now, however, in the light of Jehovah’s ancient prophecies that are being fulfilled before our eyes, the records of God’s dealings with his chosen people of old become very significant.
Did not the covenant made by God with the Jews promise them life if they would keep it? It did. “Ye shall therefore keep my statutes, and my judgments; which if a man do, he shall live in them.’’ (Lev. 18: 5) “For Moses describeth the righteousness which is of the law, That the man which docth those things shall live by them.”—Rom. 10: 5.
Had the Jews kept the law of God perfectly, would they have been granted everlasting life? Certainly; because God had so promised, and he always keeps his promises. (Isa. 46: 11) If there was any doubt in any mind, the words of Jesus make the matter clear. “And, behold, a certain lawyer stood up, and tempted him, saying, Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal life? He said unto him, What is written in the law? how readest thou? And he answering said, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy
h^art, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind; and thy neighbour as thyself. And he said unto him, Thou hast answered right: this do, and thou shalt live.”—Luke 10: 25-28.
When Jesus came, did he keep the law perfectly? He did; and that proves that the law could be kept by a perfect man and that no one else could keep it. As Paul states, he who would keep the law would be righteous, and every righteous creature is entitled to life. Therefore, had the Jews kept the law it would have proved their righteousness, which would entitle them to life. The reason the Jews could not keep the law was because of imperfection, the result of sin. Sin entered the world by reason of Adam’s disobedience; and all, including the Jews, were born sinners. (Rom. 5: 12) No sinner has the right to life. (Rom. 6: 23) The law therefore proved to the Jews and to all men that if the human family is ever to receive the blessing of life, as promised by the Abrqhamic covenant, something must be done to remove the sin or make atonement for sin. The basis for reconciliation must first be laid by the perfect sacrifice.
God, foreknowing the scheme of the Devil to bring forth amongst men a crop of evolutionists who would declare that men do not need a Redeemer, demonstrated the falsity and foolishness of that position by the operation of the law covenant. No man can ever be heard to truthfully say: “If I had an opportunity
60
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N.Y.
I could make myself perfect and live.” The operation of the law covenant is absolute proof that the theory of evolution is from the Devil, and that those who advocate it are the instruments of the evil one, whether they know it or not. The so-called “conscientious” preachers will never be permitted to hide behind a conscience which has been trained contrary’ to God’s Word of truth.
Paul declares that the law foreshadowed good things to come. (Heb. 10:1) While the law covenant was made primarily because of the transgression, God employed it also to make shadows or pictures of his purpose for the reconciliation of man to himself. The apostle further states: “Then verily the first covenant had also ordinances [ceremonies] of divine service, and a worldly [orderly arranged] sanctuary.” (Ilcb. 9: 1) What were these ceremonies and orderly arrangements of divine service? At the time of making the covenant in Egypt a lamb without blemish, a male of the flock, was slain and its blood sprinkled upon the doorposts, which served as a means of salvation to the Jews on the passover night. That lamb was eaten, together with unleavened bread. (Ex. 12: 8) That ceremony must be repeated or performed once each year thereafter on the fourteenth day of Nisan.
The lamb represented the sacrifice of Jesus, the beloved Son of God, who would redeem all mankind from sin. He was “the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world”. (Rev. 13: 8) “As of a lamb without blemish and without spot.” (1 Pet. 1: 19) By this ceremony the ransom sacrifice was foreshadowed. God made promise that he would ransom man from death and the grave. (Iios. 13: 14) This ceremony would teach the Jews and others thereafter that the Lamb of God would take away the sin of the world, and it was so announced by John at the beginning of the ministry of Jesus.—John 1: 29.
After the confirmation of the covenant at Sinai, Hoses, under God’s instruction, erected the tabernacle. In the holy place thereof God showed his presence by the cloud and the light. (Ex. 40:34) Once each year there was a special divine service in connection with the tabernacle. On a day certain a bull and goat were slain and the blood thereof carried by a priest into the Most Holy and sprinkled upon the mercy scat to make atonement. (Lev. 16; Heb. 9: 6-8) That tabernacle service foreshadowed something better to come and showed that the sacrifice of the reality would make atonement for the sin of man and make it possible for man to be reconciled to God as he had promised. The sacrifice of these animals was done by a priest, for which the law made provision. These ceremonies were to teach lessons to the Jews and others thereafter. The sacrifice of the paschal lamb referred to the sacrifice of Jesus Christ, and pictured the ransom; and the sacrifice of bulls and goats and the sprinkling of the blood in the Most Holy represented the offering of the blood of Christ Jesus in heaven
itself as a sin-offering for man. Furthermore, they taught that Christ, as the great High Priest appointed by Jehovah, would offer the sacrifice and make atonement for sin.—Heb. 9:10-14, 24.
The law covenant therefore shows absolutely the necessity for the great ransom sacrifice of Jesus Christ and for a sin-offering to be made by him first in behalf of the members of the “seed” and then in behalf of mankind in ■ general. Also, that covenant foreshadowed a new and better covenant thereafter to be made; and the ceremonies in connection therewith bore testimony to the fact that there would be a long period of time elapsing between the making of that new covenant and the time of its confirmation or inauguration.
Suppose the Jews had put forth their best efforts to keep the law covenant, would any special benefit have resulted to them ? Yes. They would have shown their faith and confidence in God and in his promises, and their allegiance to him rather than to the Devil. The Jewish clergy who were leaders of Israel did not try to keep the spirit of the law covenant. They kept it in form, with their mouths, and outward show, while their hearts were far removed from Jehovah. (Isa. 29: 13) They were frauds and hypocrites, making an outward show for a selfish reason. (Matt. 23: 13-35) They claimed to be children of Abraham; but Jesus told them plainly they were liars and children of the Devil because they would do Satan’s will and not the will of God. (John 8: 39-44) The fact that they were sons of the Devil shows that they had no faith in the law covenant and were not trying to keep it. Their exact counterpart is found today in the so-called “Christian clergy” who ‘having a form of godliness, deny the power thereof’; and from such the people are warned to “turn away”.—2 Tim. 3: 5.
But some of the Jews did try to keep the law covenant. They had faith in God, and they did their’best to obey him. When Jesus came he found some of these who were looking for the coming of the Messiah, and they accepted him. The leaders, looking to the letter of the law, expected the coming of the Messiah; but they were 'looking for him entirely from a selfish motive. They practiced fraud and deceit. When “Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him, [Jesus] saith of him, Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile!” (John 1: 47) Nathanael then and there accepted him as the Son of God and the King of Israel. “Nathanael answered and saith unto him, Rabbi, thou art the Son of God; thou art the King of Israel.” (John 1: 49) He had no deceit or subterfuge about him, such as did the Pharisees. Nathanael and other honest Jews kept the spirit of the law because of their faith in God and in the promised “seed”. They were pleasing to God and accepted by him, not because of the law which they attempted to keep perfectly, but by reason of faith in Christ. Upon this point Paul says: “Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the
February 15, 1934
*3Te WATCHTOWER.
61
law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law: for by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified.” (Gal. 2:16) Those who did have faith in God and in his promises, and who tried to keep the law, to them the law served as a schoolmaster to lead them and safeguard them unto the coming of Christ., (Gal. 3: 24) They were therefore a people greatly favored of God.
The law covenant had a mediator. And why? Because the people of Israel were not competent to enter into a covenant with God. They were sinners by reason of inheritance from Adam’s sin. Moses was appointed the mediator between God and Israel in the covenant. (Gal. 3: 19) Was not Moses also born a sinner; and, if so, how could he be a mediator? Moses was born a sinner; but by reason of his faith in God and obedience to his commands, thereby proving his faith, he was justified by faith and therefore accepted by Jehovah as a competent one to enter into a covenant as mediator for Israel. (Hob. 11:23-28; Ex. 3:5) Concerning Moses Jehovah said: “My servant Moses . . . is faithful in all mine house.” (Num. 12:7,8) “Remember ye the law of Moses my servant, which
I commanded unto him in Horeb for all Israel, with the statutes and judgments.” (Mal. 4: 4) “This [Moses] is he that was in the church in the wilderness with the angel which spake to him in the mount Sina, . . . who received the lively oracles to give unto us. ’ ’ —Acts 7: 38.
Moses as mediator of the law covenant foreshadowed Christ the Mediator of the new and better covenant. “For the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.”—John 1: 17.
At the slaying of the passover lamb Moses represented Jesus alone and exclusive of his body members, the ehureh. In the new covenant Jesus alone was and is all-sufficient for the office of Mediator, to which he was appointed at the slaying of the antitypical Lamb. It would not be necessary for him to wait until the establishment of the kingdom to make the new covenant. At Mount Sinai, when the law covenant was confirmed, Moses pictured Christ Jesus inaugurating the new covenant at Mount Zion. There the blood of bulls and goats was sprinkled both upon the book of the law and upon the people. The blood of the bullock pictures Christ Jesus, whereas the blood of the goats pictures the church sharing with Jesus as “able ministers” of the new covenant.
BIRTH OF THE
LET us turn from the anxieties and turmoil of the moment back over the course of more than nineteen centuries to one of the tenderest and sweetest scenes of human history.
Jesus’ birth, then the greatest event in the world’s history, was about to be enacted. Two thousand years had passed since God had made the promise to the patriarch Abraham of the coming of the mighty One through whom all the families of the earth should be blessed. During that time Jehovah was executing his preconceived purpose, renewing his promise to the patriarchs Isaac and Jacob and their offspring to keep it fresh in the minds of the faithful, and shaping the course of those who should participate in this great transaction. And now, as the day drew near, the stage was being set.
The place selected was Bethlehem, situated on an elevation south of Jerusalem. It was once the home of King David’s great-grandfather Boaz, whose fields the beautiful Moabitish woman Ruth had gleaned and whom Boaz redeemed and afterward took as his wife. Here Jehovah had used Boaz as a tj’pe or prophetic picture of Christ Jesus, and Ruth as a type of the remnant of today, thus foreshadowing things to come. Later Bethlehem was the home of Jesse and of David his son. The name David implies “beloved one”; and it was here in this little city that he was anointed to be king over Israel, from the time of which event he
SON OF MAN
typified Jesus, the mighty Son of God. Jehovah had selected this as the birthplace of Jesus; hence here the birth must take place. Many hundreds of years before Jehovah’s prophet had given utterance to these words: “But thou, Beth-lehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me that is to be ruler in Israel; whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting.”
Away to the north in Galilee stood the humble and despised city of Nazareth. It was the home of Joseph the carpenter, a meek, little-known, yet honest man. He was espoused to Mary. We should expect that Jehovah would time everything exactly; and so he did. Authority over the land of Palestine had departed from the tribe of Judah; the Romans were in control of Palestine, and the time for the birth of tne mighty One was due. Exercising his perfect wisdom and power, Jehovah was overruling all things to the accomplishment of his purpose. Augustus Ca>sar, then the emperor and ruler over all Palestine, issued a decree that all the people should be taxed. Everyone must go to the city of his nativity, there to be numbered and taxed. Joseph the carpenter, although a resident of Nazareth, was of the house of David, and hence must go to the city of David to be numbered and taxed. Naturally his espoused virgin would accompany him to that city. She likewise was of the
62
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N.Y.
house of David through another line than that of her husband Joseph, which was another reason why she should go there. But above all, the Lord directed them there because it was a part of his arrangement.
At that time there were no means of easy and rapid transit. It was a long journey, a tedious and tiresome one. Joseph, with his espoused seated upon an ass, journeyed through the hills along the Jordan probably for three days, and late in the evening reached the city of Bethlehem. The city was crowded, the private homes were full; there was no room for them in the inn. (Luke 2:7) Tired, worn, and weary from their long journey, they were jostled by the crowd in the narrow streets of the city. Applying at various places for lodging, at each place they were turned away; until finally they found a location where they could sleep in a stall with the cattle. And they retired for the night’s repose.
Over the brow of the hill, in the field once owned by Boaz and gleaned by the beautiful Ruth, the faithful shepherds were watching their sheep. According to custom, they had four watches during the night. Some would watch while the others slept. The earthly stage was now set. But behold that there was no great earthly splendor or show 1 In truth, the condition of poverty of Joseph and his espoused, and the like poor condition of the shepherds who were now shortly to be used of the Lord, was the only fitting way that we should expect the Lord would have it. All the pomp and glory of earthly preparation would have been but tawdry tinsel, detracting from the glorious things that were shortly to follow. Each one of the earthly players whom Jehovah had assigned to perform a part upon this stage was humble, meek, and possessed of faith in the promises of God. In heaven there was a host of angels that should participate in the great drama; and all the hosts of heaven were witnesses to this unparalleled and never-again-to-be-performed event.
On earth it was night, picturing the fact that the whole world was lying in darkness and a great light was coming into the earth. The time had now arrived for the birth of the mighty One, and all the heavenly hosts were awake to the importance of the hour. Doubtless while others slept, Mary was pondering in her heart the great events that had taken place during the few months past; and while she thus meditated there in the silence of that night, without pain and without suffering there was born to her Jesus, the Savior of the world. And the shepherds watching their sheep in the field were attracted by the angel of the Lord, who came upon them, “and the glory of the Lord shone round about them: and they were sore afraid. And the angel said unto them, Fear not: for, behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people. For unto you is born this day, in the city of David, a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord.’’—Luke 2:9-11.
When this heavenly messenger had finished his
wonderful speech to the astonished shepherds, then it was, as if waiting a given signal, the multitudinous heavenly host stood forth, and sang the good tidings of great joy which ultimately shall be to all people. Their song was but the reflex of what had been announced. There the sweet singers told in words of praise of God’s beneficent purpose ultimately to bless all the families of the earth. It was a song of glory from heaven, and the hills of Judea echoed the message of peace and good will toward men. And throughout the Christian era this sweet anthem has filled with joy the heart of many a sad wanderer; and seemingly again and again these have heard the song from heaven: “Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men.”
The world is now entering its darkest period, and when mankind reaches the point of extremity, then will be God’s opportunity to reveal to all sad hearts that the birth of Jesus was the greatest event in history to that time; and that shortly this same great Jesus, now in glory, will extend the blessings of life, liberty and happiness to the whole groaning creation.
The place of Jesus’ birth was truly according to and in fulfilment of the aforequoted prophecy of Micah, thus showing that God had foreordained and prepared the condition for his Son’s birth. (Matt. 2: 4-6) Jesus was not born on December twenty-fifth, as is generally supposed; but his birth occurred about the first of October. Midwinter (or the month of December) would have been a very inopportune time for the shepherds to be watching their sheep in the fields and sleeping in the open. In addition to this circumstantial evidence, all the facts show that the birth of Jesus was in October, and that December twenty-fifth, nine months previous to his birth, was probably the date of the annunciation as recorded in Luke’s gospel, chapter one, verses thirty and thirty-one, where it is written: “And the angel said unto her, Fear not, Mary: for thou hast found favour with God. And, behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a son, and shalt call his name Jesus.”
Much has been said and written concerning three wise men who journeyed from the east to pay their homage to the babe Jesus, born in Bethlehem. Particularly at “Christmas” time is attention called to this by pictures on cards, and so forth, of the “wise” men journeying to the west, supposedly being guided by the star sent by Jehovah. It has been presumed that Jehovah by the star led these wise men to the place of Jesus' birth. The Bible proof shows, however, that these wise men were not sent by the Lord God, but that they were directed by the great adversary, the Devil, in his attempt to destroy the babe. Whether they knew it or not, these wise men were parties to a great conspiracy, originated and carried out by the master mind, Satan, the Devil, in his attempt to destroy the seed promised in God’s covenant with Abraham, and who is the great Savior of the world.
February 15, 1934
efie WATCHTOWER.
63
"When Jehovah drove Adam and Eve from Eden he likewise pronounced a condemnation upon Satan. He said concerning Satan and concerning the woman who symbolizes God’s universal organization: “I will put enmity between . . . thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel.” (Gen. 3:15) From that time forward Satan the great adversary has attempted to destroy every one whom God has favored and who Satan thought might constitute the seed of promise.
Jehovah has given to Satan four separate and distinct names, all of which have a deep significance. Besides the name Satan he is designated as the Dragon, that old Serpent, and the Devil. The name Dragon means devourer or destroyer; and Satan has at all times been seeking to destroy or devour Jesus and his true followers, who constitute the seed of promise.
His name Satan indicates adversary; and he has opposed in every way the development of the new creation, consisting of Jesus and his bride, the church. His name Serpent means deceiver; and he has applied all his wily methods to deceive, and, as Jesus has declared, he would deceive, if possible, the very elect, but God will not permit him thus to do. Ilis title Devil means slanderer; and he has constantly carried on a campaign of slanderous propaganda against the people of God even unto this day, and has never lost an opportunity to try in his various ways to destroy them.
Indisputable proof from the Scriptures shows that Jesus’ mortal enemy the Devil guided the so-called "wise men” in his plot to wreak destruction on the holy child.
LETTERS
NEED THE LORD’S KINGDOM
Eear Brethren :
In the middle of October, when I started for Parry island from Honey Harbor, Ont., on the Georgian bay, by boat, we ran into bad weather and trawled along the shore for nearly two weeks before getting there. I had my own house on the island, but my son, age 22, single, lives in it. It wasn’t long before 1 knew he was working against me and the Lord’s work. I can neither read nor write, but speak Indian, French and English. My husband has the truth also, and he can read, and that helps me along, but I know the Lord makes everything clear to me so I can explain the books by the name.
I walked for miles to reach the outlying districts, and took my boat where I couldn’t walk. Had some good experiences and found some interested. The Pentecostals are holding meetings on the island and go from house to house each evening. Some neighbors brought the preacher to see me, but he didn't know then that I was working on the island too. So I told him, and he said I had no backing and that he was backed by the government. So I said, “Yes, Satan’s government, and he was their god and will soon be destroyed.’’ He was very angry and left. Soon after this I had a summons charging me with selling books and causing mischief on the reserve and also for holding meetings in my home and trying to get the people away from the churches.
I had to go to the court in Parry Sound, so I took a few books with mo to show them that I was doing the Lord’s work. The crown attorney knows me; so he said, “Hello, Julia, what have you been doing?’’ So I told him, and I know the Lord was with me. The judge asked me if I was going around with these books during the week, and I told him I was, and on Sundays too, and I don't care what they do to me, that I would keep on with it as the Lord commands. So the judge said, “This woman has done nothing that is wrong. You are discharged.” Before I left I gave them a good witness; so they laughed, and said nothing will come out of it.
After I went back to the island my house was filled with people every night while I stayed. I got some of them to read and ask questions. My son hit me twice because he didn’t like it. I placed 8 bound books and 30 booklets and found there two Christian brothers who are sincere. Some of the homes had the books, as the pioneers had been there sometime.
The demons are very busy among the Indians with the “medicine man” trick. The secret is known to all, and there are many deaths through it. It’s a piece of root that is eaten when they want revenge on one and the other, and they go through a ceremony, and there is no satisfaction until the victim is dead. Lately there have been as high as five deaths within a week through it. They sure need the Lord’s kingdom.
Thanking the Lord for this privilege of taking the message to Parry island,
A Kingdom worker,
Mrs. Julia Simons.
TO HELP OTHERS GAIN THE KNOWLEDGE
Dear Brother Butukrfokd:
May I thank you for your wonderful helps in studying the Bible! About ten years ago one of the Bible students came to see us, and I cliased him oft the porch with a broom. I sure am sorry for that. Now I am out doing witness work for Jehovah.
My husband Jolin and I were married twelve years ago. I was a Lutheran; he was brought up a Mennonite. When we married he started to go with me to church. About four or five years ago we started to wonder why there were so many different churches. Then later we wondered why Jesus had to go to hell for three days. We thought, then what chance had a poor sinner like us! All these years a few things (like that and some more) made us wonder if our church was teaching us the truth. We were half sick about it.
Finally, about eight months ago, we happened to tune in on the Sunday forum. You know what we heard. We could hardly wait for each Sunday to come around. We used to say to each other, “If we could only understand tho Bible like that I” Then, about five montlis ago, we prayed specially for the Lord to guide U3 to the right road and, if necessary, to give us a push on to it. We felt that tho road was there if we only could find it. Well, the next morning one of Jehovah’s witnesses came to the door with a booklet, just what we wanted. We sent for a set of books, and read one (The Harp of God). We saw the truth right away.
, We hunted up the company here in C----- and started out
in the witness work right away. We did not want anything to do with the Devil’s world, so we cashed in all our insurance and used the money to pay up all our bills, and put away just enough to bury us. We had just enough left to buy ourselves a good Bible.
We finished up all our worldly things and cut the last string with Satan’s organization on Thursday, October 19, 1933. On Friday, October 20, 1933, my husband came homo sick, and died of pneumonia on the 27th of October, 1933. We were out in the service two times together before he died. Now I must go ahead by myself with God’s help. If I did not have the comfort of knowing the truth I don’t know what 1 would do. I love him and miss him, but I know the time is short till we shall meet again, never to part any more, and to work together again to the honor and glory of Jehovah’s name. The last thing my husband John spoke of before he died was the “highway” and that he would be made new again. “God bless you and help you.”
I thank you from the bottom of my heart for your goodness in writing those books for us to understand the Bible. I am doing all I can to help others gain the knowledge my husband and I did. We have a little girl, six years old, who is learning all about Jehovah God and Christ Jesus. I remain
Your sister in Jehovah,
Mes.-------H------, Ohio.
6-1
(Hie WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N.Y,
JEHOVAH’S INEXHAUSTIBLE SUPPLY
Dear Brother Rutherford and Helfers:
Having read, and received so much benefit from the different articles in The Watchtower for the last several montlis, I sometimes wonder what could there bo of real interest in the next issue of The Watchtower. It appears that the Lord-has an inexhaustible supply of “meat in due season’’.
I have served as an “elective elder’’ for many years. But all the while I realized the fact that the company could not make an elder of me by the election, and I told them so twenty years ago. There- were some who did not agree with me, but I saw that it was the truth, and so I stuck to it. I also saw that the “elective elder’’ system was a gap-through which Satan could continue to do some of his nasty work, and for a long time 1 was somewhat grieved over it; but now I am no longer grieved.
I am among those who went into the “vineyard’’ at “the first hour’’ and have borne some of the “light burden’’ of the Lord during the heat of the day. (I was among those who suffered in prison in 1918.) But not only am I willing to see those who have labored only one hour be paid first, and get as much as I get, but it really pleases me to see the Master of the vineyard do as He pleases with His own. I agreed to work for “a penny”, and that is all that I could.expect to receive when the evening and pay hour arrived. I am so well satisfied with the wages I have received, until l am really anxious to work on during the future days to come.
As suggested in The Watchtower, it is a real joy to me to realize that I have been used of the Lord, to some little extent, in helping to bring others to a unity of the faith, and common union in the body of Christ. If anything, I have been overpaid. I am poor in this world’s goods, but I would not swap my “spiritual penny” for millions of dollars of this world's money.
■With much love to you and to all of Jehovah’s witnesses, Alexander Evans, Sr., Louisiana.
RECEIVED WITH EAGERNESS
Dear Brother Rutherford:
It seems as if we must express our thanks to you for sending us the testimony for the new book Preparation. We don’t wish to take up much of your time, but we both have rejoiced greatly because of the privilege of “bearing the fruits” contained in Preparation to the people.
The past week has brought one thrill after another as we have seen with what eagerness the people received this book. Realizing that the Lord is putting the words in the mouth of his witnesses, that accounts for our stock of books being exhausted in the first six days of Jehovah’s witnesses’ Praise Peiiod, although we ordered plenty to last more than the nine-day period, based on reports of previous testimony periods. . This letter is also to assure you of our continued cooperation in spreading the kingdom message.
Ella L. Plummer and Carrie M. Anderson, Pioneers.
MORE THAN THANKFUL
Ous dear Brethren:
The Newark (N.J.) company of Jehovah’s witnesses declare themselves wholly on the side of Jehovah, the Lord of Hosts, and fully acknowledge the fact that the visible part of his mighty organization is the Watch Tower. We rejoice to say that we delight in having an active part in the work of serving notice prior to the complete destruction of Satan’s wicked system.
In this connection, we are moie than thankful for the encouragement we receive in this fight by being fed on such wonderful things as have been recently extended toward us, especially through the mC-ans of the large hook-ups. In following them up we find many, many people who have drunk of that refreshing water of life, and want to continue drinking.
We use this means if expressing our thanks to Jehovah as an outlet to the great joy and enthusiasm which bubbles within us. We prny for strength that we may meet the opportunities and greater privileges which are ahead for those who love and serve Jehovah.
SERVICE APPOINTMENTS
	T. E.	BANKS	
Hartford, Conn	 New Haven. Conn. Cllffwood, N. .r. ...... Brooklyn, N. Y	 New York, N. Y	 Newark, N. J	 Montclair, N. J.......	..Mar.	1.2 .... ”	3,	4 .... "	0,	7 .... ”	8,	9 .... ” 10, 11 .... ” 13,11 .... ’’ 15. 16	Atlantic City, N.J Philadelphia, Pn. Washington, D. C. Norfolk, Va	 Boydton, Va	 Lynchburg. Va. ... Roanoke, Va		. ..Mar. 17.18 	’’ 20. 21 »»	.>3 ...z ” 5i; 2.-. 	” 27.2- 	” 29. 30 Mar. 31-Apr. 1
G. H. DRAPER
Austin, Tex		Mar.	13	Henderson. Tex. ..		Mar.	17
San Marcos, Tex. ...	»»	4	Overton, Tex			18
Bastrop, Tex		r>	6	Gladewater, Tex.	fl	20
Taylor. Tex		ti	7	Rlionesboro, Tex.	II	21
Rockdale, Tex			8	Texarkana, Tex.	»>	
Temple, Tex			9	Bogata, Tex		II	23
Waco, Tex. 		»	10	Weaver, Tex		II	24
Mexia, Tex			11. 12	Denison, Tex			. ”	25. 26
Teacue, Tex		»»	14	Bonham, Tex. ....	»»	28
Rusk, Tex				15	McKinney. Tex.		”	29
Jacksonville, Tex. ._	»• ..	1G	Dallas, 1’ex		»» ........	30.31
Iowa City, Iowa ....Mnr.
Davenport. Iowa .....”
Clinton, Iowa ........’’
Dubuque, Jowa .......”
Cedar Rapids, Iowa _ ”
Jesup. Iowa .........  ”
Waterloo. Iowa .......”
Oelwein, Iowa ........”
Readlyn. Iowa ........"
New Hampton. Iowa	.. ”
Fima, Iowa ...........”
Mason City, Iowa .....”
J. C. RAINBOW
1	Clear Lake. Iowa ......Mar. 17
2	Allison. Iowa .........."	18
3,4	Iowa Falls, Iowa ........”	20
6, 7	Ft. Dodge, luwa .........”	21
8.1)	Bonne, Iowa .............”	22
10	Ames, Iowa .............’’	23
11	Colo. Iowa ..............”	24
12	Des Moines, Iowa ........”	25,26
13	Colfax, Iowa ............”	28
14	Hartford, Iowa ......... ”	29
15	Adair, Iowa .............”	30
10	Atlantic, Iowa ..........”	31
W. J. THORN
McFees Mills, Pa....Mar.	2
Du Bois, Pa...........”	3
Brockway. Pa. .........”	4
Clarion, Pn............”	5
- — “	—, — — .	——
Fairmount City, Pa.	7
Kittanning. l»a.......”	8
New Kensington, Pa. ”	9
Butler. Pa. ..._......’»	10.31
New Brighton, Pa......” 13.14
Ellwood City, Pa. ...... ”	15
New Castle, Pa. ... Hillsville. Pa			Mar. IC. 17 	”	18
Farrell, Pa			” 29.21
Sharon. Pa			” 22, 23
Greenville, Pa. ...		”	24
Meadville, Pa			” 25. 26
Oil City. Pa...............”	28,29
Titussille, Pa..........”	.*»(>
Cambridge Spr.,	Pa.	..	”	31
Erie. Pa.............-Apr.	1,2
M. L. HERR
Atoka. Okla..........Feb. 19 2.) Cloudy, Okla..........Mar. 12-18
Lehigh, Okla......Feb. 2<i-Mar. 4 Valliant, Okla.........”	19 25
Dunbar, Okla.........Mar. 5-11 Idabel, Okla.........Alar. 2G-Aj*r. 1
A. II. MACMILLAN
Ft. Valley, Ga		.Mar.	1	Jacksonville. Fla. .	...Mar. 13.14	
Columbus. Ga			>>	2, 3	New Orleans. La. .		15
Albany, Ga				4	Beaumont. Tex. ...		16
Thomasville. Ga. ...	...”	6.7	San Antonio. Tex. .		17. I S
Quitman, Ga		JI	8	Hl Paso. Tex			”	20.21
aycross, Ga		...”	9	Phoenix. Ariz		»»	»>o
Savannah, Ga. 		...”	10. 11	Los Angeles, Calif.	....	21-28
	G.	Y. M’CORMICK			
Monrovia, Calif. 			.Mar.	1,2	Porterville, Calif. .	....Mar. It	14
Ventura, Calif		If	3> 4	Tulare. Calif			15
Santa Barbara, Calif	fl	G	Lemoore. Calif		...... ”	111
Paso Robles, Calif. .	»»	7,8 10	Fresno, Calif			”	17. IS
Bakersfield. Calif. ...	”• II		Atwater, Calif		...... ”	20
Arvin. Calif			" II	11	Turlock. Calif		>1	21
Taft. Calif. ....		II	13	Los Angeles, Calif.		”	23 29
S. H. TOUTJIAN
Shaw, Miss		..Feb.	28	Lamar, Ark		....Mar.	16
Mound Bayou. Miss.	Mar.	1	Fayetteville, Ark.		17,18
Sbelbv, Miss		n	2	Springdale. Ark. ...	II	20
Tutwiler. Miss			3	Kogers. Ark		II	21
Clarksdale. Miss.		4	Gravette. Ark		It	22
Sardis. Mi><			6	Gentry. Ark			II	23
Memphis. Tenn		if	7, 8	Ft. Smith, Ark		If	24
Tnmiann. Ark			9	BnJes. Ark		tt	25
Jonesboro, Ark			10	Big Fork, Ark		If	27
Parnnould. Ark		it	11	Amity, Ark		fl	28
Leachville. Ark			13	De Queen, Ark		>1	29
Success. Ark. 	.....	fl	14	De Koche, Ark		It	30
Pangburn. Ark		It	15	Hot Springs, Ark. .	tl	31
J. C.
La Grande, Oreg. ....Mar.	1,2
Hermiston. Oreg........”	3, 4
Pro?»>dr, Wash.........”	6
Sunnyside. Wash.........”	7
Yakima. Wa^h............”	8.9
Ellensburg, Wash........”	10,11
WATT Wenatchee, Wash.........Mar. 13,14
Entiat. Wash............”	15
Seattle, Wash...........”	1<>
Portland. Oreg..........”	17, 18
San Francisco. Calif. ”	20,21
Los Angeles, Calif......”	24-28
watchtower.
Published Semi-Monthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N. Y., U. 8. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford President W. E. Van Amburgh Secretary "And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children."~Isaiah f-ftij.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is tho only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that tho Logos was the beginning of his creation and his active agent in tho creation of all things; that the Logos is now tho Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created tho earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man wilfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and tho man Jesus suffered death in order to produce tho ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him. with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is tho Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of tho world; that tho anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whoso duty and privilege it is to testify to tho supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear tho fruits of tho kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and tho Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of tho peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ which lias now begun; that tho Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in tho earth, and that under tho kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall be restored and live on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instiuction.
specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to tho Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah. God under Christ Ills Beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in tho light of tho Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns aro not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Pbics
TTnited States, .$1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and south Africa, 7s. American remittances should he made by Express or Postal Money Order, or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should bo mado direct to the respective branch otiiccs. Remittances from countries other than tlio-o mentioned may be mado to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British . .............31 Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England
Canadian ....... 4G Irwin Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Australasian . . 7 Beresford Bond, Stratlificld, N. S. W., Australia South, African .... Boston IIou«e, Cape Town, South Africa 1’lea.se address the Society In every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.}
All sincere students of tho Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or advcniiy are unable to pay the subscription price may have Tho Vutchtoiccr free upon written applicailon to tli:> publishers, made once each year, stating tho reason for so requesting it. Wo are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal reculalicas. Notice to Subscribers; Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will bo sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may bo expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expira’ion) will be sent with tho journal one month belore tho subscription expire.’. Entered as Second Class Mail Matter at Brooklyn, N. F., Postoffce.
Act of March 3, 1879.
THANKSGIVING TESTIMONY OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES
This designates tho period from March 21 to April 1 inclusive, and which is a period of united activity of all faithful witnesses of Jehovah in every land of earth where located. The celebration of the Memorial in the midst of that period particularly makes it a season of thanksgiving, such being specially expressed by giving grateful testimony to Jehovati's holy name. The new booklet Dividing the. People will then be given a world-wide distribution, not merely in English but in many other languages, thus permitting the witnesses everywhere to join in one and the same effort. All lovers of Jehovah, including those of the Jonadab class, may participate in this distribution. All should report work done, promptly; those not working under any branch office should report direct to 117 Adams Street, Brooklyn, New York.
TRANSCRIPTION MACHINES
Tho Society has made arrangements to construct and assemble portable transcription machines at our own factory at 117 Adams Street. These machines will be somewhat different in construction from those previously furnished. They will be spring-wound, and operated from a 6-voit wet-celi battery. Every machine will be furnished complete with the battery and a battery charger, so that it can be kept up to its tail streninh. We are pleased to announce that this machine can be offered at §100, complete, to brethren tn the United States.
CONVENTION
Los Angeles, March 24-28 inclusive, are the place an.] time for a convention of Jehovah’s witnesses. All meetings except Sunday afternoon will be held in the Trinity Auditorium, Grand .Ave. and &th. Sunday afternoon, from 2 to 5 o’clock, the Shrine /Auditorium will be used. At 3:30 to 4 o'clock p.m. Brother Rutherford will deliver an address which will bo broadcast from coast to coast. The convention will conclude on the night of the 28th with celebration of the Memorial. The forenoon of each day of tho convention will be use 1 for house-to-house witness work. This marks the beginning of tho Thanksgiving Period. Tho booklet Dividing the People will be used throughout tho entire world during that period. The brethren on the Pacific coast will have opportunity of a convention, and doubtless most of them will take advantage of it. For further information, address C. V. Knemejer, 3345 Fernwood St., Lynwood, California.
MEMORIAL
For the year 1934 the Memorial of the Lord’s supper will be held after six o’clock on tho evening of March 28. The Wctchtoiuer contains some timely instruction for all those who partake, and we suggest that each one be prepared by thoroughly considering the matter in advance.
Vol. LV	March 1, 1934	No. ■”
HIS NAME
PART 1
“Blessed be the name of Jehovah from this time forth and for evermore.”—Ps. 113: 2, A.Tl.V.
JEHOVAH’S NAME was exalted by all intelligent creatures. All knew and delighted in his illustrious fame and honorable reputation. All knew that Jehovah was and is the source of life and that he is the unselfish Giver of every good and perfect gift. Such was the proper and happy state existing in the universe until lawlessness found a place in the heart of the creature whom Jehovah had made lord over a part of his organization. Coveting that which had not been given to him Lucifer exalted himself, defied the Most High, and received for himself the title of Satan, and God set a time limit for the continuation of Satan, at which time limit the wicked one must end. (Jer. 51:13) The name of Jehovah for centuries has been reproached, dishonored and made infamous by Satan and by his host of wicked angels and wicked men. The crisis has come, and from this time forth and for evermore the name of Jehovah shall be exalted. The wicked shall perish, and all who receive life everlasting must know and obey and honor and joyfully serve him whose name alone is Jehovah. His illustrious fame and honorable reputation must find a place in the mind of every creature that lives. He has taken out from amongst the nations of earth a people for his name, and to them is given the privilege of now proclaiming his great and honorable name.
2	Centuries ago God began to bring his name before fallen men. He revealed to Moses his name Jehovah; then to Egypt Jehovah ‘went to redeem unto himself a people and to make him a name’. (2 Sam. 7:23) God did not bodily appear in Egypt, but he sent Moses as his servant, and thus Jehovah appeared there in a representative capacity. Egypt was a type of the world, and Pharaoh its ruler was a type of Satan, the god of this wicked world. Moses was a type of Christ Jesus, the great Prophet and Servant by whom Jehovah redeems a people for himself and causes the name of the Most High to be put in the right place in the mind of all intelligent creatures.
3	In his due time Jehovah will cause all of his creatures to know his name and its meaning and to have in memory the time when he first revealed his name to man as Jehovah; and that memorable time dates from the time of his going to Egypt. A memorial
marks a day or time certain when some great thing is done and which is to be ever afterwards remembered. Among the great things performed by Jehovah by his servant Moses were these: The revelation of his name, the making of the law covenant, the destruction of Pharaoh’s organization, and the deliverance of the Israelites from that oppressive organization. The pivotal point of these great events was the slaying of the passover lamb, because it pointed to the One whom God had ordained should be the vindicator of his great and holy name. All the things performed in Egypt by man as God’s representative and servant were incidental to the vindication of Jehovah’s name, which is the all-important thing. For this reason Jehovah said to Moses: “This is my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations.” (Ex. 3:15, A.R.V.) Because the slaying and eating of the paschal lamb pointed to Jesus, the vindicator, Jehovah said to Moses: “And this day shall be unto you for a memorial, and ye shall keep it a feast to Jehovah: throughout your generations ye shall keep it a feast by an ordinance for ever.” (Ex. 12:14, A.R.V.) Wh* n the time came for the fulfilment of the type by ti.;> death of Jesus Christ he said to his disciples concerning the bread which he broke in their presence and asked them to eat: “This is [represents] my body, which is given for you: this do in remembrance of me.” (Luke 22:19) The time must come, as Jesus knew, when his true followers must and would understand that his faithfulness unto death, and his death in the place and stead of the sinner, were not merely to furnish the redemptive price for man, but also to prove his own qualifications to be the vindicator of Jehovah’s name. Being thus perfected, Christ Jesus became Jehovah’s “high priest for ever”, the executioner of Satan and his organization, and the vindicator of Jehovah’s name and the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him. (Ileb. 2:14; 5:6-10) Thc_greatest thing to be kept in memory is the name of Jehovah, and Paul intimated that at the coming of Jesus to the temple this important truth would clearly be understood. (1 Cor. 11:26) By partaking of the “Lord’s supper” until the coining of Christ Jesus to the temple of Jehovah his faithful dis-
68
THe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
ciplcs have shown forth the Lord’s death; but now those faithful ones gathered by the Lord Jesus unto himself are ‘drinking the fruit of the vine with him new’, and all are rejoicing and praising the name of Jehovah and must do so for ever. “Thy name, 0 Lord, cndureth for ever; and thy memorial, O Lord, throughout all generations.”—Ps. 135:13.
COVENANT—LAW AND NEW
‘ Jehovah God made the law covenant by Moses as the mediator for Israel while in Egypt and at the time of the slaying of the paschal lamb. The inauguration of the law covenant took place in the season of Pentecost or about fifty days after the Israelites were brought out of Egypt and had come to Mount Sinai (Mount Horeb). (Ex. 19:1) The making of the new covenant was marked by the death of Jesus, the antitypical passover Iamb, on the fourteenth day of Nisan, A.D. 33. The inauguration of the new covenant is marked by the final outpouring of the holy spirit “upon all flesh”. (Joel 2: 28, 29 ; Acts 2:16-18) The “Lord’s supper” as a memorial of his death, instituted in AI). 33, and for centuries thereafter observed by his faithful follower's, calls attention to the making of the new testament or new covenant and keeps the same in memory. “For this is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins.” (Matt. 26:28) “After the same manner also he took the cup, when he had supped, saying, This eup is the new testament in my blood: this do ye, as oft as ye drink it, in remembrance of me.”— 1 Cor. 11:25.
’From and after the year 1919 (A.D.), and particularly from 1922, until Jehovah's witnesses pass from the earth, the “Lord's supper” not only calls attention to the death of Jesus the Redeemer and Vindicator, but also directs attention to the inauguration of the new covenant, which covenant operates to the vindication of Jehovah’s name.
CONSPIRACY
6 Satan and all of his earthly representatives, meaning Pharaoh and his subjects who obeyed him, had formed a conspiracy to destroy the Israelites and to thus prevent them from being a nation. (Ex. 1:15,16; 2:23,24) God heard the cries of the Israelites, and the law covenant made by him for Israel was an assurance in type that for Jehovah's name’s sake that people would be brought forth and preserved. The Abrahamie covenant was involved, because Jehovah had given his word that he would bring forth a seed; and now Jehovah had respect to his covenant with Abraham.—Ex. 2:24,25; 6:4, 5.
T At the time of the making of the new covenant Satan and his crowd, including his earthly priests and clergymen, conspired to destroy Jesus. (Matthew 21:38) In carrying out this conspiracy Jesus, the antitypical lamb of God, was slain, but Jehovah preserved the ones with whom his new covenant was made. (John 17:11-15; Phil. 2: 9-11) At the inaugu
ration of the new covenant again a conspiracy is formed by Satan and his crowd, including his Roman Catholic hierarchy and other religionists, to kill those who faithfully praise the name of Jehovah and to thereby “cut them off from being a [holy] nation”, and overt acts were and are now being committed in furtherance of that wicked conspiracy. (Ps. 83:1-18; 1 Pet. 2: 9,10; Zech. 13: 7-9) Jehovah has preserved his faithful and hidden ones who are in the covenant, because they are under the shadow of his wing and have been selected for his purpose; and, they continuing faithful, he will preserve them for ever.—Ps. 91 :l-4; 145: 20; Isa. 54:17 ; 42: 6, 7.
VENGEANCE
’Jehovah expressed his vengeance against Satan’s organization by slaying the firstborn of Egypt at the time the paschal Iamb was killed. At the death of Jesus, the antitypical passover lamb, the firstborn of antitypical Egypt, that is to say, of this world, did not die. The reason therefor now clearly appears and shows that the time is rapidly approaching when the firstborn of antitypical Egypt must die. As the blood of the passover lamb sprinkled on the doorposts of the houses in Egypt signified life and preservation to those who remained inside the house and under the protection of that blood-sign, so those trusting in the precious blood of Christ Jesus, and who have been in and who remain in the new covenant, have this added assurance of life and preservation; hence the “Lord's supper” properly celebrated by such for centuries past has ‘shown forth the Lord’s death till he come’ and has been a guarantee of their preservation. Now, however, the Lord has come, and his shed blood in a marked degree bespeaks that this is the day of Jehovah’s vengeance and destruction of Satan’s firstborn of this world. It is the day of God's vengeance; hence all who properly celebrate the Lord’s supper now must certainly show their consistency by proclaiming the day of the vengeance of our God against the enemy ’s firstborn who are not under the blood. This must be done in fulfilment of the divinely given commandment: “Proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God; to comfort all that mourn.” (Isa. 61:2) As Aaron acted as the mouthpiece and proclaimer for Moses (who was a type of Christ Jesus) in proclaiming the vengeance of God against Pharaoh and his organization, even so now those in the covenant with Christ Jesus must likewise proclaim the vengeance of God against Satan's firstborn and all of his organization, because they “have the testimony of Jesus Christ” and keep God’s commandment. (Ex. 4:22,23; Rev. 12:17) Those who would partake of the memorial supper and then fail or refuse to obey the commandments to be Jehovah's witnesses would thereby partake unworthily: “For he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, cateth and drinketh damnation to himself, not discerning the Lord's body.”—1 Cor. 11:29.
Ma':cii 1, 1934
Qtfe WATCHTOWER.
69
SHEPHERDS
8 The Egyptians hated shepherds and refused to eat with the Hebrews for that reason, such being an abomination unto the Egyptians. (Gen. 43: 32; 46:34) When Jehovah’s time came to make a name for himself in Egypt he sent a shepherd down there to deliver his testimony, to lead out the people from Egypt and to act as the law covenant’s mediator. Satan and his earthly crowd hate the servants of Jehovah God who bring the divinely provided food to I lis flock and thus act in the capacity of undershepherds, which hatred is especially made manifest in this present day. At the time of the making of the new covenant, and also at the time of the inauguration thereof, Jehovah God sends the “good shepherd”, the “chief shepherd”, Christ Jesus, and both Christ Jesus and those to whom he commits the work of carrying the divinely provided food to the people, who hunger for righteousness, are wickedly hated by Satan and all his earthly priests, clergymen and dupes. (John 10:11; 1 Pet. 5: 2-4) This is further proof that those who are with Christ Jesus at the temple must bear and do bear or carry the fruits of the kingdom, that is to say, the life-giving truths of God’s Word, to those in the world who have the hearing ear, and at the same lime declare God’s vengeance against the enemy and his organization, and that such faithful ones will be and are hated and persecuted by Satan and his servants. The Homan Catholic hierarchy and others of like stripe now manifest their wickedness and hatred against Jehovah’s witnesses because these witnesses speak that which is to the honor of the name of Jehovah God and the Lord Jesus Christ.—John 15:19-23.
10	The shepherd Hoses was in the mount of Horeb (Sinai) when Jehovah drew him aside by attracting him to the burning bush and there spoke to him and directed Moses to go to Egypt and to deliver the testimony of God to Pharaoh. It was in that mountain at that time that Jehovah referred to the inauguration of the law covenant when he, addressing Moses, said: “Certainly I will be with thee; and this shall be a token unto thee, that I have sent thee: When thou hast brought forth the people out of Egypt, ye shall serve God upon this mountain.” (Ex. 3:1-12) Jehovah made the new covenant at the death of Jesus, and naw he discloses to his faithful ones at the temple that the new covenant is inaugurated at Mount Zion, where the 144,000 followers of Christ Jesus are gathered by Christ Jesus unto himself. (Rev. 14:1-3) The faithful remnant now celebrate the Lord’s supper at Mount Zion, that is, in Jehovah God’s organization, rejoicing at the inauguration of the new covenant, and thev continue to proclaim the name of Jehovah.— Hob. 12:22-25.
THE LAND
11	God’s covenant with Abraham is the unconditional promise, and which promise is irrevocable, that Jehovah will carry into operation his purpose to bless
all the families of the earth through his seed. Satan for a long while has been god or miler over the earth, but Jehovah’s purpose is that Satan’s rule now must for ever end, and Jehovah takes over the earth and its fullness for himself and gives all this to his beloved Son. To Abraham Jehovah said: “For all the land which thou seest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed for ever.” (Gen. 13:15) In this prophetic statement made to Abraham by Jehovah Abraham represented God, while his seed referred to His Christ. (Gal. 3:16-29) No w he whose right it is to rule has come, and Jehovah God has installed him, Christ Jesus, upon “his throne, and he has begun his rule. (Ezek. 21:27; Ps. 2:6; 110: 2) Jehovah will now completely and for ever deprive Satan and his crowd of every part of the earth and will completely fulfil his word addressed to his Beloved, the Seed, to wit: “Ask of me, and I shall give thee the [nations] for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron ; thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter’s vessel.” (Ps. 2:8,9) Christ Jesus is therefore the rightful possessor of all the earth.
12	There is no Scriptural reason to conclude that the man Abraham and his descendants will inherit the earth. God’s promise to Abraham was lulliilcd in miniature and in a typical manner, but the greater fulfilment is to those of Jehovah’s organization. The earth is Jehovah’s, and the fullness thereof. (Ps. 24:1) The overlordship of the earth now belongs to Christ Jesus, the Seed of Abraham, whose right it is to rule, because Jehovah has given it to him. Christ. Jesus is Jehovah’s heir of all things, and those of his royal house are joint-heirs with him. (Rom. 8: 16,17) When Ged said to Abraham, ‘I will give unto thee ami unto thy seed after thee the land,’ clearly the meaning thereof is that Abraham in type was given the land and his Seed, the Christ, will possess it for ever. Of and concerning his faithful and obedient followers Christ Jesus spoke, saying: “Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth.” (Matt. 5: 5) In 1914 Jehovah gave to Jesus the whole earth and the right to rule the same. Later Jesus gathered unto himself the faithful and brought them into the temple, and those of the. remnant who continue faithful to the end shall participate in this great and marvelous gift. Christ Jesus is now at the temple in the kingdom with his followers and, to be sure, it is a time of rejoicing, pictured by the ‘drinking of the wine new with him in his Father’s kingdom’. Jehovah has therefore fulfilled his promise to give all the land to the seed of Abraham, that is, to Christ Jesus; and the “meek” mentioned by the Lord who shall inherit the land, being the teachable and obedient ones, that is to say, the faithful members of his body, these inherit the earth with him for ever.
13	Nor is there any Scriptural reason to conclude that Abraham and the ether faithful men of old shall
70
Tile WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
ever be ehanged from human to spirit creatures, as we once thought. Their position, as the Scriptures clearly show, will be that of ‘‘princes in all the earth”, that is to say, the visible governors of earth, the direct representatives of Christ to whom God has given the earth as his inheritance, and as such princes they will rule under Christ and rule in righteousness. (Ps. 2:6-8; Isa. 32:1) The faithful remnant now taught of Jehovah God see that the kingdom is here, that righteousness in the earth must and will shortly be in full control, all of which will constitute a vindication of Jehovah’s name, and therefore those faithful ones rejoice and sing the praises of Jehovah and declare his mighty doings amongst the people. The meeting of the faithful remnant with the new princes in the earth will be a joyful one, and they arc looking forward to it with joyful anticipation.
CONSISTENCY
14	If the blood of the new covenant has been sprinkled and that covenant has been inaugurated, then it necessarily follows that Jehovah has brought forth and made manifest the ones mentioned as “a people for his name” and that he has given them “a new name”; and upon none other than his covenant servant people does God confer that honor. Sneh faithful members of the remnant yet on earth now partake of the “Lord’s supper” at Mount Zion, drinking the new wine with the chief one of the royal house, because they have had his invitation and entered into the joy of the Lord. (Matt. 25:21) They must now be consistenLand act their part and speak their part as a people for Jehovah’s name; otherwise they are not acting in harmony with the drinking of the wine new, the symbol of the blood of the new covenant. They must now therefore preach Jehovah God’s name and his kingdom. This is not discretionary, but it is absolutely mandatory.
15	It would not be permissible to ask for a license or a permit to be issued by worldly institutions to preach the gospel of God’s kingdom any more than it would have been proper for Moses and Aaron to ask permission of Pharaoh to worship God. “And afterward Moses and Aaron went in, and told Pharaoh, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Let my people go, that they may hold a feast unto me in the wilderness.” (Ex. 5:1) On other occasions Moses and Aaron delivered a like message to Pharaoh. (Ex. 7:16; 8:1; 9:1) Such, however, was not a request that Pharaoh or his officers should issue a permit or license to worship or to serve Jehovah, but the same constituted a demand made by the express commandment of Jehovah that Pharaoh and his officers must quit interfering with the chosen people of God in the exercise of their liberty to freely worship and serve Jehovah. Even so now the people taken out for Jehovah’s name, to wit, the remnant, are sent forth by Jehovah and commanded to bear testimony before the rulers, and
it would be wholly inconsistent for them to ask the rulers if they might preach the gospel, but it is their business to demand that Satan and his representatives cease their interference with Jehovah’s witnesses in delivering the gospel of his kingdom.
, '18 Pharaoh not only was notified of God’s purpose, but was granted full time and opportunity to identify himself as God’s enemy by ‘putting on the garments’ and showing on which side he stood. He was notified and warned of what God would do if he continued to interfere with his people, and notwithstanding this notice and warning he continued to harden his heart: “And the Lord said unto Moses, Pharaoh’s heart is hardened, he refuseth to let the people go.” (Ex. 7:14) Now the earthly representatives of Satan are given full warning, time and opportunity to put on the garments of identification before Jehovah takes final action against them. The supremacy of Jehovah must be made known to the rulers, and his witnesses must declare God’s supremacy and the greatness of his name throughout the earth. (Ex. 9:16, Lcc.scr) It therefore must be displeasing to Jehovah God for anyone to ask permission of the antitypical Pharaoh and his officers that he might go about and preach the gospel. Since God has commanded this notice of warning to be given, Jehovah’s servants must obey his commandments.
17	The rod of Moses became a serpent when cast down before Pharaoh and was a symbolic warning of the woes to come upon Pharaoh and his organization, culminating in the destruction of the firstborn of Egypt and the destruction of Pharaoh’s host in the Red sea. In the year 1918 the Lord Jesus came to the temple for judgment, to which high position Jehovah had assigned him. He there appears as Jehovah’s special representative clothed with all power and authority; hence at that time began the fulfilment of the prophetic utterance: “Jehovah is in his holjr temple: let all the earth keep silence before him.” (llab. 2-20, AJt.V.) The rod in tlie hand of the antitypical Moses is a symbol of the authority and power which Jehovah has fully delegated to Christ Jesus and which he uses to execute Jehovah’s purposes. (See The Watchtower, 1933, page 100, and scriptures there cited.) Now the announcement to the rulers of the world that Christ Jesus, the great Judge, has come to the temple for judgment is a warning to all such of the punishment God will inflict upon his enemies culminating in the complete destruction of the world at Armageddon. Tjie rod of Moses was employed by Moses and Aaron in invoking the ten plagues upon Egypt, including the death of the firstborn. In this connection Moses was a type of Christ Jesus, while Aaron pictured the members of the body of Christ to whom is committed “the testimony of Jesus Christ” and who deliver the testimony. That rod stretched forth symbolically said that this is done by the authority and commandment of Jehovah God. The plagues upon Egypt constituted
March 1, 1934
tjfie WAT C HT0WER
71
notice and warning of God’s purpose to execute his wrath against all those who oppose him in carrying out his purposes. Nine of those plagues preceded the institution of the passover. The slaying of the paschal lamb and the institution of the first passover was directly interwoven with the tenth plague. It is certain that the Scriptures prove that the expression of God’s vengeance against the antitypical Egypt takes place after the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple for judgment, and it also clearly follows that the ten plagues have an antitypical fulfilment upon the world of Satan following the appearing of the Lord at the temple for judgment, and that these plagues have an antitypieal fulfilment before the complete expression of God’s vengeance against Satan’s organization. That conclusion being correct, the memorial of the death of our Lord Jesus Christ, the antitypical passover’ lamb, now signifies much more to God’s people than they have heretofore seen.
18	It is certain that we arc now in the last days, concerning which the ai>ostle Paul said: “This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come.” (2 Tim. 3:1) This is the time in which the “man of sin’’, “the son of perdition,’’ is made manifest. The clergy in general, and the Itoman Catholic hierarchy in particular, and others that go to make up the “man of sin’’, are described by the apostle in 2 Timothy 3:2-9. Those persons, while claiming to represent God and his kingdom, are violently opposed to the kingdom and have persecuted those whom Jehovah has taken out as a people for his name and who are delivering the testimony of Jesus Christ. These opposers of Jehovah have had every opportunity to hear the truth, but they refused to learn and to give heed to the truth; therefore they put on the garments of Baal and plainly identify themselves with God’s great enemy, concerning which the apostle prophetically wrote: “Ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth. Now as Jannes and Jambrcs withstood Moses, so do these also resist the truth: men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith. But they shall proceed no further: for their folly shall be manifest unto all men, as theirs also was.’’ (2 Tim. 3:7-9) It now appears to those devoted to the Lord that the ten plagues upon Egypt were prophetic. If those plagues, or even a part of them, have had an antitypical fulfilment, may we not now expect the Lord to show to his faithful ones the meaning thereof and also to permit them to sec what all those plagues mean? (Isa. 42:9) A consideration of those ten plagues in Egypt in connection with the memorial of the death of the Lord Jesus Christ now seems to be very appropriate.
THE PLAGUES
19	Jehovah speaks of the plagues upon Eg.vpt as “wonders’’ and “signs”. (Ex. 3:20; 8:23; 10:1) “And I will harden Pharaoh’s heart, and multiply my signs and my wonders in the land of Egypt.”
(Ex. 7: 3) “How he had wrought his signs in Egypt, and his wonders in the field of Zoan. ” (Ps. 78:43) It does not follow that the antitypieal fulfilment of these signs and wonders or plagues would be in the same time order as they occurred in type. They differ in time order from the seven last plagues described in Revelation sixteen, the one exception appearing to be that of the last plague. Seeing that the Scriptures were written aforetime for the instruction, assurance and comfort of the remnant, it is reasonable to expect that these signs and wonders will be made known to the remnant while on earth.
20	One of the reasons why Jehovah has permitted Satan to remain and continue his nefarious work in all the centuries past is stated by him as “that my name may be declared throughout all the earth”. (Ex. 9:1G, A.lt.V.) The declaring of Jehovah’s name through the earth takes place at the end of the world, and'following the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple God uses iiis people taken out for his name in connection therewith, just as he used Moses and Aaron in Egypt: “He sent Moses his servant, and Aaron whom he had chosen. They shewed his signs among them, and wonders in the land of Ham.” (Ps. 105:26,27) The antitypieal Moses and Aaron constitute Jehovah’s servant whom Jehovah has commissioned to bear his message to the world. Christ Jesus is the Head of that servant and was pictured by Moses, whereas Aaron pictured the body members, including the remnant. Jehovah speaks of his witnesses, applying his words to the “day of the Lord”, which are now as ‘an altar unto the Lord, and a pillar in the border of Egypt’. Jehovah in this connection also says: “And it shall be for a sign and for a witness unto the Lord of hosts in the land of Egypt. ” (Isa. 19:19,20) The time of the fulfilment of this prophecy of Isaiah is in the day when God serves notice first and then expresses his vengeance against Satan’s organization. Jehovah has taken out his faithful ones, spiritual Israelites, and has made them his witnesses to declare his name in the earth. Concerning this the prophecy of Jeremiah now applies: “Which hast set signs and wonders in the land of Egypt, even unto this day, and in Israel, and among other men: and hast made thee a name, as at this day; and hast brought forth thy people Israel out of the land of Egypt, with signs, and with wonders, and with a strong hand, and with a stretched out arm, and with great terror.”—Jcr. 32:20^31.
21	It is written by Jehovah’s prophet: “He cast upon them the fierceness of his anger, wrath, and indignation, and trouble, by sending evil angels among them.” (Ps. 78:49) This refers typically to the plagues in Egypt, and anti typically “evil angels” here clearly appears to refer to the Lord Jesus Christ and to the faithful remnant on earth as members of his body. This conclusion is in harmony with the Scriptures when we remember that the word evil does
72
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
not necessarily mean wicked, but it does mean that which brings misfortune, woe and punishment upon the wrongdoers. One translator of this text renders it thus: “A mission of messengers of misfortune.” (Roth.) Jehovah’s witnesses do now proclaim his message of misfortune, woe and punishment against Satan’s organization, both visible and invisible. This furnishes the clue to the understanding of the antitypical fulfilment of the ten plagues upon Egypt and suggests that Jehovah uses his witnesses on the earth in connection therewith.
22	The plagues from one to nine were pointed declarations and notices of Jehovah’s supremacy, and thereby both Jehovah’s and Satan’s organization are made to appear. The tenth plague brought the release of Jehovah’s people from Satan’s organization and their deliverance out from Egypt. Such plagues were performed before Pharaoh, and hence constitute notice to him, and the antitypical fulfilment of the plagues must be before Satan and his organization, and which constitute notice and warning to Satan and his organization. We know that Jehovah is not responsible for the economic depression, woes and misfortunes that have come upon the peoples of the world, because it is expressly stated in his Word that Satan has brought these woes; therefore the nine preliminary plagues upon Egypt could not properly apply to such woes. The antitypical fulfilment would not be those woes mentioned in Revelation 12:12. They must have some symbolic significance, such as the seven last plagues of Revelation, sixteenth chapter. Each plague is a specific message of misfortune, and these messages delivered in modern times against Satan’s organization irk, disturb, plague and forebode the downfall of Satan and his organization. As the plagues upon Egypt constituted notice and warning, antitypically fulfilled such must be notice and warning,
PLAGUE ONE
23	Jehovah commanded Hoses to perform certain signs in Egypt, first before the Israelites and then before Pharaoh, the purpose of which was to supply convincing proof that Jehovah is God, and that Moses was sent to Egypt as God’s representative. The third of those signs when performed by Moses and Aaron before Pharaoh constituted the first plague upon Egypt. That sign or wonder was the turning of the water into blood. (Ps. 78: 43, 44: 105: 29) Jehovah’s commandment to Moses concerning the first plague is recorded at Exodus 7:14-25. Moses there appearing before Pharaoh was a type of Christ Jesus, the vindicator of Jehovah’s name. The rod which Moses lifted up represented the divine authority conferred by Jehovah upon him, and antitypically represents the divine authority conferred by Jehovah upon Jesus, and antitypically represents the authority and power of the Lord Jesus Christ to oust the enemy and deliver his people, which authority has been conferred by Je
hovah. Aaron acting with Moses pictured in the antitypical fulfilment the remnant on earth performing the duties of witnesses to whom is committed the testimony of Jesus Christ, and Aaron using the rod shows that these witnesses are acting under divine command. God had commanded the performance of this sign and wonder before Pharaoh. “And Moses and Aaron did so, as the Lord commanded; and he lifted up the rod, and smote the waters that were in the river, in the sight of Pharaoh, and in the sight of his servants; and all the waters that were in the river were turned to blood.” (Ex. 7: 20) The waters of the river Nile pictured the commercial part of Satan’s organization. Egypt depended upon the waters of the Nile as a means of carrying on her commerce; hence those waters to the Egyptians were a means of life and livelihood. Turning the waters into blood represented death. Satan claimed that he had made the river Nile for himself; meaning that this was his possession. (Ezek. 29:1-3) The people of the world, and many who have consecrated themselves to the Lord, have been induced heretofore to believe that commerce is vitally and essentially necessary for sustaining the life of mankind. In recent years God’s covenant people have come to learn that commerce was organized and has been carried on by Satan as a means of controlling the people and turning them away from Jehovah God. This sign or wonder was performed before the Israelites, and thus showed that God’s covenant people must first learn the meaning of commerce and that it is the institution of Satan, and then they must declare the same before the rulers and the people, that commerce constitutes an integral part of Satan’s organization which he has employed to deceive and oppress the people and to carry on his bloody and deathdealing work. The turning of the water into blood pictured or foreshadowed a message of truth being declared or made known in the presence of Satan's visible agents, as well as to the invisible part of his organization. In the type it was a notice and warning to Pharaoh. In the antitype it must be a notice and warning to the antitypical Pharaoh and his organization. The fulfilment of the prophetic picture began at the convention of God’s people at Columbus in July 1924, at which time public declaration was made that the commercial giants, who are the principal ones of the ecclesiastical systems of this world, and all of which are a part of Satan’s organization, constitute the chief rulers or representatives of Satan on earth that rule and dominate and oppress the people. A resolution was there adopted, and afterward widely published, entitled An Indictment. Its distribution extended throughout “Christendom” in many languages. The declaration was therein made and the notice hence served upon the rulers and the people that Satan’s organization is death-dealing, and that the hope of mankind is in the kingdom of God. That was notice and warning to Satan’s organization of
March 1, 1934
fffle WATCHTOWER.
73
God’s purpose to fully express his wrath against that wicked organization and that this he would do in due time. (See The Watchtower, 1933, page 121; Light, Book One, page 122.) That notice and warning was given five years before the great economic depression began and which continues until this day. Since then Jehovah’s witnesses have continued to call the attention of the rulers and the people to the fact that Satan is the author and creator of commerce, who has exercised beastly rule over the people, and which has served as a great defamation of God’s holy name, and that it will be destroyed in vindication of Jehovah’s name. This testimony continually given by Jehovah’s witnesses, and the Scriptural proof submitted in support thereof, has constituted and continues to constitute a great plague upon the organization of Satan. IIis visible representatives have no answer to these pointed truths, and hence they are tormented by hearing them.
24	As the waters of the river were turned into blood, bringing death, so in the past few years the people have been learning that commerce, instead of bringing them life and happiness, is a great system of oppression resulting in much suffering and death. As the peoples of Egypt dug about the river to find lifesustaining waters to drink, even so now the rulers and their allies arc bringing forth many makeshifts in their desperate attempt to pull the world out of depression and to find that which will sustain their present organization. All these schemes and plans brought forth ignore God, and the visible agents of Satan refuse to give heed to the message of God concerning his kingdom which he is causing to be brought before them.
25	But the magicians of Egypt cooperated in making hard the heart of Pharaoh. By their enchantments they also turned water into blood. (Ex. 7:22) The modern magicians, to wit, the clergy and religious teachers of Satan’s organization, including the “man of sin’’ class, resist the Lord and his purposes by haranguing their allies and the people and saying that the waters of truth, that is, the testimony delivered by Jehovah’s witnesses, are death-dealing; and thus they turn the waters of truth into blood. Instead of receiving the testimony of Jesus Christ as a warning the clergy and their allies contend that all the trouble, woes and economic depression now upon the world proceed from Jehovah. It is the message of truth that plagues Satan’s representatives, and by refusing to give heed thereto they continue to harden their hearts against God.—See The Watchtower, April 15, 1933.
28	The turning of the waters of the river Nile into blood was one of the ten plagues, end in connection with the first plague it is written: ‘ ‘ And seven days were fulfilled, after that the Lord had smitten the river.” (Ex. 7:25) “Seven” is a divine symbolic number of completeness, and as here used it appears to say that the testimony of notice and warning to Satan’s organization must continue from that time on
ward until Satan’s organization yields to the rightful Ruler and Vindicator of the world or else suffers complete destruction. It would therefore follow that when the ten plagues are antitypically fulfilled and performed, then would come the complete overthrow of Satan and his organization.
PLAGUE TWO
2T	Satan is totally depraved, and many of his visible agents give evidence of their total depravity. God continues to give them notice and warning. The second plague of Egypt was that of frogs. “He sent . . . frogs, which destroyed them.” (Ps. 78:45) “Their land brought forth frogs in abundance.” (Ps. 105: 30) The record of the second plague appears at Exodus 8:1-15. Jehovah commanded Moses, the type of Christ Jesus, to say unto Aaron, the type of the earthly mouthpiece of the Lord Jesus, Jehovah’s witnesses, to proceed with the work of carrying out the second plague: “And the Lord spake unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Stretch forth thine hand with thy rod over the streams, over the rivers, and over the ponds, and cause frogs to come up upon the land of Egypt. And Aaron stretched out his hand over the waters of Egypt; and the frogs came up, and covered the land of Egypt.”—Ex. 8:5,6.
23	The hand stretched out holding the rod, which manifestly was Moses’ rod, represented and pictured the power and authority of Jehovah God conferred upon Christ, the Greater Moses, and by him upon the earthly members of his organization, the servant class, who bear the message or testimony of Jehovah before the rulers and before the people. (Ezek. 2: 9,10; The Watchtower, 1933, page 115) The rivers and ponds and other water’s pictured the peoples of the world, particularly of “Christendom”. Frogs are “marsh leapers” and inhabit shallow waters or marshes. They give the appearance of great wisdom and importance and make a loud and discordant noise, and these particularly represent the agitators amongst the common people who suggest divers and numerous remedies for the salvation of the world; for example, the socialists, bolsheviks, communists, Christian Scientists, and the various elements of organized religion. Frogs are unclean ; and coming out of the waters of Egypt, that is, the world, shows that whatever they represent is from Satan’s organization.—See Light, Book Two, page 42.
20 It was the exercise of divine power and authority that caused the frogs to come up and to be exposed and to harass the people; which, antitypically, is the authoritative exercise by Jehovah’s servants, including those on earth, of the power and commission in delivering the message of notice and warning to the enemy organization and which exposes the many so-called “remedies” for the human race. It appears that the second plague antitypically fulfilled had its beginning upon Satan’s organization from the year 1927 and onward and corresponds to the sixth trumpet
74
WATCHTOWER-
Brooklyn, N. V.
of Revelation (9:13-21). The facts which relate to the antitypieal fulfilment of this plague are these: At Toronto, before a large visible audience and one by radio, constituting a far greater audience, a message from the Lord’s Word in the form of a resolution and supporting argument was adopted and addressed “To the Peoples of Christendom’’. The message broadcast on that occasion was afterwards printed and distributed by the millions to the peoples of earth and in many languages. Amongst other things that message said was in substance this: ‘The blessings so much desired by the people can never come through any unrighteous system of “Christendom” or any organization of so-called “Christianity”, because the same forms a part of Satan’s organization, and that there is no reason for the people to give support to that hypocritical and oppressive system that blinds them, misleads them, and turns them away from God. Further, that in this hour of perplexity Jehovah God bids the peoples to abandon and for ever forsake “Christendom” and all of her misleading systems and organizations, because all of these are of the Devil's organization.’ (See Light, Book One, page 163.) At the time of the delivery of that message commerce was at its zenith in operating fraudulent and oppressive schemes to get rich, and which were oppressive to the people. About the time of the delivery of that message men and women through the public press and by other means began a great croaking noiso in the way of palaver and talk and agitation, and wind-pulling, assuming great wisdom and making much noise about the ability of their various systems to bring about the desire of the people, the falsity of which the message aforesaid exposed as being from Satan. Amongst these croakers were included the clergy and their newspapers, as well as the secular press. All of these things were the expression of human or man-made wisdom and all opposed to God’s kingdom under Christ. Included also amongst these croakers is the “man of sin” class (Jannes and Jam-bres) who join with the public press and the clergy and other agitators to speak against Jehovah's witnesses and against the message of truth delivered by them. Many who thought they were amongst God’s people were misled by these croakings and became offended at Jehovah and Christ and fell away, joining Satan’s organization openly. Some of these offended ones said in substance: “Had the radio speech at Toronto been tempered with moderation the .National Broadcasting Company would have permitted the continued use of its facilities to the Society.” None of such frog-croaking, of course, came from Jehovah’s witnesses, but came from those that opposed the kingdom; and the fact that Jehovah's witnesses called attention to and exposed these croakings as being from the Devil, and cited the Scriptures in support thereof, and showed that none of such schemes were from God, made the croakers very angry.—Jer. 23:16-21, 31, 32.
30	The message above mentioned exposing the frogcroaking was distributed to the official element of Satan’s visible organization as well as to the people, and Satan induced his wiseacres to try to offset it by bringing forth some frogs of their own. “And the magicians did so with their enchantments, and brought up frogs upon the land of Egypt.” (Ex. 8: 7) These latter frog-messages did not proceed from the croakers amongst the common people, but, as the Scriptures declare, they “come out of the mouth of the dragon, . . . the beast, and . . . the false prophet”, the official element of the Devil and his organization. (Rev. 16:13,14) This latter scripture gives the clue to the meaning of the frogs of the second plague upon Egypt. In this text in the Revelation, and in connection with the Egyptian plagues, are the only places in the Bible where frogs are mentioned, and both show they represent the beastly and fraudulent claims made by Satan and his organization which the Lord by his power and authority has exposed.—See Light, Book Two, pages 42-51.
31	The plague of frogs docs not in any manner refer to Jehovah's witnesses or the message delivered by them, but that plague does show what resulted by reason of the delivery of the divinely given message, because the message resulted in exposing these various croakings or false claims. The dying of the frogs does not mean that Jehovah’s witnesses stopped proclaiming the message of truth, because Jehovah commands them to continue their work; but it does seem to say that the reasonable people begin to see that these croakers have no real means of bringing blessings to the people and they cease giving heed to them. The official part of Satan’s organization was greatly disturbed by' the croaking noise of these antitypieal frogs, and, fearing that the same might interfere with their schemes, hence they, like Pharaoh, lied in order to have themselves released from these frog annoyances. (Ex. 8:8) The frogs of Egypt did not all die, but only those that were on the diy land and in the house of Pharaoh and his official family. All the other frogs remained in the rivers. (Ex. 8:11) The message of God’s kingdom published in 1928 specially pointed out that all attempts of government by agitation and agitators, such as hereinbefore described, must fail because only God’s kingdom under Christ can bring what is the desire of the people. (See Government, pages 242-247.) That message was put in the hands of practically all the official visible part of Satan’s organization in “Christendom”. Satan and his official crowd probably have taken some satisfaction in believing that they will not be overthrown by such agitators, but that their own schemes, namely, the false, unclean messages that come from the mouth of the Devil, his beast, and his false prophet, bespeak the remedy for the controlling of humankind.
32	The message contained in the Government book, issued in 1928, further exposes the many false sys-
March 1, 1934
WATCHTOWER.
75
terns and attempts of government and points out that the only possible means for the blessing of the people is through God’s kingdom. The message of truth therefore angers Satan’s organization, antitypieal Egypt, the members of which harden their hearts. Further testimony of notice and warning must continue, which will plague Satan’s organization, and which will be to the honor of Jehovah’s name.
(To be continued)
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
H 1. Contrast the state existing since the time of Eden with that prior thereto, and account for the change. What is Jehovah’s purpose concerning present conditions and those responsible therefor? What has he done to make known that purpose?
If 2-5. Point out the time and manner in which God first revealed to man his name Jehovah. What were some of the great things Jehovah performed by his servant Moses, and how is the slaying of tlic passover lamb related thereto? What is the reason for the statements recorded at Exodus 3: 15 and 12: 14? In view of these scriptures, account for and apply Jesus’ words of Luke 22: 19. Compare the application of this text before 1918 with that since then. Point out the event, and the time thereof, marking the making and the inauguration of the law covenant and of the new covenant.
fl (5, 7. In regard to conspiracy by Satan and his representatives, and deliverance by Jehovah, compare the position of the Israelites in Egypt with that of Jehovah’s anointed at the time of making and of inaugurating the new covenant.
K 8. Explain the fact that Jehovah expressed his vengeance against Satan’s organization by slaving the firstborn of Egypt at tho time the paschal lamb was killed but did not slay those of antitypical Egypt at the death of the antitypical passover lamb. What does this mean, as related to the “Lord’s supper”, to those in the new covenant in tho day of God’s vengeance upon the firstborn of antitypical Egypt?
H 9, 10. Apply the prophetic fact (a) that the Egyptians hated shepherds; (b) that Jehovah used the shepherd Moses to deliver his testimony to Pharaoh; (c) of the assurance given to Moses by Jehovah as recorded at Exodus 3:12.
f 11-13. Point out the fulfilment of Genesis 13: 15. What do the Scriptures show to be the heritage of the faithful men of old?
f 14, 15. What does it mean for the “people for his name” if the blood of the new covenant has been sprinkled and that covenant has been inaugurated, and how will they use that honor and meet the attending responsibility? Explain and apply the demand made of Pharaoh by Moses and Aaron as recorded in Exodus 5: 1.
H 16. What test upon Pharaoh attended notice and warning given to him by Moses? In this connection, compare the position of Moses and of Pharaoh with that of Jehovah’s witnesses and of Satan’s representatives now.
f 17. Explain the symbolism of the rod of Moses and its becoming a serpent when cast down before Pharaoh, and of the rod in tho hand of the antitypical Moses. Just why does the memorial of the death of our Lord Jesus Christ now have much greater significance to God’s people than they have heretofore seen?
11 18. Show that 2 Timothy 3: 1-9 is now having fulfilment.
U 19. Why is it reasonable to expect that these signs and wonders will be understood by the remnant while on earth?
f 20. How does Exodus 9: 16 account for Satan’s so long continuing his wicked work? When and how do the prophetic purpose set forth in Exodus 9: 16 and the prophetic picture presented in Psalm 105: 26,27 find fulfilment? Show the relationship thereto of Isaiah 19:19,20 and of Jeremiah 32: 20,21.
H 21, 22. Identify the “evil angels” mentioned in Psalm 78:49, and show that such identification is clearly in harmony with the Scriptures. Point out the nature and the purpose of the first nine plagues brought upon Egypt, typical and antitypieal.
7 23-26. For what purpose did Jehovah send Moses to Egypt, and how was Moses to proceed when there? Whom did Moses and Aaron there prophetically picture? Describe the performance of the sign or wonder which constituted the first plague upon Egypt, and show when and how that pictorial prophecy is fulfilled. How, in the fulfilment of prophecy, have the ‘magicians of Egypt’ also ‘turned the water into blood’? What is the significance of the statement that ‘ ‘ seven days were fulfilled ’ ’ after the Lord had smitten the river?
1, 27-31. As to the prophetic event and the time and manner of fulfilment, what constituted the second plague of Egypt, how was it called forth, and what is declared to be the purpose thereof?
THE ONLY PERFECT MAN EVER BORN
FOR centuries theologians have been puzzled over how Jesus eould he born of a woman who was a descendant of the sinner Adam and yet himself be “holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners”, as the sacred Scriptures (Ileb. 7:26) testify. Without a scripture in the Bible to support their theory, these theologians invented the doctrine that Mary, the earthly mother of Jesus, was herself immaculately conceived and bora. Such an unscri ptural argument leads only to another question, namely, How about Mary’s mother? and how about Diary’s mother’s mother? and so on all the way back to mother Eve. Such a doctrine of immaculate conception having no support whatever in the inspired Holy Scriptures as written by the apostle Peter and the other apostles and prophets, but rather being contradictory to the written Word of God, we promptly dismiss such doctrine. Paul, the apostle, says in his letter to the
church at Rome, chapter five, verse twelve: “As by one man [namely, Adam] sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned.” Psalm fourteen, verse three, states: “There is none that doeth good, no, not one.” These scriptures being true, and since Jesus was born of a woman, was he not a sinner like others ?
Jesus was not a sinner. He was born pure, holy, sinless, without spot or blemish. He was not begotten and born like other children. While he was born of the woman Mary, Joseph was not his father. Joseph was espoused to Mary, Jesus’ mother, and before they were married she was found to be with child. The record of Matthew, chapter one, verse eighteen, reads: “Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: When as his mother Mary was espoused to Joseph, before they came together, she was found with child of the holy [spirit].” Mary was a virgin, yet she was
76
CTlc WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn', N. Y.
about to give birth and did give birth to the babe Jesus. The account goes on to say in the next few verses (20-23) : “But while [Joseph] thought on these things, behold, the angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a dream, saying, Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife; for that which is conceived in her is of the holy [spirit]. And she shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt call his name Jesus; for he shall save his people from their sins. Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying, Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his name Emmanuel; which being interpreted is, God with us.-’ The holy child that was born of the virgin Mary was and is the Son of God; so the angel Gabriel assured Mary, saying to her: “The holy [spirit] shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee; therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God.”
The words translated in our Bibles “Holy Ghost” should properly be translated holy spirit. The holy spirit is the invisible power and energy of Jehovah. God is holy; therefore his power and energy are holy. Father means life-giver. Jehovah is the Father of Jesus because he gave life to Jesus; hence Jesus is called the Son of God. The spirit or energy of Jehovah operating at the time of creation upon earthly substance produced earthly creatures. So the Biblical record states. (Gen. 2:7; 1 Cor. 15:47) The same holy [lower and energy begat the child Jesus, who was born of his mother Mary. Therefore the life of Jesus was without sin or imperfection. The perfect, sinless germ of life of him who was born as Jesus was transferred from the spirit plane of life in heaven to the human plane or nature on earth. This, as the Scriptures state, was all accomplished by the spirit or invisible power of God the Father, and it was this perfect and holy power of God that counteracted all imperfect influences which the imperfections and blemishes and inbred sin of the virgin Mary might tend to have on the child of her virginity.
Jesus was our Lord’s human name. It implied his humiliation and lowly estate, in comparison with the glory which he had with the heavenly Father before the world was. (John 17:5) He had existed long before he became a human creature. According to the Greek language, in which the gospel of John was written, his prehuman name was the Loyos, which is translated in our common version Bible “the Word”. The Greek word Logos is therefore one of the titles of Jesus and should not be translated over into English at all. It means the spokesman, active agent, or messenger, of Jehovah. John, writing in the first chapter of his gospel (1-3) concerning the Logos, who later became Jesus, says: “In the beginning [which means the beginning of God's creative activity] was the [Logos], and the [Logos] was with God
[that is, the God, Jehovah], and the [Logos] was God [not the God, but a god or mighty one]. The same was in the beginning with God [that is, the God, Jehovah], All things were made by him [the Logos] ; and without him [the Logos] was not any thing made that was made”; he was the active agent of Jehovah in making all things.
Tb.e “beeinning” here referred to could not mean the beginning of God the Father, because, as Psalm forty-one, verse thirteen, and Psalm ninety, verse two, state, he is from everlasting to everlasting and never had a beginning. The work of Jehovah, however, had a beginning, and his creative work is clearly what i-, here meant in connection with the expression “in th: beginning”. The Logos was the first and only direct creation of Jehovah; and thereafter God’s creation was performed through his Logos. This is the thought expressed by the apostle Paul in Colossians, chapter one, verses fifteen to seventeen, where he said that Jesus “is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every creature; for by him were all thines created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers; all things were created by him, and for him: and he is before all things, and by him all things consist.”
As further evidence of Jesus’ prehuman existence, we have his own words as quoted from John’s gospel (6:38) : “I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me.” In 8:42: “I proceeded forth and came from God; neither came I of myself, but he sent me.” Again (8:58): “Before Abraham was, I am.” Again (16:28): “I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world: again, I leave the world, and go to the Father.” x\nd 17:5: “Ami now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee before the world was.” Again, Jesus said (Kev. 3:14): ‘I am the beginning of the creation of God.’ Furthermore, in Hebrews, chapter one, verses one and two, the apostle Paul under inspiration states: “God •. . . hath, in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds.” And again, in Second Corinthians, chapter eight, verse nine, he states: “For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet for your sake's he became poor, that ye through his poverty might be rich.” He was in the form of God before he became a man; as it is worded in Philippians, chapter two, verses six and seven, according to the Diaglolt translation: “Who [that is, Jesus], though being in God's form, yet did not meditate a usurpation to be like God, but divested himself, taking a bondman’s form, having been made in the likeness of men.”
Some religious people have earnestly believed that Jesus was God himself. But such a conclusion is not warranted by the Scriptures. John said: “The Father
M/.r.cii 1, 1904
THe WATCHTOWER.
77
loveth the Son, and hath given all things into his hand.” (John 3:35) Again, Jesus said: “The Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son; that all men should honour the Son, even as they honour the Father. lie that honoureth not the Son, honoureth not the Father which hath sent him. . . . For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself.” (John 5:22,23,26) Again, Jesus said: “It is also written in your law, that the testimony of two men is true. I am one that bear witness of myself, and the Father that sent me beareth witness of me.” (John 8:17,18) Thus Jesus definitely fixes the fact that he and the Father are separate and distinct persons.
Again, Jesus said: “My Father, which gave them me, is greater than all; and no man is able to pluck them out of my Father s hand. I and my Father are one.” (John 10:29,30) It may be asked, Does not this prove that they are one being 1 Our answer is that it does not; but that it does show, in connection with the other scriptures just quoted, that Jesus and the Father, Jehovah, are one in harmonious action; just as Jesus subsequently prayed to the Father that the church, his followers, might be made one with
him, when he said, according to John’s gospel, chapter seventeen, verses twenty to twenty-two: “Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their word; that they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou hast sent me. And the glory which thou gavest me I have given them; that they may be one, even as we arc one.” Thus Jesus definitely shows what is meant by being one with the Father.
Again, Jesus prayed to the Father, saying: “Father, save me from this hour; but for this cause came I unto this hour. Father, glorify thy name. Then came there a voice from heaven, saying, I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again.” (John 12: 27, 28) Jesus could not have been praying to himself here, but he was praying to Jehovah God, from whom he came. That the Father is greater than the Son, Christ Jesus, he shows when, according to John, chapter fourteen, verse twenty-eight, he says: “I go away, and come again unto you. If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I said, I go unto the Father: for my Father is greater than I.”
JEHOVAH HEARS SIGHING OF PRISONERS
ALL denominational churches, both Catholic and Protestant, operate under the name “Christian”. They call themselves by the name of Christ even though they constitute a part of Satan’s organization, which is the world. Many good people desire to seme God and follow Christ and, knowing no other place to go, have been brought into these denominational folds. The clergy of each denomination respectively is the watchman of that flock and claims the flock as his. (Isa. 56:10,11) Instead of feeding the hungry souls of that flock from the Word of God the clergy furnish a provender of their own making, such as politics and business, mixed with a little of the Bible misapplied. Therefore the prophet speaks of their tables as laden with vomit. (Isa. 28:8) The consecrated followers of Jesus who are in these denominational church systems are nauseated by these mixtures of false doctrines upon which they are fed and by the hypocritical practices of those who prepare and dispense the food. They know that the doctrine of evolution is entirely contradictory to the truth concerning Christ Jesus and his great sacrifice. They know that the Lord has said that a true follower of Christ must keep himself separate from the world. They see the clergy making the profiteers and politicians the chief ones of their flock and yielding to the selfish influence of such. They see their leaders freely engaging in the evil affairs of the world. These poor sheep of the flock are sick and in distress and know’ not what to do. The clergy tell them that they may
believe what they will, just so they remain in the church and help to support it. They arc told that if they leave the church they will be doing violence to their own interests and the interests of their families and the interests of the community, and that if the church falls all morality will cease. They further threaten them with the fires of eternal torment should they forsake the church system. By these various means employed the clergy hold these sick and hungry souls as “prisoners” in the denominational systems and prevent them, as far as possible, from knowing the truth concerning God’s government. These “prisoners” see that the clergy no longer worship Jehovah as their God and Christ Jesus as their Redeemer, but deny God, deny his Word and deny the blood of Christ that bought them, and instead advocate the God-dishonoring doctrine of evolution. In their distress they cry out: “Help us, 0 God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name; and deliver us, and purge away our sins, for thy name’s sake. Wherefore should the heathen [unbelievers] say, Where is their God? let him be known among the heathen [unbelievers] in our sight, by the revenging of the blood of thy servants which is shed. Let the sighing of the prisoner come before thee; according to the greatness of thy power preserve thou those that arc appointed to die.”—Ps. 79: 9-11.
That the Lord in his due time will bring forth these prisoners is made certain by his promise: “Happy is he that hath the God of Jacob for his help, whose
78
WATCHTOWER.
Beooklyx, N'. y.
hope is in the Lord his God: which made heaven, and earth, the sea, and all that therein is; which keepeth truth for ever; which executcth judgment for the oppressed: which givetli food to the hungry. The Lord looseth the prisoners: the Lord openeth the eyes of the blind: the Lord raiseth them that are bowed down: the Lord loveth the righteous.”—Ps. 146:5-8.
Then the Lord indicates when he will loosen these prisoners and states that it is when he builds up Zion. That means when the Lord comes to his temple and gathers unto himself the faithful ones and covers them with the robe of righteousness. (Ps. 102:16-20; Isa. 61:10) But how will he loose these prisoners? Jehovah then addressing his servant class, the anointed ones, who are called to be his witnesses and who constitute the remnant, says: “I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles; to open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house.”
Great is the privilege of those who have part in this witness work. These have the consolation of informing the spirit-begotten ones who are held as prisoners that the time has come for them to show themselves and take their stand on the side of the Lord. (Isa. 49:8,9) That witness must be given, and is being given. This explains why there is a little company of men and women who count not their lives dear unto them and who joyfully carry the message of God’s loving-kindness and concerning his righteous government to the hungry souls who are in the various church systems at this time. While Satan is employing all of his agencies to discredit God in the eyes of the people it is the privilege of the remnant to give testimony to those who will hear that Jehovah is God and that their blessings must come from him.
Jehovah established the jubilee system amongst the Israelites. That jubilee foreshadowed his kingdom or righteous government, when all the oppressed ones must be relieved and have a fair opportunity to start in the way of righteousness. At the opening of the jubilee year the law required the trumpet to be sounded to inform the people that the jubilee year had arrived. (Lev. 25: 9,10) Thereby the Lord foreshadowed that he would have the people informed concerning the establishment of his righteous government through which man shall be returned unto all of his possessions originally intended for him. For this reason Jesus declared that the good news of the kingdom must be given to all nations as a witness before the final sorrows should come upon Satan’s organization in which his evil organization will be overthrown. Through his prophet God said to his anointed remnant, his witnesses: “Go through, go through the gates; prepare ye the way of the people; cast up, cast up the highway; gather out the stones; lift up a standard for the people. Behold, the Lord hath proclaimed unto the end of the world, Say ye to the
daughter of Zion, Behold, thy salvation cometh; behold, his reward is with him, and his work before him.”—Isa. 62:10,11.
A “gate”, as here used, is a symbol of an entrance into the kingdom. The remnant, being now in the temple, are therefore entering the gates of the kingdom. As God’s witnesses they are commanded to prepare the way for the people by pointing them to his righteous government. They are told to remove the stumbling stones, which are the false doctrines and theories by which the people have been blinded. They are told to lift up a standard for the people, which means to point the people to the fact that God’s righteous government is the standard to which they must rally. This is a part of the work that the Lord God is having done in the earth at this time, and only those who are unselfishly devoted to him are participating in that work.
The only active enemies of Satan now on the earth are those who are joyfully announcing the fact that God has placed his King upon his throne. These must be obedient to God’s commands as his witnesses to do his work and finish it before the Lord dashes to pieces Satan’s organization in the final time of trouble which Christ Jesus pointed out is now impending. (Malt. 24:14,21,22) It is to be expected that Satan, that old Dragon, is exceedingly angry at the faithful witnesses of the Lord and will do everything within his power to destroy them. The Lord said that this is what he would do: “And the dragon was wroth with the woman, and went to make war with the remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ. ”-Bev. 12:17.
Through the clergy and the principal of their flocks Satan presses his warfare against the remnant of God because of their faithfulness. But the enemy cannot prevail, for the reason, it is written: “And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony; and they loved not their lives unto the death.”—Kev. 12:11.
The faithful remnant, trusting in the blood of Christ, anointed by the spirit of Jehovah, counting not their lives dear unto them, are joyfully giving the testimony and by the Lord’s grace they will overcome the enemy. On they go in the work with joy and singing. They press the battle to the very gate of Satan’s organization, and while so doing fear no evil, because they arc in the secret place of the Most High. (Ps. 91:1-15) Foreseeing this day of his wonderful work God through his prophet says to the remnant: “In that day shall the Lord of hosts be for a crown of glory, and for a diadem of beauty, unto the residue [remnant] of his people, and for a spirit of judgment to him that sitteth in judgment, and for strength to them that turn the battle to the gate.”—Isa. 28: 5. 6.
Many Christians have deceived themselves into believing that God is trying to have them develop a beautiful and sweet character that they might go to heaven and there sing and enjoy ease and comfort
Mai’Cii 1, 1934
<3Tie WATCHTOWER.
79
forever. The true remnant class realize that in order to be of the heavenly government class they must do some singing while on earth and do it to the praise of Jehovah’s name. They must be witnesses that he is the Mighty God. They are called out of darkness into the marvelous light that they might show forth his praises while on earth. (1 Pet. 2: 9,10) God will take
into his government and make official members thereof only those who prove that they love him and his King more than their own lives. Perfect love has no fear of man or Devil, but he who has perfect love and absolute confidence in the Lord boldly makes proclamation of the truth as a witness in the name of the Lord.—1 John 4:17,18.
AN EFFECTIVE MEANS OF UNIFYING
Dear Brother Rutherford:
The Chicago division, at their assembly at Chicago on Sunday, December 31, wish to express their gratitude to Jehovah for the timely and effective instructions as brought to them through the transeiiption lecture entitled “His Organization”.
Surely the transcription machine is a marvelous blessing from Jehovah; and wo are grateful to him that not only can it be
used as an instrument in guiding the people into his organization, but it can be used as an effective means of unifying Jehovah’s witnesses more thoroughly and completely in the battle for the vindication of his name with his Vindicator-King. We trust that it will be Jehovah’s will to give us further instruction in a similar manner.
With love and best wishes, we are
Chicago division of Jehovah’s witnesses.
(Continued from page 80)
NEVADA
Reno KOH Su 10:30am
NEW HAMPSHIRE Manch'ter WFEASu 2:45pm We 7:00pm
NEW JERSEY AtlanticC’y WPG Su 10:00am
NEW MEXICO
Albuq’que KOB Su 5:45pm
Roswell KGFLSu 5:15pm
We 4:30pra Fr 4:30pm
NEW YORK
Auburn WMBOSu 6:30pm
Sa 2:15pm
Bing’mtonWNBF Su 7:00pm Brooklyn WBBR Su 10:15am
Su 6:30pm MolO:30:im Tu 10:30am Tu 6:30pm We 10:30am Wo 6:30pm Th 10: 30am Th 6:3opm Frl0:30ani Fr 6:3i>pm
Brooklyn WCNW Mo 9:45pm
Th 6:30pm Sa 5:00pm
Buffalo WGR Su 10:00am Buffalo WKBW Wo 10:00am Freeport WG13B Su 9:00am
Tu 7:00pm Th 7:00pm
Hudson F. WGLC Su 10:45am Jamestown WOOL Su 7:00pm New York WMCA Su 10:45am Saranac L. WNBZ Su 10:15am
Ta 4:15pm Th 4:15pm
Sy racuse WSY R Su 10:30am Tupper L. WHDL Su 10:45am
Th 10:00am
Wh. Pl’ns WFASSu 6:00pm Mo 1:00pm Sa 9:00am
NORTH CAROLINA Asheville WWNC Th 5:30pm Charlotte WBT Su 10:30am Greensboro WHIG Su 9:45am Raleigh WPTF Su 10:00am Wilm ’ton WRAM Su 10:00am
We 7:GC'pm
NORTH DAKOTA
Devils L. KDLR Su 12:30pm We 6:00pm Fr 6:00pm
Fargo WDAY Su 10:00am G’d Forks KFJM Su 5:00pm
Wo 5:00pm Fr 5:00pm Mandan KGCU Sull: 30am
We 8:45pm Fr 8:45 pm
OHIO
Akron WADC Su 1:45pm
Wo 1:00pm
Cleveland WIIK Su 6:30pm
Tu 3:15pm Th 9:15pm Cleveland WJAYSu 9:45atu Columbus WAIU Su 10:0U:tm
Th 7:30pm
Columbus WCAH Su 10:45am
Mo 2:00pm We 2:00pm
Fr 2:00pm
Toledo WSPDSu 9:30am
Sa 8:15am
Youngst’n WKBN Su 10:00am
We 4:00pm
Zanesville WALR Su 10:00am
Wo 4:15pm
OKLAHOMA
Elk City KASA Su 1:15pm
Okl’aCity KOMA Su 1:45pm
PoncaCity WBBZ Su 10:00am
Wo 9:00pm
Shawnee KGFF Mo 8:45pm
Wo 8:45 pm Fr 8:45pm
OREGON
Klamath F. KF JI Mo 8:15pm
Marshfield KOOS Mo 1:30pm
Medford KMED Su 10:00am
Th 4:00pm
Portland KWJJ Su 9:30am
Portland KXLTu 7:00am
PENNSYLVANIA
Altoona WFBG Su 12:00 nn
Tu S :15pm
Erie WLBWSul0:.Klam
Glenside WIBG Su 12:15pm
Johnstown W J AC Su 4:30pm Phil’a WCAU Su 12:00 nn Pittsb’gh KQV Su 10:30am
Wo 1:45pm Fr 1:45pm
Pittsb ’glx WWSW We 5:15pm
Reading WEEU Su 3:45pm
Wo 3:45pm
Wash ’ton WNBO Su 9:45atn
W ’msport WRAK Su 9:15pm
Th 7:15pm
PHILIPPINE ISLANDS
Manila KZEG Su 7:00pm
Th 7:00pm
SOUTH CAROLINA
Charleston WCSG Su 1:00pm
We 7:00pm Fr 7:00pm
Columbia WISSu 1:15pm
Fr 6:45pm
Greenville WFBCSu 9:30am
Spart’b’g WSPA Su 6:30pm
SOUTH DAKOTA
Pierre KGFX Su 1:00pm Tu 4:00pm Th 4:00pm
SiouxF’Is KSOO Su 10:00am 'l'h 4:30pm Watertown KGCR Su 9:15am
We 8:45pm Fr 8:45pm
TENNESSEE
Bristol WOPI Wo 6:45pm
Sa 6:45pm
Cha’nooga WDOD Su 1:00pm
Th 8:0oam
Jackson WTJS Su 1:30pm
We 5:00pm Fr 5:30pm
Knoxville WNOX Su 1:45pm
Wo 5:30pm
Memphis WMC Su 4:00pm
Memphis WREC Su 9:30am
TEXAS
Amarillo RGBS Su 9:00am
Austin KNOW Su 10:00am
Beaumont KFDM Su 10:00am
Tu 7:45pm
Borger KSRB Su 5:00pm
Wo 5:00pm Fr 5:00pm
CorpusChr. KGFI Su 9:0oam
We 6:45pm Fr 6:45pm
Cuero VOCSu 2:45pm
We 4:45pm Fr 4:45pm
Dallas KRLDSu 5:45pm
Dublin KFPLTh 8:00pm
Fr 10:0oam
El Paso KTSMSa 7:3'>pm
Ft. Worth KTAT Mo 5:15pm
Wo 5:15pm Fr 5:15pm
Galveston KLUF Su 10:15am
We 2:15pm
Houston KPRC Su 10;0o:tm
S. Angelo KGKL Su 1:45pm Th 8:45am
S.	Antonio KTSA Su 10:45am
Wichita F. KG KO Su 12:30pm Th 8:45pm
UTAH
Ogden KLO Su 3:15pm We 5:45pm Fr 5:00pm
Salt L. City KSL Su 11:15am
VERMONT
Rutland	WSYB Su 10:00am
Th 5:30prn
Waterb’y WDEV Mo 1:+Jpm We 1:45pm Fr l:4Jpiu
VIRGINIA
Ch’lottesv. WEIIC Su 10:45am
Danville WBTMSu 9:15ptu
Lynchb’g WLVA Su 12:45pm
Petersb’g WPI1R Su 6:15pm
Wo 10:00am Fr 10:0O:im
Richmond WRVA Su 12:15pm
Roanoke WDBJ Su 12:30ptn We 5:00 pm
WASHINGTON
Aberdeen KXROSu 1:15pm Bell'ham KVOS Su 10:0Oam Th 5:3<:pm
Seattle KJR Su 10:OO:im
Seattle KVLMo 6:45pm
Tu 6:45pm We 6:15pm
Th 6:45pm Fr 6:45pm Sa 6:45pm
Spokane KFIO Su 9:15am We 7:45am Fr 7:45am
Spokane KGA Su 4:00pm
Tacoma KMO Su 10:!',Ikuu
We 5:00pm l’r 5:0i.pm
Tacoma KVISu 2:3<p:n
Walla Walla KUJ Su 7:45am
Su 1:30pm Wenatchee KPQ Su 10:00am Wo 7:00am
Yakima KIT Su 10:00am Th 7:00am
WEST VIRGINIA
Bluefield WHIS Su 9:00am
Fr 8:00am
Cha'stun WOBU Su 4:00pm Hunt'ton WSAZ Th 4:(J0fm Wheeling WWVA Su 10:00um
WISCONSIN
LaCrosse WKBHSu 1:00pm Madison WIBA Su 10:00am Fr 2:15pra
WYOMING
Casper KDFN Su 10:30am Th 8:45am
£F6e WATCHTOWER.
RADIO SERVICE
The good news of the kingdom of Jehovah is broadcast each week or oftener by these and other stations at time shown.
[Current local time is shown in each instance.]
AUSTRALASIA
NEW SOUTH WALES
Albury 2-AY Tu 9:15pm Broken Hill 2-XL Su 8:45pm Canberra 2-CA Su 8:45pm Goulburn 2-GN Su 7:30pm Gtinnedah 2-MO Su 7:00pm Lismore 2-XNWe 7:15pm Newcastle 2-HDSu 9:30am
Su 7:15pm Wo 6:45pm Svdncy 2-UE Su 7:00pm W ’gaW ’ga 2-WG Wo 7:45pm
QUEENSLAND
Brisbane	4-BC Su 10:15pm	
Mackay Townsville	4-MK Su 4-TO We	11:00am 8:00pm
VICTORIA Ballarat	3-AC	Su	10:15pm Ballarat	3-BA	Su	1:15pm Bendigo	3-BOTu	8:00pm Hamilton	3-HA	Su	8:3opra Melbourne	3-AW	Su	4:45pm Salo	3-TRSa	9:00pm Swan Hill	3-SIISu	7:15pm Wangaratta 3-WR Su	8:15pm		
WEST AUSTRALIA
Kalgoorlio 6-KG Su 7:40pm
Perth 6-MLSu 9:00pm
CANADA
ALBERTA
Calgary CFCN Su 5:45pm
NOVA SCOTIA
Sydney C.JCBSu 9:00pm
ONTARIO
Hamilton CKOC Su 10:30 nn Su 1:30pm Su 8:15pm
CHINA
Shanghai XHini Su 10:00am
CUBA
Havana CMK Su 11:30am also Spanish Su 9:00pm
Santa Cl ’a CMHI Su 12:00 nn
ESTHONIA
Reval RADIO-Su 3:30pm (296.1 m) TALLINN
FRANCE
Beziers RADIO-Th 8:00pm (220.1m) BEZIERS
Bordeaux RADIO- Mo 7:45pm
(237 m) SUD-OUEST
Feeamp RADIO-NOR-
(223 m) MANDIE
English: Su 4:00pm
French: Tu 8:00pm
Paris RADIO L L Fr 8:15pm (370 in)
Paris RADIO- Su 12:00 nn
(312.3 m) VITUS
Th 7:30pm Sa 7:30pm
Toulouse RADIO- We 7:15pm (385.1 m) TOULOUSE
MEXICO
Mexico XECW
Spanish: Th 10: 00pm
UNITED STATES
ALABAMA
Birm'ham WAPI Su 9:45am
Birm'ham WBRC Su 10:00am
We 4:30pm
Dothan WHET Su 10:30am
We 1:15pm Fr l:15pra
M’tgomery WSFA Su 3:45pm
Muscle S. WNRASu 6:00pm
We 8:00pm Fr 8:00pm
TASMANIA
Launceston 7-LA Fr 10:15pm
BELGIUM
Hainaut BONNE Sa 5:30pm (330 m) ESPERANCE
ALASKA Anchorage KFQD We 9:30pm Ketchikan KGBU Mo 7:15pm Th 7:15pm Sa 7:15pm		
	ARIZONA	
Bisbee	KSUN Su	4:00pm
Wo	4:00pm Fr	4:00pm
Jerome	KCRJ Mo	5:15pm
We	5:15pm Sa	5:15pm
	Spanish Th	4:30pn
Phoenix	KTARSu	9:00am
Prescott	; KPJM Su	5:45pm
Wo	5:15pm Fr	5:15pm
Tucson	KGAR Su	7:00pm
We	5:45pm Fr	5:45 pm
Tucson	KVOASu	8:45am
	Th	8:00pm
Yuma	KUMA Su	6:15pm
	Spanish Su	6:00pm
ARKANSAS
Fay’ville KUOA Su 12:45pm
Wo 11:45am Fr 6:00pm HotSp’gs KTHS Su 3:30pm Little R'k KARKSu 9:00am Little R’k KGHI Su 7:00pm
We 5:45pm Fr 5:45pm Little R’k KLRA Su 10:30am Paragould KBTM Su 10:00am
Wo 11:30am
Texarkana KCMC Su 6:45pm
CALIFORNIA
El Centro KXO Su 10:00am Eureka KIEM Su 10:30am Fresno KMJ Su 3:45pm Hollywood KNXSu 9:15pm Long B ’ch KGER Su 10:45am Los Angeles KTM Su 8:30am
Su 8:00pm Th 8:0i>pm
Oakland KLS Su 11:15am We 2:45pm Fr 2:45pm Oakland KROW Su 10:15am
Su 6:15pm Mo 7:45pm
Fr 8:15pm Sa’mento KFBK Su 9:30am S.F’cisco KT AB Su 9:30am
Sa 8:30am Stockton KGDM Su 9:30am Wo 7:15am Fr 1:15pm
COLORADO
Col ’o Spr. K VOR Su 10:30am
We 5:30pm Sa 4:30pm Denver	KFEL Su	7:00pm
Grand J’n KFX.T Su	1:15pm
Greeley KI KA Mo	7:15pm
Lamar	KIDW Su	7:15pm
We 2:40pm Fr 2:40pm
Pueblo KGHFMo 8:15pm
Wo 10:45am
Yuma	KGEK Su 12:45pm
We 12:45pm Fr 12:45pm
CONNECTICUT
Bridgeport WICC Su 10:00am
DELAWARE
Wihn ’ton Wi’ i’ton	WDEL Su We WILM Mo	7:00pm 8:30pm 8:45pm
	FLORIDA	
Miami W10D Su 12:15pm Miami WQAM Su 4:30pm Orlando WDBO Su 12:45pm Pensacola WCOA Su 1:00pm Wo 7:30pm Fr 6:30pm		
	GEORGIA	
Athens	WTFI Su Atlanta	WGST Su Augusta WRDWSu Th Columbus WRBL Su LaGrangeWKEU Su		9:45am 5:45pm 3:00pm 7:45pm 9:30am 3:00pm
Wo 3:00pm Fr 10:00am
Romo WFDV Su 12:30pm Wo 8:45pm Fr 8:45pm
Savannah WTOC Su 1:15pm
Thomasv. WQDX We 9:15ani We 7:30pm
HAWAII
Honolulu KGMB We 12:05pm Fr 7:15pm
IDAHO
Boise KIDO Su 10:30am
We 8:45pm
Nampa KFXD Su 11:00am
Pocatello KSE1 Su 2:00pm Su 9:00pm
Twin Falls KTFI Su 10:45am
Su 4:45pm
ILLINOIS
Cicero WHFC Su 5:00pm Wo 5:00pm Fr 5:00pm
Decatur WJBL Su 10:00am
Mo 7:30pm
Harrisb’g WEBQ Su 6:00pm
Mo 10:30pm Fr 10:00pm
Joliet WCLS Su 12:15pm
We 12:45pm Fr 12:45pm
LaSalle WJBC Su 6:15pm
Ruckford WROK Su 10:00am
Su 10:00pm Wo 10:00pm
Sp ’gfield WCBS Su 12:30pm
Sa 11:15am
INDIANA
Ind ’apolis WKBF Su 10:00am
Wo 2:00pm
Muncie WLBC Su 1:30pm
Fr 7:30pm
T.	Haute WBOW Su 12:45pm
IOWA
Decorah KGCA Mo 9:00am
Wo 9:0<Jam Sa 9:00am Des Moines WHO Su 9:30am Marshallt’nKFJB Su 8:45am
We 6:15pm Fr 6:15pm Waterloo WMT Su 6:45pm
KANSAS
Coffeyville KGGFSu 1:45pm
Th 8:00pm
Kans. C ’y WLBF Su 4:45pm
We 4:45pm Fr 4:45pm
MAINE
Bangor WLBZ Su 9:45am Portland WCSH Su 4:00pm
MARYLAND
Baltimore WBALSu 4:15pm
Cumberl’d WTBO Su 2:00pm
We 2:00pm Fr 2:00pm
Hagerst ’n WJE.T Su 10:15am
MASSACHUSETTS
Babson P. WBSO Su 12:30pm
Boston WNAC Su 10:00am Sp ’gfield WMAS Su 10:00am Worcester WORC Su 10:30am
MICHIGAN
Calumet WIlDFTu 6:45pm
Detroit W.JRSu 9:45am
Ironwood WJMS Su 5:00pm
Wo 7:00pm Fr 7:15pm Jackson WHIM Su 3:00pm KalamazooWKZO Su 9:45am
Wo 3:00pm
MINNESOTA
F ’gus Falls K< i D E Su 10:00am
Min’polisWRHM Tu 8:00pm
Moorhead KG UK Su 7:30pm
We 5:15pm Fr 5:15pm
St. Paul WRHM Su 12:30pm
Th 1:00pm
MISSISSIPPI
Hattiesb ’gWPFB Su 1:30pm
We 7:45pm
Laurel WAML Su 12:45pm
Meridian WCOC Su 10:00am
Wo 6:450m
Miss. City WGCM Su 9:15am We 8:45 pm
MISSOURI
Columbia KFBU Su 4:30pm
We 7:15am
Kans.C’y KWKC Su 8:45am
Tu 7:00am
MONTANA
Billings KGHI, Su 12:15pm
G’t Falls KF BB Su 10: imam
NEBRASKA
Kearney KGl'W Su 9:00am ' We 6:45pm Fr 6:45pm
Lincoln KFABSu 9:30am
Lincoln KFOR Su 10: 15aru
Scottsbl’f KGKY Su 10:15am We 5:45pm Fr 5:15pm
York KGBZSu 5:41pm
Th 2: O''pm
(Continued on page zd)
WATCHTOWER.
Published Semi-Monthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N. Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford President W. E. Van Ambubgh Secretary "And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.”~lsaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of lifo to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation, and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the (jnljf Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man wilfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven abo\o every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of tho world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Lente, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and tho Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceedi"g to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of tho peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ which has now begun; that tho Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall be restored and live on earth forever.
THANKSGIVING TESTIMONY OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES
This designates the period from March 24 to April 1 inclusive, and which is a period of united activity of all faithful witnesses of Jehovah in every land of earth where located. The celebration of the Memorial in the midst of that period particularly makes it a season of thanksgiving, such being specially expressed by giving grateful testimony to Jehovah’s holy name. The new booklet Uictdiny the Ptople will then be given a world-wide distribution, not merely in English but in many other languages, thus permitting the witnesses everywhere to join in one and the same effort. All lovers ot Jehovah, including those of the Jonadab class, may participate in this distribution. All should report work done, promptly; those not working under any branch office should report direct to 117 Adams Street, Brooklyn, New York.
TRANSCRIPTION MACHINES
The Society has made arrangements to construct and assemble portable transcription machines at our own factory at 117 Adams Street. These machines will be somewhat different in construction from those previously furnished. They will be spring-wound, and operated from a G-volt wet-cell battery. Every machine will be furnished complete with the battery and a battery charger, so that it can be kept up to its full strength. We are pleased to announce that this machine can be offered at $100, complete, to brethren in the United States.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes - as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction
specifically designed to ai<l Jehovah’s witnesses. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for tho kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his Beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of tho Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Fobeign, $1.50; Cbe-at Bbitain, Alstbalasia, and South Africa, 7s. American remittances should bo made by Express or Postal Money Order, or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should bo made direct to tho respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than tboso mentioned may tie made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ..............31 Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England
Canadian . .........40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Australasian . . 7 Beresford Itoad, Stratbfield, N. S. W., Australia South African .... Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa Please address the Society in every case.
(Translation* of this journal appear In several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription prlco may have The Wafchtoicer free upon written application to tho publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it We are glad to thus aid tho needy, but the written application once each year Is required by the postal regulations. hotice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requester!, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires. Entered as Second Class Mail Hatter at Brooklyn, N. Y., Postotflce.
Act of Starch 3, 18'9.
MEMORIAL
For the year 1934 the Memorial of the Lord’s supper will be held after six o’clock on the evening of March 28. Tin: Watchtower contains some timely instruction for all those who partake, and we suggest that each one be prepared by thoroughly considering the matter in advance.
LOS ANGELES CONVENTION
Los Angeles, March 23-28 inclusive, are the place and time for a convention of Jehovah’s witnesses. All meetings except Sunday afternoon will be held in the Trinity Auditorium, Grand Ave. and Sth. Sunday afternoon, from 2:00 to 5:00 o'clock, the Shrine Auditorium will be used. At 3: 30 to 4: 00 o’clock p.m. (Pacific Standard Time) Brother Rutherford nill deliver an address on “World Control”, which will be broadcast from coast to coast. The convention will conclude on the night of the 28th with celebration of the Memorial. The forenoon of each day of the convention will be u-ed for hou“e-to-house witness work. This marks the beginning of tho Thanksgiving Period. The booklet Pitidinp the People will be used throughout the entire world during that pr-rmd. Tim brethren on the Pacific coast will have opportunity of a convention, and doubtless most of them will take advantage of it. For further information, address C. V. Kneiimyer,' J 14 > Fernwood St., Lynwood, California.	’
Vol. LV
March 15, 1934
No. 6
HIS NAME
PART 2
“Thy name, 0 Lord, endureth for ever; and thy memorial, 0 Lord, throughout all generations.”—Ps. 133: 1.3.
JEHOVAH’S primary purpose in sending Moses to Egypt was to place before the Egyptian ruling class, and before the people, the proof that he is the Supreme One. His primary purpose in sending Jesus, the antitypical Moses, to earth at both his first and his second coming is to place before the creation of the world the proof that Jehovah is the Almighty, and that there is none besides him. This he does for his own name’s sake, that all may know that life and attending blessings come from God, and from him only. This conclusion is proved by his words to Moses that “the Egyptians shall know that I am Jehovah’’. (Ex. 7:5, A.h’.V.) It is also proved by the words of Jesus: “This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.’’ (John 17:3) Moses was Jehovah’s instrument in Egypt to place the evidence before the people. Jesus Christ is his instrument or “hand’’ by which Jehovah places the evidence before the entire world.
2	Since the divine purpose is to bring knowledge home to creatures, looking to the vindication of his holy name, and this he did in Egypt by means of plagues, so we now sec that the antitypical plagues in fulfilment of the type consist of some definitely provided means of bringing before the peoples of the world knowledge that Jehovah is God, that his kingdom is here, and that his time is at hand when the oppressive power must vacate and the people be delivered ; hence Satan must let them go or suffer complete destruction. All of this Jehovah does for his own name’s sake; hence what came to pass in Egypt was and is a memorial to Jehovah’s name. What is done in the earth by Christ and his faithful remnant is a memorial to the name of Jehovah God. The plagues upon Egypt culminated in the slaying of the passover lamb, which foreshadowed the death of Christ Jesus; and his faithful followers since his death, by celebrating the Memorial feast, do thereby show forth the death of our Lord, who is the Vindicator of Jehovah’s name. The ten plagues were immediately followed by the destruction of Pharaoh’s army, which foreshadows that immediately following the antitypical fulfilment of the plagues there must come the destruction of Satan’s organization at Armageddon.
3	In considering the antitypical fulfilment of the plagues, therefore, we must not liken Jehovah’s witnesses to frogs or to any other beastly creatures which bring woe upon humankind. The frogs came as a plague upon Egypt after the exercise of divine power and authority by Moses and Aaron. The evils or burdensome troubles upon antitypical Egypt come by reason of the divinely provided message proclaimed, which message of truth brings knowledge home to the creatures of Satan’s organization, and which knowledge is a woe and burden to those of that organization. The redemption and deliverance of the Israelites from the oppression of Egypt was merely incidental to the vindication of Jehovah’s name. Likewise the redemp-t'cr’ and deliverance of the human race, and particularly the deliverance of the church, are things incidental to the vindication of Jehovah’s name. Such •gdemption and deliverance are, however, proof that Jehovah has the right of the great question at issue. In considering the antitypical fulfilment of the plagues upon Egypt it clearly appears that we. must at all times keep before the mind that the vindication of Jehovah’s name is the chief thing, in order that we may have an appreciation of the truth concerning the same. By bringing these plagues upon Egypt before the destruction of the firstborn and the destruction of Pharaoh’s army Jehovah furnished ample opportunity for Pharaoh to yield to his demands and let his people go or to harden his heart and suffer destruction. Even so in connection with the antitypical fulfilment of those plagues Jehovah gives notice and warning to Satan’s organization and affords ample opportunity for Satan and his agents to either willingly bow to Jehovah’s will or else suffer complete destruction. Further examination of these plagues proceeds.
PLAGUE THREE
4	The third plague upon Egypt was one of lice. “And the Lord said unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Stretch out thy rod, and smite the dust of the land, that it may become lice throughout all the land of Egypt. And they did so: for Aaron stretched out his hand with his rod, and smote the dust of the earth, and it became lice in man and in beast; all the dust
84
Stfe WATCHTOWER.
Bbooelyx, N. I’.
of the land became lice throughout all the land of Egypt.” (Ex. 8:16,17) Lice are associated with filth and are found on creatures of unclean habits. The root of the word rendered “lice” means ‘‘to nip”; hence the lice here mentioned were nippers which would greatly annoy and plague the Egyptians or anyone else whom they might bite. It was the order to Moses to direct Aaron to stretch out his rod and smite the dust of the land, thereby showing that it is divine power and authority conferred upon Christ and by him put upon the remnant of earth to cause the. coming of these antitypical nippers upon the world, which forms Satan’s organization. The lice symbolically stand for or represent that which results from the message of truth delivered by Jehovah’s witnesses and which greatly annoys, plagues and nips or bites the unclean organization of Satan, and particularly the official members thereof.
5	The visible part of Satan’s organization, particularly that called ‘‘Christendom”, is an unclean and abominable thing and a good habitation for lice. It hypocritically claims to be on the side of the Lord, whereas it is a part of Satan’s wicked organization. Herod Agrippa the First, who killed James and imprisoned Peter, posed as the representative of God but was the instrument of Satan. It is said that he died of a loathsome or lousy disease. ‘ ‘ And upon a set day, Herod, arrayed in royal apparel, sat upon his throne, and made an oration unto them. And the people gave a shout, saying, It is the voice of a god, and not of a man. And immediately the angel of the Lord smote him, because he gave not God the glory: and he was eaten of worms [lice), and gave up the ghost.”— Acts 12:21-23.
8	Aaron used the rod of Moses to smite the ‘‘dust of the earth”. That dust was symbolic of the earthly, human, visible part of Satan’s organization, and particularly ‘ ‘ Christendom ’ ’, because that part is hypocritical in the superlative degree. The antitypical mouthpiece of the Greater Moses, Christ Jesus, and which is God’s remnant on the earth acting by authority conferred upon them by Jesus Christ, bear and give forth his message that smites ‘‘Christendom” and declares it to be not of God nor of Christ, but that it is unclean, filthy, and abominable in the sight of God and is exceedingly lousy with Satan’s agents who are nippers of the flesh and suckers of the lifeblood of the people. These lice bring upon the people great suffering, sorrow and death. The message of truth thus delivered by Jehovah’s witnesses to the visible organization of Satan declaring that organization to be lousy greatly offends ‘‘Christendom's” respectability and plagues and annoys that organization. Thus Jehovah’s witnesses are used by him to bring a plague upon Satan's organization by exposing the duplicity and hypocrisy of the chief visible operators therein.
7	It was in 1921 that The Watchtower, by the Lord's grace, began to call attention to the visible part of Satan’s organization and that it is made up of com
mercial, political and religious elements which exercise a beastly rule over the people, and is exceedingly filthy. From that time forward Jehovah’s witnesses have been continuously and consistently heralding this message before the people and exposing the hypocritical duplicity and lousy state of ‘‘Christendom” in particular and Satan’s organization in general. By completely separating themselves from ‘‘Christendom” and refusing to have any part or anything in common therewith, or to touch the unclean, lousy, crawling thing, the faithful remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses add force to this plaguing message. The third plague came upon the ancient Israelites as well as upon the Egyptians; which means that in order for a professed Christian to be pleasing and acceptable to the Lord such must be separate from the world and clean; hence the cleansing of God’s sanctuary is involved and includes the removing of the ‘‘elective elders” as parasites, and which must take place before God’s organization is entirely clean. ‘‘Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence, touch no unclean thing; go ye out of the midst of her; be ye clean, that bear the vessels of the Lord.” (Isa. 52:11) “Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing; and I will receive you, and will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty.” (2 Cor. 6:17,18) This divinely provided message widely proclaimed throughout “Christendom” has been to that devilish organization like nipping lice, greatly plaguing and annoying particularly the clergy and the principal ones of their flocks, including, of course, the commercial and political chief men.
8	Pharaoh’s agents (Jannes and Jambrcs), the class opposing God, were unable to'produce lice and had to admit to their chief, Pharaoh, “This is the finger of God.” (Ex. 8:19) The modern opposers see themselves as unclean and that those devoted to Jehovah are clean and nothing can be found against them except their devotion to Jehovah. By separating themselves from “Christendom” and devoting themselves entirely to the Lord, the remnant are pictured as the dust of God’s organization, meaning the earthly part thereof and which in God’s due time is cleansed. (Dan. 8:14) Jehovah has mercy upon Zion, that is, the visible members of his organization, and favors them by cleansing them; and his servants take pleasure in the faithful members of his organization. “Thou shalt arise, and have mercy upon Zion: for the time to favour her, yea, the set time, is come. For thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and favour the dust thereof.” (Ps. 102:13,14) This dust of the earth is not lousy, but clean, by the grace of the Lord God. Jehovah declares that the unclean organization of Satan shall die like a louse. “Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and look upon the earth beneath: for the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall wax old like a garment, and they that dwell
March 15, 1934
WATCHTOWER.
85
therein shall die in like manner [Hebrew, like a louse] : but my salvation shall be for ever, and my righteousness shall not be abolished.” (Isa. 51:6) The plague is still upon Satan’s organization, and he and his agents continue to harden their hearts.—Ex. 8:19.
PLAGUE FOUR
• It is noteworthy that the Israelites were, beginning with the fourth plague, spared and that the seven last plagues were only upon the Egyptians. This would indicate a complete separation of Jehovah’s faithful remnant from the world. The fourth plague was that of a great swarm of flies (margin, a mixture of noisome beasts) that came upon the Egyptians. (Ex. 8:21) In order that God’s chosen people might be assured that Jehovah was with them, and that his enemies might know that Jehovah is God and favors those who love and serve him, Jehovah said to Hoses: “And I will sever in that day the land of Goshen, in which my people dwell, that no swarms of flies shall be there; to the end thou mayest know that I am the Lord in the midst of the earth. And I will put a division between my people and thy people; to morrow shall this sign be.” (Ex. 8: 22, 23) Moses then served upon Pharaoh another notice of warning demanding that he should release God’s chosen people and pennit them to go and worship him. “And the Lord did so: and there came a grievous swarm of flies into the house of Pharaoh, and into his servants’ houses, and into all the land of Egypt; the land was corrupted by reason of the swarm of flies.” (Ex. 8:24) “He sent divers sorts of flies among them, which devoured them.”—Ps. 78:45; 105:31.
10	Just what composed the flies that came upon the Egyptians is not certain, since the word “flics” appearing in the Authorized Version is a substituted word, as appears from the text. The word “swarm” in the text is from the Hebrew meaning “to intermingle, to traffic with, to give security as a kind of exchange”. The expression well applies to swarms of flics which mix with one another in great numbers, especially in the cast and near east, and are a great pest to the people. ‘Dead flics [ Hebreiu, zebub] cause the ointment to send forth a vile odor.’ (Ecel. 10:1) The word zebub is derived from the Hebrew root meaning “to flit”. “Baakchnb,” according to the Scriptures, means “lord of the flitting one; the side-stepper; the great transgressor”, that is, Satan himself, and which term would apply to all who willingly act according to Satan’s will. The whole world, or antityp-ieal Egypt, lies under Satan the wicked one. (1 John 5:19, Diag.) The world has been terribly pestered by these flies, that is to say, Satan and his numerous invisible and visible agents, since the coming of the Lord to the temple in 1918.—Rev. 12:12.
11	The Lord Jesus Christ appearing at the temple in 1918 gathered unto himself the faithful and has anointed them and sent them forth with his message of truth to be given as a testimony, and which mes
sage has been and is a great pest to Satan’s organization on earth. That message has declared and continues to declare, particularly unto “Christendom”, the truth of and concerning what constitutes the “higher powers”. Prior thereto, the people, including the followers of Christ, understood and believed that the “higher powers” mentioned in the Scriptures are made up of the visible rulers of this world. The Lord has enlightened his people, and by his grace they now clearly see and declare to the world that “the higher powers” means Jehovah and Christ Jesus and that the world is serving the Devil, and that the big business, political and religious elements, jointly, rule and demand obedience from the people, and these are not of the “higher powers” but are in fact the agents of Satan and the opposers of Jehovah God. IIis witnesses further declare that Jehovah is in no wise responsible for the woes that have come upon the peoples of earth in these last days, but that Satan and his agents arc the ones who have brought these woes and troubles upon the people, and that all mankind holding on to Satan’s organization arc alllicted by the bites, corruption, annoyance and all the schemes and blood-sucking doctrines of the wicked rulers of this world, including Satan himself. Jehovah’s witnesses now declare these truths, and this message exposing Satan and his organization galls and bites and plagues the chief rulers and their allies and supporters. Jehovah’s faithful remnant serve the true “higher powers”, God and Christ Jesus, and refuse to obey any part of Satan’s organization. In obedience to God’s commandments Jehovah’s witnesses go about the country preaching the gospel of his kingdom, which message is of great annoyance to Satan’s crowd and which message bites them and plagues them like numerous flies. The rulers in “Christendom” claim to be representatives of God, and if they were honest they would welcome Jehovah’s witnesses; but, instead, they side-step the questions that arc presented to them by the Lord’s witnesses and declare Jehovah’s witnesses to be peddlers and hawkers and not preachers of the gospel. The rulers of this wicked world claim that they have no objection to anyone’s worshiping God according to their own ideas, but denounce Jehovah’s witnesses and evade the real issue by declaring them to be engaged in a commercial enterprise instead of teaching the gospel. The truth plagues them so thoroughly that they must make some apparent plausible objection thereto.
12	The flies so greatly annoyed the Egyptians that “Pharaoh called for Moses and for Aaron, and said, Go ye, sacrifice to your God in the land”. (Ex. 8: 25) Otherwise stated, Pharaoh was willing that the Israelites might do some worshiping, but they must do it according to the Egyptians’ ideas and in the presence of the Egyptians. Now’ the antitypical Egyptians, the representatives of Satan on earth, say to Jehovah’s witnesses, in substance, ‘We have no objection to your worshiping your God, but do it in the church build
83
^©WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
ings (“cur land”), as others do, and refrain from interfering with our commercial business or annoying our people by going from house to house. ’ Moses told Pharaoh that for Israelites to sacrifice before the Egyptians would be an abomination to God. Likewise Jehovah’s remnant today reply to the modern Egyptians: “We must obey God and not man; we will follow his commandments and obey the higher powers.” The Watchtower, in June 1929, set forth for the first time the truth of and concerning the “higher powers”, and then the flies began to bite Satan’s crowd because the truth exposed that wicked organization. As Jehovah separated the land of Goshen, where the Israelites dwelt, from the Egyptians, so God cleans his people and separates them from Satan’s organization, showing them the truth as to who constitute the higher powers. Jehovah declared: “And I will sever in that day the land of Goshen, in which my people dwell, that no swarms of flics shall be there; to the end thou inayest know that I am the Lord in the midst of the earth.” (Ex. 8:22) When that plague came upon the Egyptians there were no swarms of flies on the Israelites, God’s people. Even so now Jehovah cleanses his own people, whom he uses as his witnesses, and there arc no flies on them. They are in the world, but not of it. They continue to declare the message of truth, and, as Pharaoh and his house hardened their hearts, even so now those of “Christendom” continue to harden their hearts and more testimony is required.
PLAGUE FIVE
13	Pharaoh continued his obstinacy and hypocrisy, and Moses warned him that the hand of Jehovah would be upon all of his cattle in Egypt. “Behold, the hand of the Lord is upon thy cattle which is in the field, upon the horses, upon the asses, upon the camels, upon the oxen, and upon the sheep: there shall be a very grievous murrain.” (Ex. 9:3) The Lord specifically declared that this plague should not affect the Israelites, and then God appointed a set time for the coming of this plague upon Egypt saying: “To morrow the Lord shall do this thing in the land. And the Lord did that thing on the morrow, and all the cattle of Egypt died; but of the cattle of the children of Israel died not one. And Pharaoh sent, and, behold, there was not one of the cattle of the Israelites dead. And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, and he did not let the people go. ” (Ex. 9:4-7) Before any of the plagues began to come upon the Egyptians Moses declared before Pharaoh that Jehovah would fall upon the Israelites with pestilence if they failed to sacrifice unto the Lord. (Ex. 5:3) Because of the faithfulness of Moses and Aaron in giving the testimony God spared the Israelites from the pestilence. ‘Obedience is better than sacrifice.’ The Lord spared the Israelites from these pestilences that now were coming upon the Egyptians.
M The plague of grievous murrain was upon all
the beasts of the Egyptians. The beasts of burden of the Egyptians, to wit, horses, asses, camels, oxen and that sort, represented the live wealth of the Egyptians in carrying on its commerce and war and all such live stock and equipment so used by the Egyptians in exercising their selfish purpose and opposition against Jehovah God’s kingdom. The plague of “murrain” or pestilence on the beasts of Egypt was a further notice and warning to the Egyptians and which foreshadowed a message of truth to be declared by the power and authority of Jehovah God by and through the Greater Moses, Christ Jesus, and in which the faithful remnant are used; and which message is to the effect, to wit, that this world’s ‘beasts of burden’, including all military and economic organizations, human inventions, and all kinds of national recovery schemes, and such things as “holy year” schemes, are all fraudulent and are not from Jehovah God, and are not due to the fact that Christ is ‘preparing the way of Jehovah’; but that all such things arc of the Devil and will completely fail to bring relief to the people, and that all must die. This message Jehovah’s witnesses began to declare emphatically after the coming of the Lord to the temple, and which message is set forth in Vindication, Book Two, page 165 and pages following. The Word of God declares that a great plague shall come upon Satan’s organization, and all of his instruments, represented by his cattle, shall die. This message of truth that their beasts of burden, their implements and other means of carrying on their commercial and fraudulent schemes must perish, is a great plague to “Christendom” and greatly annoys Satan and his visible organization.
15 The Lord’s Word then declares that ‘not one of the cattle of the Israelites died’, which foreshadowed that the means of activities, or “the beasts of burden”, employed by the faithful remnant are wholly devoted to the Lord, and, being thus devoted to the Lord, he, of course, protects them. They separate themselves from the world and from their sacrifice unto God. (See Ex. 10:26; Zech. 14:20; Preparation, page 335.) That message declaring that vengeance shall come upon Satan’s organization because of his opposition to God is now being delivered by Jehovah’s witnesses and continues to plague the enemy organization.
PLAGUE SIX
18 The “botch of Egypt” was the sixth plague. The furnaces, limekilns and brickkilns of Egypt constituted a part of its economic or commercial industry, and hence pictured the things now pertaining to the commercial industry of the visible part of the world, which is Satan’s organization. (Isa. 33:12) Jehovah then directed Moses and Aaron to take these ashes from the furnaces and for Moses to sprinkle the same before Pharaoh. “And the Lord said unto Moses and unto Aaron, Take to you handfuls of ashes of the furnace, and let Moses sprinkle it toward the heaven in the sight of Pharaoh. And it shall become small
March 15, 1934
<Tile WATCHTOWER
87
dust in all the land of Egypt, and shall be a boil breaking forth with blains upon man, and upon beast, throughout all the land of Egypt.” (Ex. 9: 8, 9) This resulted in breaking forth of boils with blains. According to the llotherham rendering of the text blains are ‘burning sores, breaking out in pustules’. Such plague came upon man and beast throughout Egypt.
17 The sixth plague pictured a further message of Christ and his faithful remnant, his representatives on earth, which message is delivered by the power and authority of Jehovah God. The clue to the significance of this plague appears to be given in Revelation 16:2,11. This shows that the plague would affect all those who are members of Satan’s organization on earth as the leaders thereof, as well as those who are supporters of that wicked organization.—For explanation see Light, Book Two, page 20 and pages following.
1S Pharaoh concluded that with all of his equipment and power to rule he could defy Jehovah and get away with it. Even so Satan and his earthly agents have concluded that they can weld together and unite the nations and the peoples of earth into a confederacy or league and thus defy Jehovah God by setting up their own organization and thus rule and control the world continuously. (Isa. 8:9-13) But all such schemes of the worldly organization must fail. Jehovah causes his faithful remnant on earth, his witnesses, to proclaim before the Devil and all of his agents in tho world, which constitute modem Egypt, that the League of Nations, the World Court, the peace pacts, disarmament conferences, “holy year” schemes, prosperity schemes, and ail such like schemes, arc not of God, but of the Devil, and that the instigators and supporters thereof are unclean and an abomination in the sight of God, just as Uzziah was unclean and became leprous for his wrongful acts before Jehovah. (2 Chron. 26:13-23) The declaration of this message of truth beginning with the ‘pouring out of the first vial’, as described in Revelation, continues upon the world; and such declaration of truth throughout the realms of ‘‘Christendom” by means of radio, books, magazines, and word-of-mouth testimony has been and is a great plague to the modern Egyptians. The ancient Egyptians blasphemed God’s name because of the suffering from their pains and sores, and likewise the modern Egyptians, Satan’s earthly agents, do blaspheme and curse.
10 This plague of putrid boils afflicted the magicians as well as the others of Egypt. ‘‘And the magicians could not stand before Moses because of the boils; for the boil was upon the magicians, and upon all the Egyptians.” (Ex. 9:11) Those magicians could not stand before Hoses to resist him; likewise the modern magicians, “Jannes and Jambres,” because of their corruption attempt to resist the message of God through Christ, but they cannot successfully do so, and their end is in sight and their fall shall appear before all men who survive. (2 Tim. 3:8) The clergy
and the “man of sin” and all like modern “wonder”-workers, and “holy year” workers of modern Egypt, now itch and scratch and are tormented, and thus mark themselves badly, and they continue to howl and express their agony, opposition to and indignation against the message of truth that is plainly placed before them, and thus are guilty of the ‘transgression that maketh desolate’. (Dan. 8:13) Jehovah’s witnesses are divinely permitted to proclaim the message of truth which thus plagues the opposers of the Most High. Instead of these opposers’ giving heed thereto, they harden their hearts against the Lord, and further plagues come upon them.
PLAGUE SEVEN
20 The seventh plague was a rain of grievous hail such as never before was known. “Seven” is a symbol of divine completeness, while hail symbolizes hard and unbreakable truths that cut, bruise and kill. All the plagues, antitypieally, have to do with the proclamation of God’s message of truth, and this proclamation of truth or work of Jehovah’s witnesses will not be completed on earth until they have proclaimed all of Jehovah’s warning messages of vengeance and vindication; and this they must do before Armageddon. Jehovah might well have completely smitten Egypt when Pharaoh first refused to let the Israelites go, but it pleased God to cause further testimony to be delivered to Pharaoh and his royal house. Even so Jehovah might well have smitten Satan’s earthly organization when first Christ came to the temple, but it pleased him to permit Satan to go on and to remain for a time, that further witness might be given, and that Jehovah's power might be made more manifest, and that none of the world should have any reason to say that they were taken unawares by the judgments of Jehovah. Six plagues had now been upon Egypt, and this had served only to harden the heart of Pharaoh. The purpose of the plagues upon Egypt was to place plainly before the Egyptians the name and supremacy of Jehovah. Instead of God’s completely destroying Pharaoh and his organization earlier, he said: “For at this time I send all my plagues [margin, all my remaining plagues] against thy heart, and against thy servants, -and against thy people; in order that thou ma jest know that there is none like me on all the earth. For even now I might have stretched out my hand, and I might have smitten thee and thy people with the pestilence; and thou wouldst have been cut off from the earth; but for this cause have I allowed thee to remain, in order to show thee my power; and in order that they may proclaim my name throughout all the earth.” (Ex. 9:14-16, Lecser) The remaining plagues that were to come upon Egypt and which did come were further notice and warning to Satan’s earthly organization. This notice of warning in modern times must be given and declared by Jehovah’s witnesses as members of his temple organization.
88
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
2t A great storm or downpour of hail accompanied by the fire of lightning smote the crops and men and beasts of Egypt. Jehovah had warned Pharaoh, but that warning was unheeded; and now he sent forth upon the Egyptians the seventh plague. “And Moses stretched forth his rod toward heaven; and the Lord sent thunder and hail, and the fire ran along upon the ground: and the Lord rained hail upon the land of Egypt. So there was hail, and fire mingled with the hail, very grievous, such as there was none like it in all the land of Egypt since it became a nation. And the hail smote throughout all the land of Egypt all that was in the field, both man and beast; and the hail smole every herb of the field, and brake every tree of the field.” (Ex. 9: 23-25) That great plague of hail came upon Egypt in the springtime, and which is shown by the words of verse thirty-one: “And the flax and the barley was smitten; for the barley was in the car, and the flax was boiled.” “He smote their vines also, and their fig trees; and brake the trees of their coasts.” (Ps. 105:33) Antitypically this plague began to come upon Satan’s earthly organization in August 1928. It was then that Jehovah caused his people on earth, to whom had been committed the testimony of Jesus Christ, to declare his message against Satan and his organization. The proclamation of a specific message was there begun, and carried on through the earth, which message is designated “Declaration against Satan and for Jehovah”. This was first publicly declared at an assembly of Jehovah’s people in Detroit, Michigan. It was then that the lightnings flashed from the temple and the remnant had their first clear vision of the great issue joined between Satan and Jehovah. (Sec The Watchtower, September 15, 1928; Light, Book One, page 221.) Since that time in particular God has continued to rain down upon “Christendom” great chunks of strong and weighty truths, unparalleled in the history of the world, and this because the time has arrived for the ‘increase of knowledge’, and for the announcement to be made that the end of Satan’s organization is at hand. (Dan. 12:4; Rev. 11:17) It is the day of Jehovah God, the day of his vengeance and vindication, and his message of vengeance therefore must be declared. That great hailstorm has continued to spoil “Christendom’s” self-righteousness (pictured by the linen flax in Egypt, which was destroyed) and “Christendom’s” spiritual fodder (first fruits, pictured by the barley destroyed in Egypt) and her self-conscious sweetness (pictured by the fig trees and their fruit in Egypt, which were spoiled). Satan’s lies, which had found refuge in “Christendom”, there began to be swept away, and are being swept away, by thfi flood of truth. (Isa. 28:2-17) Therefore Jehovah is causing his witnesses on earth to bear his message of truth throughout the world to modern Egypt, calling attention to his own supreme power and that this power will be completely made manifest at Armageddon.
22 In Pharaoh’s realm in Egypt there were some who heard and gave heed to the warning given by Moses concerning the approaching storm; while others failed and refused to give any heed thereto, and they suffered as a result thereof. “He that feared the word of the Lord, among the servants of Pharaoh, made his servants and his cattle flee into the houses; and he that regarded not the word of the Lord left his servantsand his cattle in the field.” (Ex. 9: 20, 21) Even so now some persons who are of the world are hearing the word of warning given by authority and power of the Lord in which his witnesses are used, and some of these seek refuge, while others disregard and scoff at the message. The great storm comes upon all of Egypt except Goshen; and likewise this great storm comes upon all the world except God’s chosen people. “Only in the land of Goshen, where the children of Israel were, was there no hail.” (Ex. 9:26) Among God’s faithful people now on earth the truth, accompanied by flashes of lightning, brings great joy to the hearts of all such; hence there is no plague or hail for any of them. They dwell in the secret and protected place of the Most High and rejoice in the blessings that the Lord gives to them, even as he had long ago promised: “And my people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting places, when it shall hail, coming down on the forest; and the city shall be low in a low place.” (Isa. 32:18,19) But the poor old “Jannes and Jam-bres” crowd are having a very grievous time. The hail and lightning blinds, bruises, plagues and torments them, and they continue to harden their hearts. More testimony is required.
PLAGUE EIGHT
” Had Pharaoh yielded to the demands of the Lord through Moses and let the Israelites go and worship Jehovah, such would have been a public acknowledgment by Pharaoh that he was wrong; and hence his pride would not permit him to do so. So now, if Satan’s earthly agents should give heed to the message of Jehovah delivered through his witnesses, such would be an acknowledgment that these faithful witnesses are telling the truth; and that would be a public admission on the part of Satan and his earthly agents in “Christendom” that the Devil and all of his organization are entirely wrong. It seems, however, that some persons in the Devil’s organization would be glad to give up the fight, because the truth is too much of a plague to them. Satan, however, has “Christendom” tightly tied, and his organization and all the members thereof continue to harden themselves against God’s purposes.
21 The eighth plague was that of a great swarm of locusts; but, as heretofore stated, the antitypical fulfilments of the plagues do not seem to follow in time order of the other plagues mentioned. The key to the understanding of this plague appears in Revelation 9:1-12, concerning the locusts that came upon the
March 15, 1934
Sfc WATCHTOWER.
89
world, an explanation of which is found in Light, Book One, pages 136-155. The locusts’ coming from the east, that being the same direction from which come the “kings of the east”, gives a clue to what constitutes this antitypical plague. “And Moses stretched forth his rod over the land of Egypt, and the Lord brougiit an east wind upon the land all that day, and all that night; and when it was mornin g, the east wind brought the locusts. And the locusts went up over all the land of Egypt, and rested in all the coasts of Egypt: very grievous were they, before them there were no such locusts as they, neither after them shall be such.” (Ex. 10:13,14) “He spake, and the locusts came, and caterpillar's, and that without number, and did eat up all the herbs in their land, and devoured the fruit of their ground. ’ ’—Ps. 105: 34, 35.
23 In the past few years the constant barrage of testimony of truth at and against “Christendom” has brought a great plague upon Satan’s visible organization. Among these shots thus fired may be counted the message contained in the booklets The Crisis, Escape to the Kingdom, and Dividing the People. The first organized mass attack of these locusts was made upon the community of Bergenfield, N. J., May 22, 1932, and the work of these witnesses of Jehovah has increased and prospered from that time forward, and this by the grace of the Lord. Even though there is some indication that some of these agents of Satan seemingly would be glad to yield (Ex. 10: 7-11), whatsoever repentance is shown by such servants of Satan, that repentance is not sincere from the heart, but entirely hypocritical. Jehovah’s witnesses must continue to serve notice and warning according to his commandment, that all may’ know that Jehovah is God, and particularly that those of good will may have an opportunity to take their stand on Jehovah’s side. As the plague of locusts came upon Egypt, so not only has the antitypical plague begun, but this plague continues upon modern Egypt throughout all the land of “Christendom”.
PLAGUE NINE
20 The ninth plague upon Egy’pt was thick darkness over all the land of Egypt except that part of the land occupied by the Israelites, and there the Israelites had light in their dwelling-place. Usually thick darkness strikes terror into the hearts of those who have no faith in God; and since Pharaoh possessed a hard heart and had no faith, he was frightened and desired to be quit of the Israelites when this plague came upon him and his people: “And the Lord said unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand toward heaven, that there may be darkness over the land of Egypt, even darkness which may be felt. And Moses stretched forth his hand toward heaven; and there was a thick darkness in all the land of Egypt three days: they’ saw not one another, neither rose any from his place for three days; but all the children of Israel had light
in their dwellings. And Pharaoh called unto Moses, and said, Go ye, serve the Lord; only let your flocks and your herds be stayed; let your little ones also go with you.”—Ex. 10:21-24.
27 It is noted that in calling forth some of the preceding plagues Moses stretched forth his rod over the land of Egypt, but in calling forth the ninth plague he “stretched forth his hand toward heaven”; which seems to symbolically say that this message of notice and warning given by divine command pertains to heavenly things, which became totally dark to those making up the visible part of Satan’s organization, and particularly those who form the religious or so-called “spiritual” elements of Satan’s organization. In 1919 the League of Nations was set up as a substitute for the kingdom of God, and which league the clergy, forming the spiritual part of Satan’s visible organization, hailed as ‘the political expression of God's kingdom on earth’. Thus they disclosed the fact that they had no proper conception of God’s kingdom. In 192G Jehovah’s witnesses made public a declaration at the earthly scat of the beastly power of Satan, which declaration set forth that the League of Nations is a child of the Devil and wholly in opposition to God’s kingdom. That declaration, which began at London, England, was a specific notice of warning and was addressed To the Rulers of the World and emphasized the fact that Satan had set up, by his earthly representatives, an abominable thing, to wit, the League of Nations, which makes desolate because it is a hypocritical substitute for the Kingdom. Instead of giving heed to that warning the rulers of “Christendom” continued to scoff at the message, to harden their hearts, and to oppose God. ‘The transgression that maketh desolate’ dates from that time because they then and there had specific notice and warning that the League of Nations is in opposition to the kingdom and is a great abomination to God; and from that time forward thick darkness has settled down upon “Christendom”, (See Light, Book One, page 137.) Although given full opportunity to know the truth and to identify themselves with God’s kingdom, “Christendom’s” leaders have refused to give heed: “They know not, neither will they understand: they walk on in darkness: all the foundations of the earth are out of course.” (Ps. 82:5) That particularly marked the time spoken of by the prophet Isaiah, to wit: “For, behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people : but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee.” (Isa. 60:2) From that time onward all the opposers of the purposes of Jehovah God, and particularly the “man of sin” class (Jannes and Jambres), had their “understanding darkened” because of their hardness of heart. (Eph. 4:18) They received notice and warning that they were opposing God and his kingdom, and they refused to hear the message of warning, and to such the proph-
90
£FKe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn; N. Y.
ecy of God applies, “Let their table become a snare before them: and that which should have been for their welfare, let it become a trap. Let their eyes be darkened, that they see not; and make their loins continually to shake.”—Ps. 69:22,23.
28 Jehovah says: “I form the light, and create darkness.” (Isa. 45:7) “Darkness shall pursue his enemies,” that is, those who oppose Jehovah’s purposes. (Nah. 1:8) It was Jehovah who caused the darkness in the land of Egypt; and now darkness by his command is upon Satan’s world. (Ezek. 32:8; Prov. 4:19; Isa. 8:22; Zeph. 1:15) “And the fifth angel poured out his vial upon the seat of the beast; and his kingdom was full of darkness; and they gnawed their tongues for pain, and blasphemed the God of heaven because of their pains and their sores, and repented not of their deeds.” (Rev. 16:10,11) There is no part of ‘ ‘ Christendom ’ ’ today that has any light of and concerning God’s kingdom. The effort of the Roman Catholic hierarchy to make 1933 a “holy year” has brought no light whatsoever to “Christendom”, but even greater darkness. All light Jehovah has withdrawn from the world. The hypocritical howl of the clergy in their present movement “back to the church” brings no light of relief, but only darkness and disappointment. More keenly now than ever the political and commercial elements of the world, which have trusted and hoped that they would receive favor by the ministration of the clergy, have come to realize that God is not blessing the clergy or any of their schemes. Even thousands of clergymen are now out of a job and have no opportunity of haranguing the people, by which they have heretofore been able to feed themselves. The three days of darkness coming upon Egypt symbolically means that the present-day darkness upon the world will continue and persist until Armageddon, when the whole of the Devil system will go down into the abyss of everlasting darkness.
22	Jehovah’s faithful witnesses are now in the temple, the secret place of the Most High, where they enjoy everlasting light from the glory of the Lord and from his King. To the rulers and their supporters of this wicked world under Satan the temple of God is a place of darkness, because none of them can see therein. In the temple Christ Jesus enlightens his faithful remnant and sends them forth as witnesses to proclaim from the housetops the message of God’s vengeance and of his kingdom. (Matt. 10:26,27) After the faithful remnant had received the wages, the “new name”, they resigned from ail connection with “Christendom”. (Zech. 11:9-17) The rulers have been served with notice of warning, and now the remnant, the witnesses of Jehovah, will do what they can for the people of good will that they may hear the message and take their stand. While darkness covers the world, Jehovah continues to turn his light upon his faithful ones, giving them a more wonderful vision of his Word than they ever expected to have
while on the earth. This suggests that the battle is near.
30	Pharaoh expressed a willingness to let the Israelites go upon condition that they would leave behind them in Egypt all things of a commercial value. Likewise the world rulers now make some concessions to those who serve Jehovah God, but this upon condition-; that would make Jehovah’s witnesses go empty-handed before the Lord and be deprived of all means of offering the “continual sacrifice” before Jehovah. God's faithful witnesses will not comply with any such condition, but they will obey Jehovah and not man or devil; and their attitude angers Satan's representatives and calls down upon the heads of Jehovah’s witnesses the expression of wickedness and threats of destruction. This was foreshadowed by the anger expressed by Pharaoh. “And Pharaoh said unto him, Get thee from me, take heed to thyself, see my face no more [unless I send for you]: for in that day thou seest my face thou shalt die.”
31	Murder was in the heart of Pharaoh, and he threatened to kill Moses if he again appeared before him. With calmness and dignity Moses replied to the wicked Pharaoh: “Thou hast spoken well, I will see thy face again no more.” (Ex. 10:28,29) That was a final warning from Jehovah delivered to Pharaoh by Moses. Pharaoh threw down the challenge, and Moses, as the Lord’s representative, accepted it. The way was now clear for the final plague. It must have been a thrilling moment to Moses. Likewise it must be a time of great joy to the Greater Moses now to see that the hour has arrived when he shall vindicate his Father’s name.
PLAGUE TEN
32	From the Scriptures it appears that while Moses was still in the presence of Pharaoh God spoke to him, and that Moses gave a final warning to Pharaoh before he departed. “And the Lord said unto Moses, Yet will I bring one plague more upon Pharaoh, and upon Egypt; afterwards he will let you go hence: when he shall let you go, he shall surely thrust you out hence altogether.” (Ex. 11:1) Moses withdrew from Pharaoh never again to communicate with or see Pharaoh except upon the request of the latter; which request was later made. Fear had seized upon Pharaoh and his official household, and they were anxious to be quit of God’s messengers. (Ex. 12: 31, 33) It now appears that the nine plagues have been antitypieally performed by Jehovah’s witnesses at the command of the Lord and under his direction, which messages of truth are still continuing, and persist, and are great plagues upon the rulers of the world and their henchmen. These messages of notice and warning constitute a great plague like a nightmare to the official element of Satan’s visible organization, which would be glad to be rid of the ‘pestiferous’ witnesses of the Lord. This is made manifest by the constant howls that go up from the Roman Catholic hierarchy
MARCH 15, 1934
Me WATCHTOWER-
91
mid other clergymen, big radio preachers, and others of like stripe, who demand that the messengers be forbidden an opportunity to use the facilities of the world for proclaiming the truth. Jehovah’s witnesses arc now thoroughly hated by all such opposers, and they would find some apparently legal excuse to destroy Jehovah’s witnesses. This was particularly made manifest by the recent actions of the Roman Catholic hierarchy and their public press, and further at Plain-Held, N. J., when their “strong-arm squad’’ appeared on the scene armed to the teeth, when there was no danger to anyone except to those who could be hurt by the plain proclamation of the truth. That strongarm squad was doubtless there at the instance of cruel Catholic priests, and to this day members of that strong-arm squad cannot understand why they did not commit murder. There is still some witness work to be done amongst the people, and preparation is now being made for the final plague to be visited upon Satan’s organization at Armageddon.
33	Jehovah had previously told Moses that, when his due time came for the deliverance of the Israelites, “ye shall not go empty,’’ but that the Israelites should borrow of the Egyptians: “and ye shall spoil the Egyptians.” (Ex. 3:21,22) Immediately following the ninth plague Jehovah spoke to Moses and said: “Speak now in the ears of the people, and let every man borrow of his neighbour, and every woman of her neighbour, jewels of silver, and jewels of gold. And the Lord gave the people favour in the sight of the Egyptians. Moreover, the man Moses was very great in the land of Egypt, in the sight of Pharaoh’s servants, and in the sight of the people.” (Ex. 11:2,3) The borrowing of articles from the Egyptians was not merely for self-adornment, but for use in the service of the Lord by the Israelites. This seems to mean that it is right and proper now for Jehovah’s witnesses to apply for and use any and all of the facilities that the worldly rulers now control and to use them in order for the furthering of the witness work for the kingdom. That means that they are to use the enemy’s own means or instruments against them, such as radio stations, the facilities of the courts, the making of petitions and protests, the lawmaking bodies, which right is guaranteed by the fundamental law of their own land, and by the use of any and all other means to bring to the attention of the people the message of Jehovah’s kingdom. By thus doing they are not asking permission of Satan’s organization to do something, but they are serving notice upon Satan’s organization and demanding that this worldly organization shall cease interfering with the execution of God’s purposes. The borrowing from the Egyptians would also include receiving money by Jehovah’s witnesses in the way of contribution for the literature, and then using that money in the preparation and publication of more literature. Thus the Lord’s people arc diverting some things from the Devil’s crowd into
the Lord’s work and service. This is further and conclusive proof that Jehovah’s witnesses are not engaged in a commercial enterprise, such as hawking and peddling and bookselling, regardless of what the worldly tribunals may decide or determine, and certainly regardless of what the clergy and their crowd may say.
34	Preparation must then be made, and was made, for the final plague, and at the same time for the protection of God’s people. Pharaoh and his official family had spurned and disregarded the notice of warning of the nine preceding plagues, and hence it would have been useless to give Egypt’s rulers any instruction concerning the passover protection; and none was given to them. It appears, however, that. Moses plainly warned Pharaoh that all of his firstborn should die, but not even a dog’s tongue would move against any of the Israelites, and that this warning was given to Pharaoh before Moses withdrew from his presence.—Ex. 11: 5-10.
35	Jehovah told Moses that the death of the firstborn would take place at midnight, antitypically meaning at a time of the world’s blackness or darkest period. The blackness of darkness is now upon the world, and must continue until Armageddon. At the command of Jehovah Moses prepared the Israelites by instructing them that each household should on tho tenth day of Nisan take a lamb without spot or blemish and keep it up until the fourteenth day of that month, on which day, in the evening, the lamb should be killed and its blood sprinkled over the entrance into each house and all should go into the house and remain there during the night, roast the lamb whole without breaking a bone, and eat it with unleavened bread and bitter herbs, and while thus doing they should be fully equipped for travel, God saying to them: “It is Jehovah’s passover.” “For I will pass through the land of Egypt this night, and will smite all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both man and beast; and against all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgment: I am the Lord. And the blood shall be to you for a token upon the houses where ye arc: and when I see the blood, I will pass over you, and the plague shall not be upon you to destroy you, when I smite the land of Egypt.” (Ex. 12:12,13) “And smote all the firstborn in Egypt, the chief of their strength in the tabernacles of Ilam.” (Ps. 78: 51) “He smote also all the firstborn in their land, the chief of all their strength.” (Ps. 105:36) “And it came to pass, that at midnight the Lord smote all the firstborn in the laud of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharaoh that sat on his throne, unto the firstborn of the captive that was in the dungeon; and all the firstborn of cattle.”—Ex. 12:29.
FIRSTBORN
3S	The final plague upon the world will be at Armageddon. Who constitutes the antitypical firstborn? The firstborn son “is the beginning of his strength"; so declared God’s law. (Deut. 21:17) The antitypical
92
ffKe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Pharaoh, who is the Devil, has children, and these children include the "tares” and the clergy. (Matt. 13:38; John 8:44) Other scriptures identify more of these children. (Acts 13: 8,10; 1 John 3: 8,10,12) The firstborn of Egypt would therefore picture all of Satan’s children, that is, those of his earthly organization who are "the beginning of his strength", namely, the chief of their strength, to wit, the leaders and chief ones in the religious, commercial and political branches of his visible organization. The firstborn of every portion of Satan’s organization was destroyed; which antitypically means and includes the “man of sin”, “the son of perdition,” the “strong-arm squad" and those who put forth their strength to carry forward Satan’s schemes, and also the counterfeit of God’s kingdom, namely, the League of Nations. In this day Satan makes war upon the remnant of Jehovah, the "church of the firstborn”, and would destroy them unless prevented from so doing by the power of the Lord. Tiic only protection that these faithful witnesses have is from the Lord, and this comes by reason of their obedience to Jehovah’s commandment given to them by the Greater Moses, Christ Jesus.— Acts 3:23.
31 The slaying of the lamb, and the eating thereof, preceded the slaughter of Egypt’s firstborn. Even so the death of "Christ, our passover”, and the partaking of his merit by the spirit-begotten ones, precede the slaughter of Satan’s firstborn at Armageddon. As Israel’s firstborn were passed over and preserved on that fateful night, even so the faithful remnant, who are of Jehovah’s firstborn, will be passed over and preserved at the battle of the great day of God Almighty. They will survive Armageddon by virtue of Jehovah’s protection. The “great multitude” will not survive Armageddon, because they are not of the "church of the firstborn” and are not shown in this type or picture. The Scriptures show that God’s promise is to preserve a remnant, and not a vast multitude. (Joel 2:32; Isa. 10:21-23) The “great multitude” are ‘appointed to die’. The Scriptures also show that the Jonadab class will survive Armageddon, but not for the same reason that the Lord will preserve the remnant of the firstborn.
OTHER TYPES FULFILLED
38 The typical or paschal lamb was taken into the house on the tenth day of Nisan, and this antitypically means in the present day of Jehovah since 1918 the receiving of the ‘Lamb as it were slain’ as Jehovah’s King enthroned in office, hence the receiving of the kingdom and undertaking the full responsibility of the interest of the kingdom. On the tenth day of Nisan, A.D. 33, Jesus rode into Jerusalem and offered himself as King to the Jews; and antitypically this shows that the receiving of the Lamb into the house since A.D. 1918 signifies far more than accepting Jesus as the ransom sacrifice or ‘the lamb that taketh away the sin of the world’. In this day of Jehovah
the eating of the lamb would include not only partaking of his merit, which cleanses from sin, but also the having a share in the doing of the work which Jesus Christ was sent to earth to do, to wit, to bear testimony to the name of Jehovah to the vindication of his holy name, hence also entering into the joy of the Lord, which is now the strength of the remnant. Furthermore it means that there must be no uncleanness in God’s organization or among his people resulting from coming in contact with or compromising with the Devil’s organization. There must be no “leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy”, meaning the failure or refusal to confess the Lord before men. (Ex. 12:8,10,15-17; Luke 12:1; 2 Cor. 6:16-18) Jehovah's witnesses must now be entirely separate from Satan’s organization.
30	The Israelites were required to be in haste, with their loins girded, feet shod, and staff in hand, which antitypically means that Jehovah’s witnesses are not of this world nor subject to Satan’s organization and its demands, but are subject to the “higher powers”; that they are on the trek and about to leave the antitypical Egypt, seeing that the wicked organization will shortly be destroyed. (Ex. 12:11) The Israelites must abide in the house, under the blood, until morning; which antitypically means that Jehovah’s remnant are now hidden and are kept “in the secret place of the Most High”, under the protection of Jehovah and his Vindicator, and are thus protected “until the indignation be overpast”, and have there entered, by the Lord’s grace, and have ‘shut the door behind them’.—Ex. 12:22; Ps. 91:1; Isa. 26:20,21.
80	The blood of the paschal lamb was publicly sprinkled on the doorposts and lintels of the houses of the Israelites, and that antitypically not only means a public confession of the blood of Christ Jesus as Jehovah’s provided redemptive price for mankind, but also signifies to the remnant that all of that class are Judeans, that is, praisers of Jehovah, and arc subject to the orders of Jehovah’s Vindicator and great High Priest, Christ Jesus, the Prophet greater than Moses; and further that the day of judgment or vengeance of God is here, which vengeance shortly will be expressed and exercised in the destruction of Satan’s “firstborn” at Armageddon. Therefore the blood was both a public declaration and a testimony of the approaching destruction upon Jehovah’s enemies. This truth Jehovah’s witnesses, who are his firstborn and who are yet on earth, must declare, because it is an expression of his vengeance. It is true that the blood signifies that those under it say, “I accept Christ Jesus’ blood as my redemptive price”; but to the remnant it means much more. That blood on the doorposts being the blood of the victim which validates the new testament or new covenant, it signifies that the firstborn of the remnant have entered into that new covenant, the primary purpose of which is to bring forth or produce a people for Jehovah’s name and which will have a part in the vindication of that
Mabch 15, 1954
WATCHTOWER.
93
holy name. Upon the remnant of Jehovah’s witnesses the Most High has bestowed the “new name’’, thus showing them to be a “people for his name”. The blood on the door entrances would therefore picture that the new covenant has been inaugurated toward the remnant and hence they must be faithful to the new name which Jehovah has given them, and hence must continue to faithfully bear testimony to his name.
WHO MAY CELEBRATE THE FEAST
41	It is not for any man or organization of men to determine what individuals may or may not publicly celebrate the Lord’s supper. It is proper, however, to here call attention to the significance of the things pertaining thereto and then let each one assume the responsibility for his actions. Without a doubt many partake of the Memorial emblems without any conception of what they mean. We are now in the “day of Jehovah”, when the plagues are being antitypically fulfilled upon the world. The celebration of the Memorial now means much more than it did prior to the coming of the Lord to the temple in 1918. Those who now properly partake of or celebrate the Lord’s supper as a memorial to the name of Jehovah must have an active personal part in the performance of the ten autitypical plagues upon antitypical Egypt, that is, Satan’s organization. By that is meant that each one must participate in proclaiming the message of God in connection with these plagues. The plagues are now in operation, advancing to the great climax of destruction of Satan’s firstborn at Armageddon. To partake worthily of the Memorial one must have a part in declaring these truths as Christ has commanded. It was Moses and Aaron who declared God’s word to the Egyptians, which resulted in the plagues. Moses was a type of Christ Jesus, and Aaron, associated with him as his spokesman, represented those of the temple class, the remnant, now on earth, declaring the message of God’s vengeance and bearing testimony of his kingdom.
"Jehovah’s witnesses at the temple are instructed by the Lord Jesus and then sent forth to declare the message of truth pertaining to the antitypical plagues. It follows, then, that those who worthily partake of the Memorial must be in Christ, of the capital organization of Jehovah, and hence in the temple, and must be wholly devoted to God, and engaged in proclaiming the mighty name and works of the Most High, for the reason, as it is written, “in his temple doth every one speak of his glory.” Others may engage in proclaiming the message of the kingdom of God, but it is those who partake of the death of Christ Jesus who are the ones that ultimately live with him. Those who suffer the reproaches that reproached him by reason of being Jehovah’s faithful witness, even unto the end, are the ones that will ultimately reign with him. (2 Tim. 2:11,12) Jehovah gave to Jesus the privilege and honor of being his vindicator at the cost of his human life. All who are with him in
that vindication must likewise die sacrificially, as Jesus did, faithful unto the end. All of such capital organization are “one bread and one body”, and the breaking of the bread and the drinking of the cup show forth that all who do so properly are one with Christ Jesus, that is to say, in unity with him as members of his body and therefore in the temple. (1 Cor. 10:16,17) Such, therefore, properly partake of the emblems of the Memorial.
" The question comes back to the primary purpose of Jehovah, which is the vindication of his own holy name. That is why God sent Moses to Egypt; and for that same reason he sends Jesus to the world. All things else are incidental to the vindication of Jehovah's name. The “day of Jehovah”, beginning in 1914, marks the time when Christ Jesus was placed upon his throne and sent forth to rule. In 1918, or three and one-half years thereafter, judgment begins, and then follows the antitypical fulfilment of the plagues upon Egypt, which plagues are completed at Armageddon in the destruction of the firstborn. Therefore it is those who are in Christ as members of his royal house who are the ones passed over at Armageddon, and these are passed over upon condition that they are faithful, abiding in Christ, obeying his commandments; and which means that they must perform the service of bearing testimony before the rulers and before the people of and concerning the kingdom and declaring the vengeance of our God. When this declaration is completed, then will follow the execution of the final plague at Armageddon.
44	The Scriptures, therefore, seem clearly to show that the firstborn of Egypt represent the visible part of Satan’s organization, which will be destroyed at Armageddon, and that the invisible part of his organization, including Satan himself, will shortly follow thereafter, when Satan shall be cast into the pit of destruction.—Rev. 19:19-21; 20:1-3.
SIFTING
45	At the time that Jesus ate the last passover and instituted the memorial of his death as a memorial to the name of Jehovah the crucial hour in his career as the man Jesus had been reached and he knew that he must die on that day as the antitypical lamb. Doubtless Satan also knew that Jesus would be killed on that day, and, since he had arranged to have him crucified, Satan concluded that he had proved his side of the challenge against Jehovah’s holy name. He knew that he had succeeded in turning Judas away from God. Probably he thought he saw some particular weakness appearing in Peter and, if permitted to do so, he could turn Peter away; and hence he challenged the Lord to permit him to give Peter a special test. “And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold, Satan hath desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat: but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not: and when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren.” (Luke 22: 31,32) Thus the Lord in guard
94
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
ed language showed that Peter would come through that test successfully and that he could afterwards be of strength to his brethren. This will support the conclusion that Satan makes a desperate attempt to overthrow everyone who is worthily partaking of the Memorial. Let all such, then, have absolute and complete faith in Jehovah God and Christ Jesus and remain firm and steadfast, regardless of all opposition, and continue to proclaim the name of Jehovah God faithfully unto the end. So doing, they may be assured of complete deliverance into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ and be for ever the favored servants of the Most High.
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
? 1-3. How is Jehovah’s sending Moses to Egypt related to his sending Jesus to earth, and what was the purpose in each instance? Point out the importance of knowing Jehovah and his Son Jesus Christ. In line with that which took place in Egypt, and the purpose and outcome thereof, what do we find as to the nature of the anti typical plagues, the purpose in them, and how they will culminate?
Y 4-8. What was the third plague visited upon Egypt? Show that the nature of the plague, the manner in which it was called forth, and who were affected thereby, fitly pictured that which was Jehovah’s purpose therein to foretell.
5 9-12. Who were affected by the fourth plague, and what docs this indicate? Of what did this plague consist, and what is the evidence that this pictorial prophecy has been fulfilled?
f 13-15. Describe the fifth plague. Why should this further pestilence come upon Egypt? What was foreshown therein? Apply the faet that “of the cattle of the children Of Israel died not one’’.
J 16-19. What was the sixth plague, how was it called forth, and who were affected thereby? When and how does this have fulfilment?
20-22. Point out the significance (a) of the seventh plague’s being one of thunder, hail and fire, and (b) of the tim< and result of this plague. When, how, and with what effect is this part of the prophetic picture fulfilled? In what facts do we seo fulfilment of Exodus 9: go,21 and of verse 26?
7 23-25. Account for Pharaoh’s not yet assenting to let the Israelites go and worship Jehovah. Apply this prophetic fact. Describe the eighth plague, and the manner in which as a prophecy it is fulfilled.
H 26-29. What have we observed regarding the manner in which these plagues were called forth? What is symbolically expressed thereby? What was the ninth plague? When and in what event and conditions is this plague visited upon antitypical Egypt? Explain the prophetic fact that in this plague also “the children of Israel’’ were unaffected thereby.
J 30-32. What is the evidence that the first nine plagues still afflict antitypical Egypt, and that Exodus 10: 28,29 foretold the present situation in “Christendom’’?
T 33. What seems clearly to be foreshown in the Israelites’ borrowing jewels of silver and of gold, etc., of the Egyptians?
34, 35. At this time what was the attitude of Pharaoh, and what further information was given to him by Moses? Briefly relate Jehovah’s instructions to Moses to be given to the Israelites concerning preparation for the final plague. That the death of the firstborn would take place at midnight carried what prophetic significance?
f 36, 37. Identify the antitypical firstborn of Egypt, quoting scriptures in proof thereof. What is prophetically shown in tho slaying of the lamb, and the eating thereof, as preceding the slaughter of Egypt’s firstborn? What of tho “great multitude” and the Jonadab class in Armageddon?
I 38-40. What is now found to have been pictured (a) by tho obedient Israelites’ taking the lamb into the house on tho tenth day of Nisan? (b) By the instructions recorded at Exodus 12: 11, and that they should remain in tho house until morning? (c) By publicly sprinkling the blood of the paschal lamb on the doorposts and lintels of the houses of the Israelites?
T 41. How may it be determined who may celebrate tho Lord’s supper? What definitely greater meaning attaches to celebration of the Memorial now?
V 42. How do Psalm 29:9, 2 Timothy 2: 11,12, and 1 Corinthians 10: 16,17 serve to determine who may partake of tho Memorial?
T 43, 44. What was Jehovah’s primary purpose in sending Moses to Egypt and in sending Jesus to the world? How, in the “day of Jehovah”, does ho proceed to complete the execution of that purpose?
45. Show that Satan makes a desperate attempt to overthrow everyone who is worthily partaking of the Memorial. How shall these proceed, and with what assurance and to what end?
SATAN’S ORGANIZATION: EGYPT
THE primary purpose of Satan is to reproach Jehovah God, turn the people away from him, and compel worship of himself. Knowing that God’s creatures who love Him would sing His praises and worship Him, Satan brought into being his organization, and at the very beginning thereof made religion the most prominent part; and then he makes the commercial and the political or ruling powers a part of his organization, and they adopt his devilish religion. It is the religious element of Satan’s organization that he uses chicfly to blind the people concerning Jehovah God, and therefore the religious element was made the most prominent in the beginning and is the most reprehensible before God.
Originally Satan was the beautiful and holy cherub Lucifer. Until iniquity was found in Lucifer he was a part of God’s organization. By reason of his covetous desire to have the worship of creation he produced a wicked religion. By the multitude of his merchan
dise, or the commercial factor, he has produced violence; and by his selfish desire to rule creation he produced the political or ruling elements, all of which appear in his organization.—Ezek. 28:14-18.
It was unfaithfulness on Lucifer’s part that caused him to rebel against God and to form the wicked organization called Babylon and become the husband thereof. Therefore Babylon is represented as an unchaste woman and means an immoral organization, and hence it is the mother of all “harlot” systems, engaged in spiritual fornication. The visible part of Satan’s organization, to wit, the earthly governments, is represented under the symbol of “beast”, because harsh, cruel and oppressive. It is the “beast”, figuratively speaking, that carries or bears up the organization of Satan; and she, the organization of Satan, rules over and sits upon the peoples and nations of the earth. (Rev. 17: 3, 5,15,18) The prophet of God calls the Devil’s organization “the lady of king
March 15, 1934
WATCHTOWER-
95
doms”. (Isa. 47:5) This is manifestly an ironical statement. The Scriptural proof is conclusive, therefore, that Babylon in the plains of Shinar was organized by the Devil through Nimrod “the mighty hunter’’, and that it represents the Devil’s complete organization, both the invisible part in heaven and the visible human part on earth.
Although Babylon was first organized, Egypt was the first nation of great and dominating strength. The predominating factor of Egypt was her military power, which stands for the commercial factor of the government. The real reason for building up the military power is to acquire or hold property. Almost all wars have been prompted by a covetous desire to acquire the property of others, and have been promoted by the commercial factors of the rulers of the nations. The wars which Jehovah God commanded his chosen people the Jews to fight were fought either for the execution of God’s judgment against evildoers or to maintain his good name, and were always carried on for good. God is the Giver of life, and he has the perfect rigid to take it away when he secs good. Not so with others. The Devil’s organization has carried on war for a selfish and unrighteous purpose, and has builded great military force for that purpose.
Egypt was so called by the Greeks and Romans. The Hebrew name for Egypt is Mizraim, which means “the eneloser or the embanker of the sea”, probably referring to the fact that the first Pharaoh of Egypt turned the Nile river into its course by embankments. This is supported by the words which Ezekiel’s prophecy (29:3) ascribes to Satan, saying: “My river is mine own, and I have made it for myself.” The name Mizraim is derived from the Hebrew word Mazor, and, according to Doctor Strong, an authority, means “something hemming in, a mound, a siege, and distress”. Sometimes the Hebrew word Mazor is used as the name for Egypt. (See Isaiah 19:6; 37:25; Micah 7:12, R.V., margin.)
“Rahab,” which means “proud”, is the ecclesiastical name applied to Egypt, doubtless because of her pride, arrogance, and boastfulness against God. (Ps. 87:4; 89:10) “The land of Ham” is another designation, probably because of one of Ham’s sons whose name was Mizraim.—Gen. 10: 6.
In ancient times the land of Egypt was very fertile, especially along the valley of the Nile. Its productivity depended on the regular and annual overflow of the Nile river. The people worshiped the river, evidently because Satan used this means to turn the people away from the true God and make them believe that their gods, of which he was chief, brought the blessings to them through the river Nile. The scriptures of the Bible make note of the absence of rain in Egypt. (Deut. 11:10,11) Hail, lightning and thunder were probably unknown to the Egyptians until the Lord sent the ten plagues upon the land of Egypt at the time that he sent Moses there. As it is
written: “And Moses stretched forth his rod toward heaven; and the Lord sent thunder and hail, and the fire ran along upon the ground; and the Lord rained hail upon the land of Egypt. So there was hail, . . . very grievous, such as there was none like it in all the land of Egypt since it became a nation.” (Ex. 9:23,24) The extraordinary phenomenon of the fire, which manifestly was lightning, running along upon the ground, called the attention of the people to the fact that Jehovah was the Mighty God, and made for him a name amongst the people.
The natives of Egypt were afflicted with skin diseases, denoting a bad condition of the blood; thus suggesting a bad condition because of sin, as the life of all flesh is in the blood. God told his people, the Israelites, that if they would be diligent and hearken unto his voice and do right, then he would put none of these diseases upon them which were upon Egypt. (Ex. 15:26; Deut. 7:15) Disobedience to God would bring upon Israel such loathsome diseases as afflicted the Egyptians. (Deut. 28:27,60) Thus God would teach his people that only he has the power to remove sin and affliction.
The Egyptians were noted for the use of the horse. The Scriptural record (1 Ki. 10:28,29) is: “And [King] Solomon [of Israel] had horses brought out of Egypt. . . . And a chariot came up and went out of Egypt for six hundred shekels of silver, and an horse for an hundred and fifty.” (See also Ezekiel 17:15.) The primary use of horses then was for military purposes. The chariots were drawn by horses, and the chariots were used for war purposes. This arrangement made Egypt a great military power that dominated all the other nations. Because of the misuse of the horse and because it destroys trust in Jehovah God, he, the Lord, docs not speak favorably in his inspired Word concerning the horse, but says: “Woe to them that go down to Egypt for help; and stay on horses, and trust in chariots, because they are many; and in horsemen, because they are very strong; but they look not unto the Holy One of Israel, neitner seek the Lord! ’ ’—Isa. 31:1-3.
The displeasure of God concerning the use of horses is shown when he directed Josiah to remove them: “And [Josiah] took away the horses that the kings of Judah had given to the sun, at the entering in of the house [temple] of the Lord, by the chamber of Nathan-melech the chamberlain, which was in the suburbs, and burned the chariots of the sun with fire. ’ ’—2 Ki. 23:11.
The enemies of Israel came with horses and chariots of war to fight against the people of God: “And the Lord said [at that time] unto Joshua [the commander of the Israelites], Be not afraid because of them: for to morrow about this time will I deliver them up all slain before Israel: thou shalt hough their horses, and burn their chariots with fire.” (Josh. 11:6) To hough means to hamstring a horse and make it useless. Later King David did the same thing with the horses of the Syrians.—2 Sam. 8: 4.
96
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N.Y.
In the past some students of Bible symbolisms have interpreted the symbol "horses” to mean hobbies and fads and doctrines or teachings which people ride. However, it does not appear that "horses” can properly apply to doctrines; but, in particular, the horse does symbolize war, war policies, and war propaganda, and therefore fitly represents a military organization.
A further proof that Egypt was a military power is that the Egyptians hated the peaceful occupation of the herders of sheep, such as the Hebrews were. Genesis, chapter forty-six, verse thirty-four, says: "For every shepherd is an abomination unto the Egyptians.” It is well known that men or organizations that have used horses and military equipment have little use for the peaceable occupation of a shepherd ; and this was first manifested by the Egyptians, and the Lord has shown it in his Word.
The Egyptians worshiped the Devil and practiced the Devil religion. The magicians of Egypt were scribes or horoscopists who drew magical lines and circles, and claimed to state thereby what their invisible gods had determined as to a person. The commercial or military powers were subject to and practiced the Devil religion, as did also the political or ruling power. The rulers were against Jehovah and oppressed the people. With indignation the king said
to Moses: "Who is the Lord [Jehovah], that I should obey his voice?”—Ex« 5:2.
The religion of Egypt, used of the Devil and dp-posed to Jehovah, is shown by the following Scriptural proofs. To Moses the Lord God said: "Against all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgment: I am the Lord [Jehovah].” (Ex. 12:12) "And it came to pass in the morning that [Pharaoh’s] spirit was troubled [because of the dream he.had had] ; and he sent and called for all the magicians of Egypt, and all the wise men thereof: and Pharaoh told them his dream; but there was none that could interpret them unto Pharaoh.” (Gen. 41:8) Through the prophet Isaiah (19:3) Jehovah said later concerning that "land of Ham”: "And the spirit of Egypt shall fail in the midst thereof; and I will destroy the counsel thereof; and they shall seek to the idols, and to the charmers, and to them that have familiar spirits, and to the wizards.” Still later Jehovah said through his prophet Jeremiah (43:13): "He shall break also the images of Beth-shemesh [or, house of the sun (margin)], that is in the land of Egypt; and the houses of the gods of the Egyptians shall he burn with fire.”
Hence the organization of Egypt was just as its religion, and that was, devilish, satanical, and opposed to the supreme God of heaven, Jehovah.
SERVICE APPOINTMENTS
T. E. BANKS
J. C. RAINBOW
Salisbury, N. C.......Apr.	3, 4
Statesville, X. C.......”	5, 0
Aslmvillo. X. C.........”	7 8
Chapel Hill, X. C.......”	10.lt
Santord. X. C...........”	12,13
Farmville, N. C. _______”	14,15
Cocky Mount, X. C. ..Apr. 17, IS Entield, N. C..........."	19,20
Plea.-ant Dill, X. C. .... ’ 21, 22
Cheraw, S. C............”	24, 25
Copes, S. C.............”	20, 27
Atlanta, Ga............ ”	28-30
G. H. DRAPER
Greenville, Tex.....Apr.
Terrell, Tex..........”
Ennis, Tex............ ”
Alvarado, Tex.........”
Cleburne, Tex.........”
Ft. Worth, Tex........”
Weatherford, Tex......”
Mineral Wells, Tex...’’
Dublin, Tex...........”
Brownwood. Tex........”
Abilene, Tex.........."
3 4
5 0
7. 8 10 .11
12
13 14, 15
Breckenridge, Tex...Apr.
Merkel, Tex.........."
Robert Lee, Tex....  "
Mertzon, Tex.........”
San Angelo, Tex......”
Sweetwater. Tex......■" 22.
Colorado, Tex......  "
Aspermont, Tex.......”
Lubbock, Tex.........”
Abernathy, 'lex......." 28,
Quitaque, Tex........May
Clarinda, Iowa ...—..Anr.	1
Red Oak, lovva .....  '	3
Council Bluffs, Iowa	„ ”	4
Neola, Iowa ......... ”	5
Omaha. Nehr...........”	7, 8
River Sioux. Iowa ____”	10
Sioux City. Iowa .....”	11,12
Alton, lovva ........ ”	13
Ashton, Iowa _________”	14
Inwood. low a .....   ”	15
Hawarden, Iowa .......”	17
Sioux Falla, S. Dak. Apr. 18
Davis,	s. Dak.........’’	19
Irene,	S. Dak..........”	20
I'llca,	S. Dak..........”	21
Scotland, S. Dak........”	22
Ethan,	S. Dak.......•’	24
Pie-ho,	S. Dak........”	25
Huron,	S. Dak........n	2<»
Brookings, S. Dak......."	27
Conde, S. Dak..........”	28
Berlin, N. Dak........29
W. JI. THORN
M. L. HERR
Heavener, Okla......Apr. 2-8	Porum, Okla.........Anr. lfi-22
McCurtain, Okla.....”	9-15	Bunch, Okla.........’’ 23-29
West field, N. Y.....Apr.
Fredonia, N.Y........’
Jame-town. N. V.......”
Onovllle, N. Y. -....."
Warren. I'a...........”
Bradford, Pa..........”
Shinglehouse, Pa._____”
Olean, N. Y...........«
4
5
<1
7
8, 9
11. 12
13
14
Franklinville, N. Y.	..Apr,	15
Centerville, N. Y.......”	17
Perry, N. Y.............”	Iff,	19
Batavia, N. Y...........”	20
Buffalo, N. Y...........”	21	2d
Depew. N. Y.............”	27
Tonawanda, N. Y........*'	28,	29
Niagara Falls, N. Y. May 1, 2
Albuq’qne, X. M. Mar. 31. Apr. 1
Sweetwater, Tex......Apr. 3, 4
A. H. MACMILLAN
S. H. TOUTJIAN
Ft. Worth, Tex.......'
Pallas. Tex..........'
Shreveport. La.......’
New Orleans. La......’
Pensacola. Lia.......’
Ponce de Leon, Fla...’
IS
Marianna, Fla. ______Apr. 19
Bascom, Fla...........’’	20
Havana, Fla.......—”	21
Jacksonville, Fla......”	22,23
Starke, Fla............”	25
Ocala. Fla............."	2*S
Tarpon Springs, Fla.	”	27
Tampa. Fla............’’	28, 29
Little Rock, Ark....Apr.	1,2
Redfield, Ark.....—,. ”	4
Fordyce, Ark.........”	5
Camden, Ark. ...—____  ”	G
Hamburg, Ark. ........ ”	7
Wtihbnseka, Ark.......”	8
Monroe. Ark...........”	10
W. Helena, Ark........”	11
Memphis, Tenn.........”	12-14
Dyersburg, Tenn.......”	10
Jackson, Tenn.......-Anr. IT
Lexington, Tenn.........”	18
Clarksville, Tenn.......”	20
Springfield, Tenn.......”	21
Nashville, Tenn.....” 22.23
Smyrna, Tenn............”	25
Milton, Tenn............”	2G
Lebanon, Teun...........”	27
Dunlap, Tenn............”	28
Chattanooga, Tenn..’’ 29, 30
Pacific Grove, Calif. Mar.	31
Santa Cruz, Calif. .—Apr. 1
San Jose, Calif..........."	3.	4
Oakland, Calif. ........”	5,	6
San Francisco, Calif.	”	7.	8
Modesto. Calif..........”	10,11
Oakdale. Calif...........”	12
Stockton, Calif..........”	13,14
Itocklin. Calif..........”	15
Placerville, Calif......."	10
G. Y. M’CORMICK
Lincoln, Calif..........Apr.	17
Live oak, Calif.........6	18
— - _ _ —    . _ . _	_.	—
Yankee Hill,	Calif. .	»♦	19
Clear Lake,	Calif. ...	n	20
Santa Rosa.	Cnlif. ...	••• ..	2t
J. C. WATT
. -— —	...	—	•	.V ■	- .	- —	......	—
Lakeport, Calif.........”	22
I'pper Lake, Calif......”	21
Paynewreek, Calif.......”	25
Redding, CaliL .........”	27
Eureka, Calif..." 2', 29
Phoenix, Ariz....Mar. 30, Apr. 1
El Paso, Tex.........Apr. 3,4
San Antonio, Tex.....”	G-8
Tulsa. Okla.............”	9. 10
St. Louis, Mo.........."	12. 13
Indianapolis. Ind......”	14.15
Kokomor Ind............”	17,18
Peru. Ind............Anr.	19
Wabash, Ind............”	20
Ft. Wayne. Ind.........”	21,	22
Ligonier, Ind.........’’	2 1
Elkhart, Ind...........”	25.	20
South Bend, Tnd........"	27-29
Lu I'orte, lud..........May	1
THE WATCHTOWER,
Published Semi-Monthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N. Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford President W. E. V?.n Ambubgh Secretary "And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children." -Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to liis creatures; that tho Logos was the beginning of his creation and his active agent in tho creation of all tilings; that the Logos is now tlie Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and tho Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man wilfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and tho man Jesus suffered death in order to produce tho ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is tho rightful King of the world; that tho anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and aro his witnesses whoso duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, deciare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of tho kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and tho Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to tho establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of tho peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ which has now begun; that the Lord's next great act is tho destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under tho kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall bo restored and live on earth forever.
rrs mission
HIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to taiow Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction
specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Biblo as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his Beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of tho Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 7s. American remittances should be made by Express or Postal Money Order, or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African anil Australasian remittances should bo mmlo direct to tho respective branch ofiices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn oflice, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British . ............34 Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England
Canadian ....... 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Australasian . . 7 Beresford Road, Slrathlield, N. S. W., Australia South African .... Boston House, Capo Town, South Africa I’leaso address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this Journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to tho publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting It. We are glad to thus aid tho needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations. Xotice to Subscribers.- Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Chance of address, when requested, may bo expected to appear on addro-s label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of cxniratlon) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires. Entered as Second Class Mail Matter at Brooklyn, X. Y., Postotr.ee.
Act of March 3, 1819.
PUBLIC LECTURES BY TRANSCRIPTION
Jehovah’s blessing has been markedly upon the use of the portable transcription machne. lie has plainly manifested that this machine meets the need of the hour, when the enemy, under Gog, is seeking to curtail the use of the radio by God’s anointed and when the people’s ears are eager to iiear, not man’s message, but God’s. The transcription machine lias increased the power of Jehovah's witnesses afield to preach His truth manyfold, so that the desire for the literature is stimulated and study classes of many interested hearers are being formed. Besides more than 450 such machines in the United States alone, great numbers are now being effectively used in countries near and afar. For more information, write the Society.
TRANSCRIPTION MACHINES
The Society has made arrangements to construct and assemble portable transcription machines at our owu factory at 117 Adams Street. These machines will be somewhat different in construction from those previously furnished. They will be spring-wound, and operated from a 6-volt wet-cell battery. Every machine will be furnished complete with the battery and a battery charger, so that it can be kept up to its full strength. We are pleased to announce that this machine can be offered at $100, complete, to brethren in the United States.
HAS YOUR SUBSCRIPTION EXPIRED?
For the benefit of subscribers, and for their convenience, a renewal blank is sent with this journal one month (on foreign subscriptions two months) before the subscription is due to expire. Machinery used to print subscriber’s address on label or wrapper is so constructed that the plate bearing address is automatically dropped from the list at expiration; thus discontinuance of an expiration is accomplished mechanically in every instance.
ANNOUNCING COMPANY MEETINGS
Many hearers of radio transcription lectures have the desire to meet with Jehovah’s witnesses and to study his Word w-ith them. Hence wherever the kingdom message is radioeast, the time and place of meeting of the local company of Jehovah’s witnesses should be announced after the transcription. Tho time on the air being paid for, the station manager ought to readily grant your request to make such announcement.
LITERATURE FOR THE BLIND
Of the booklets of the new series, Uere,after, Cause of Death, IFho Is God? and What Is Truth? can bo supplied, in Braille, for the blind. These are obtainable at $1 a copy, or may be had on loan by any blind reader. Address the Society’s binneli for the blind, 1216 Spear St., Logansport, Ind.
Vol. LV
April 1, 1934
NO. 7
HIS COVENANTS
PART 1
“Gather my saints together unto me; those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice. And the heavens shall declare his righteousness: for God is judge himself.”—Ps. 50:5,6.
JEHOVAH’S purpose is to vindicate his name. Let that great truth always be foremost in the mind of every faithful student of God’s Word. All other things arc incidental to and hence secondary to the vindication of Jehovah’s name. Having builded up his capital organization Zion Jehovah now appears in his glory to those of Zion. The children of Zion, now gathered unto him at his temple, are taught of God by and through Christ Jesus, the chief one of the Zion organization. The faithful now sec their Teachers, to wit, Jehovah and Christ Jesus, and, being obedient to what they are taught, the children of Zion walk on in the right way singing the praises of the Host High. (Isa. 30:20, 21; 54:13) The children of Zion are Jehovah’s saints now made to ‘sit with Christ Jesus in heavenly places’ and form a part of the heavenly organization, and being thus gathered unto the Lord they ‘shall declare his righteousness: for God himself is Judge’. The faithful remnant are doing this very thing.
2 In times past God’s faithful people had a dim vision of his purpose, but now they may have a clearer understanding thereof. The chief reason for greater enlightenment now is the fact that it is God’s due time to make known his purpose to his people. Those who are born of Zion, and hence gathered together unto the Lord at the temple, now have Jehovah and Christ Jesus for their instructors, and the flashes of the light at the temple reveal Jehovah’s truths to them, and as these great truths arc revealed to them they continue to declare God’s righteousness.
2 But there is another reason why the consecrated have not had a clear vision of God’s Word heretofore, and that reason is largely due to selfishness or a desire for personal gain. Selfishness or the looking for personal gain will now hinder even those of the anointed in understanding and appreciating the truth. For many centuries almost all of those who have consecrated themselves to do the will of God have done so with the expectation of personal gain or benefit. Leaders of “Christendom” have taught the people that God is trying to save the human race from hell torment and to take the saved ones to heaven. The
motive for becoming members of the organization of those ecclesiastical systems has been entirely selfish, that is, a desire to be saved and escape punishment. During the Elijah period of the church the doctrines held and taught by the followers of Christ Jesus in the truth were in brief these:
* The human race, condemned to death by reason of Adam's sin, is bought by the blood of Christ Jesus; hell is not a place of conscious torment, but the state of the dead, and none can escape eternal death except by and through the merit of Christ Jesus’ sacrifice; the plan of God is to take out from the world his church, the members of which find their eternal home in heaven and will, together with Christ Jesus, rule the world and restore the obedient ones to human perfection. The doctrine of “no hell torment” was greatly stressed, and salvation in heaven or upon the earth was the chief motive inducing creatures to serve God and Christ Jesus. It was thought that each one consecrating himself to the Lord must even by his own efforts bring himself to a point of character development that would entitle him to a high seat in the courts of heaven. It must be conceded that such motives were largely selfish. To be sure, some who consecrated in that time had the unselfish desire to serve Jehovah, but all were looking to the reward. While the domrines above mentioned as held during the Elijah period were and are generally true, the primary purpose of Jehovah was not seen, hence the higher motive was not the moving cause for creatures to serve God. Now those of the temple who are proving faithful appreciate the great truth that the vindication of Jehovah's name is the all-important thing and that to have a part in the vindication of his holy name these faithful creatures must unselfishly devote themselves to him. Such unselfish devotion to Jehovah is the key of knowledge and understanding. The religious leaders amongst the Jews by reason of their selfishness took away from themselves and from others the key of knowledge, and when Jesus presented to them the truths of the kingdom the Pharisee's not only-rejected the truth, but caused others to do likewise. (Luke 11: 42-52) The same thing has been true of the
99
100
TKg WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
organizations of so-called “Christianity”, and partic-ularlj2 3 * * * 7 of the “man of sin” class. Self-gain blinds the eyes of one to the proper devotion to God, and, thus blinded, one makes no progress in knowledge and understanding.
5 It follows, therefore, that if the anointed will hold the key of knowledge and understanding they must keep always to the fore that the chief purpose of Jehovah is the vindication of his name, that it is his name that is involved, and that the kingdom is the means used to accomplish the vindication of his name. To have part in the vindication of Jehovah’s name is not a selfish -work. The part which the remnant eau have is that of being faithful witnesses for Jehovah, and thus they maintain their integrity toward him. Those of the anointed who are faithful unto death will receive everlasting life and be associated with Christ Jesus in his heavenly work and glory. But such reward is secondary to the vindication of Jehovah’s name and is given only where unselfish devotion is shown to God. To have part in the vindication of his holy name is the condition precedent to the entering into divine life.
COVENANT
* A covenant is a binding agreement or promise to do or not to do a certain thing. Jehovah’s expressed purpose to do a certain thing is an unconditional or one-sided covenant. When Jehovah gives his word of promise he unconditionally binds himself to carry out that purpose. lie says: “I have purposed it, I will also do it.” (Isa. 46:11) “My word . . . shall accomplish that which I please.” (Isa. 55:11) A covenant made by Jehovah with one or more of his creatures is a bilateral or two-sided agreement to do certain things, and the other parties to the covenant must do the things mentioned. Jehovah always faithfully performs his part of his covenants.—Deut. 7: 9.
POINTS
T The following abstract points are here set out that the student, by carefully following this outline, may be better enabled to consider the argument as he progresses:
(1) The greatest of all questions before creation is, Who is the supreme, almighty God, from whom comes all life in happiness?
(2) All covenants made by Jehovah toward man are made for the primary purpose of vindicating his name. They are called Jehovah’s covenants because he is the originator and maker of them, and he takes others into his covenants as it pleases him.
(3) The Abrahamic covenant is an unconditional
promise of Jehovah to produce by his organization
Zion, symbolized by his “woman”, a seed by or
through which all the families of the earth may have
an opportunity for the blessing of life, the primary
purpose of which covenant is the vindication of Jehovah’s name. The “seed” of that covenant is Christ, who is the Savior and Redeemer of man and the Vindicator of Jehovah God’s name. That covenant is unchangeable because bound by the word and oath of Jehovah.
(4)	Because of the abounding of transgression or sin against God's law, Jehovah added to the Abrahamic covenant the law covenant, made in Egypt with Moses as mediator, and that covenant served as a schoolmaster to lead the teachable ones of Israel to Christ, the “seed” and Vindicator, and it was continued until the coming of Christ. The purpose of the law covenant was to produce a people for the name of Jehovah; lienee the primary purpose thereof was the vindication of Jehovah’s name.
(5)	The new covenant was made in the place and stead of the old law covenant. The purpose of the new covenant was not for the salvation of men, but for the purpose of selecting a people for the name of Jehovah, which people so selected must be witnesses to the name of Jehovah; and, proving faithful therein, these participate with Christ Jesus in the vindication of Jehovah’s name.
(6)	The new covenant was made with Christ Jesus at the time of his death. Before that Jesus made his covenant of sacrifice, and then others were invited to make a covenant by sacrifice in order that they might be offspring of and taken into the new covenant and have a part in the vindication of Jehovah’s name.
(7)	The new covenant has no reference to the world of mankind in general, does not relate to the restitution of mankind, but pertains exclusively to spiritual Israel; and no one can be an offspring of the new covenant until after that one has made a covenant by sacrifice; and it is the ones making the covenant by sacrifice, and who prove faithful thereto, that are gathered together unto the Lord God and’made members of his company, and who declare his righteousness and participate in the vindication of his name.
FACTS
8	At Eden Lucifer defamed Jelioxah’s name, charging him with being a liar and without the ability to carry out his purpose. Satan then defied Jehovah to put on earth a man that would maintain his integrity toward Jehovah. (Job 2:2-4) This was a further reproach to the name of Jehovah God. Jehovah's purpose is to prove to all creation that he alone is the Almighty God, and this he does in vindication of his name. There could be no blessing to the human race without life; and since life is the gift of Jehovah God, the creature by proving his faithfulness to God and maintaining his integrity toward God and receiving life from God would thus be a vindication of the name of the Most High. Jehovah then took Abraham out of his native land and sent him down to Canaan and
April 1, 1934
WATCHTOWER.
101
there made a covenant or unconditional promise, using Abraham as the one to whom the promise was at the time expressed, and there expressed his purpose to produce a seed by and through which all the families and nations of the earth may be blessed. The ‘promised seed’ is Christ, whom Jehovah constitutes as his chief witness, high priest and vindicator. (Gal. 3:16) Surely the selection of the seed of promise was not merely for the salvation of men, because God could have killed Adam and started a new race. The selection of the seed was for the very purpose of vindicating Jehovah’s name, that is, proving Jehovah carries out his purposes according to his will. A secondary provision thereof was that those who should obey the seed would be blessed with everlasting life. Uis original name, Abram, means “exalted father’’, which name the Lord changed, calling him Abraham. The name Abraham means “father of many nations”. This is proof that Abraham was here used as a symbol to represent Jehovah God himself, who alone is the Giver of life, hence the great Father of the families and nations of the earth that live, and that the seed is Christ, by and through whom Jehovah gives life to man. (Rom. 6:23) When Jehovah said to Abraham, “I will . . . make thy name great,” manifestly God meant that he would make his own holy name great. (Gen. 12: 2) The dealing of Jehovah with the natural descendants of Abraham was for his, Jehovah’s, own name’s sake. (Ezek. 20: 9) The purpose of the Abra-hamic covenant, therefore, was not primarily for man’s benefit, but was and is for the vindication of Jehovah’s name; and this conclusion is abundantly supported by the Scriptures. A lung period of time is permitted to elapse during which period of time Jehovah God permits Satan to remain and carry forward his nefarious work in order that he, Jehovah, in his own due time may have a testimony given in the earth concerning his name and then exhibit his power to convince all creation that he is the Supreme One. Let it be kept in mind that the salvation of creatures is entirely secondary to the great purpose of Jehovah.
NEW COVENANT
’ The Scriptures disclose other covenants of Jehovah, among which are the covenant made at Egypt and confirmed at Sinai, and the new covenant, made thereafter. Much has been said and written concerning the new covenant, and it has been emphasized in most of such writings that the new covenant belongs to the millennial reign of Christ, under which all the families of the earth shall be blessed. The following quotation is the gist of what has been held and taught for many years, to wit: “The new covenant is an arrangement which God provides by and through which he can have mercy upon the fallen raee.” (Studies in the Scriptures, Volume 5, page 455) The Scriptures do not support that conclusion. From about 1907 to 1909 a great deal was published about
the new covenant, and a shaking amongst the consecrated occurred and a division resulted by reason of a disagreement as to the new covenant. For the two reasons hereinbefore named the purpose of the new covenant was not then understood; but now in the day of the Lord, when he is at the temple enlightening his people, the purpose may be understood by those who are devoted to him, and who are of the temple, and for this reason The Watchtower now considers again the question of the covenants. Again it is suggested that the seven points above set out be kept in mind as the study progresses.
10	The new covenant is not for the direct purpose of saving any creature, but is for a far higher and greater purpose. The new covenant is not a restitution covenant, to be employed by the Lord during the Millennial reign. In fact, it has nothing to do with the regeneration of the human race. The blood of Christ Jesus is the purchase price of the human race, and a covenant is not required in order for God to have mercy on those who come to Jesus in God’s appointed way.—John 6:37-40.
THE PURPOSE
11	What is the purpose of the new covenant? It is Jehovah’s instrument to gather unto himself a people for his name, to be used for the vindication of his name. It therefore applies to the church, and not to the world at all. The new covenant was foreshadowed by the old law covenant, as well as being a replacement substituted for the old law covenant. That being true, then, it follows that the purpose of the old law covenant foreshadowed the purpose of the new covenant. The purpose of the old law covenant could not have been the salvation of the Jewish nation. It was not needed to save that nation. Eventually the Gentiles will have the same opportunity of salvation, and they never had any relationship to the law covenant, but were aliens to it and also to the new covenant. (Eph. 2:12) Furthermore the Jewish nation, being God’s chosen people, did not foreshadow the Gentile nations in general, but did foreshadow God’s chosen people taken out from the world. The law covenant imposed an additional obligation upon the Jews which was never upon the Gentile nations, and hence the Gentile nations would not have to be relieved thereof. To redeem the Jews from that additional curse imposed by the law covenant Jesus must die on the tree as and in the place and stead of the sinner. (Gal. 3:13; Deut. 21:23) This fact, however, does show a special responsibility re Jing upon those who are in the new covenant. It is quite certain that the apostle had in mind this responsibility when he quoted from the prophecy uttered by Moses, to wit: “He that despised Moses’ law died without mercy under two or three witnesses: of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who hath trodden under foot the Son of God, and hath counted the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified,
102
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
nn unholy thing, and hath done despite unto the spirit of grace? For we know him that hath said, Vengeance belongeth unto me, I will recompense, saith the Lord. And again, The Lord shall judge his people. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.” (Ileb. 10:28-31) This prophecy was spoken by Moses. (Deut. 32:35,30) The responsibility of those in the new covenant is here compared with that of those in the law covenant.
12	God made the old law covenant with Moses as mediator for his chosen people. God made the new covenant with Christ Jesus, whom Moses foreshadowed, as the Mediator for his chosen ones. Jehovah sent Moses to Egypt primarily to make a name for Himself, and secondarily to redeem the Israelites. (2 Sam. 7:23) To this end Moses was required to bear testimony before the Israelites and before the Egyptian ruler, and this he must do prior to the making of the law covenant. Jehovah sent Jesus into the world, antitypical Egypt, to bear witness to his name, hence to make a name for Himself, and he must bear witness before the Jews and others before the new covenant is made. (John 18:37) Jesus said: “I am come in my Father’s name.” (John 5:43) That the chief purpose of the coming of Jesus was to glorify and vindicate Jehovah’s name is shown by his words: ‘‘For this cause came I unto this hour. Father, glorify thy name. Then came there a voice from heaven, saying, I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again.” (John 12:27,28) The lifeblood of Jesus poured out in sacrifice was the blood that made good the new covenant, and also provided the redemptive price for man. It is by and through the new covenant that a people is taken out for the name of Jehovah; hence the name of Jehovah becomes paramount to the redemption of man.
“ The Israelites, God’s selected people, must prove their faithfulness to the terms of the law covenant in order to become God’s holy nation, as it is written: ‘‘And Moses went up unto God, and the Lord called unto him out of the mountain, saying, Thus shalt thou say to the house of Jacob, and tell the children of Israel: Now therefore, if ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people: for all the earth is mine. And ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation. These arc the words which thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel.” (Ex. 19: 3, 5, 6) This proves that a people was foreshadowed by the Israelites and that such people who were foreshadowed by the Israelites in the law covenant must prove their faithfulness under the terms of the new covenant in order to become God’s holy nation. Addressing that people foreshadowed by the Israelites the inspired apostle says: ‘‘But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should shew forth the praises of him who hath called you out of darkness into his marvelous light: which in time past were not a peo
ple, but are now the people of God; which had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy.” (1 Pet. 2: 9,10) This holy nation is made up of those who become members of the royal house of which Christ Jesus is the Head.
14	The purpose of the law covenant was to produce a seed; as it is written: ‘‘Which things are an allegory: for these [women] are the two covenants; the one from the mount Sinai, which gendereth to bondage, which is Agar [Hagar]. For this Agar is mount Sinai in Arabia, and answereth to Jerusalem which now is, and is in bondage with her children.” (Gal. 4:24, 25) Abraham’s wife Sarah was past the natural age of child-bearing, and she requested Abraham to use her Egyptian maid to get an heir for the reason, ‘‘it may be that I may obtain children by her.” (Gen. 16:2,3) God had promised Abraham to give him a seed, and Hagar was given to Abraham by his wife that this might be accomplished. Hagar’s offspring did not prove acceptable to God as the promised seed, and likewise the children of the old law covenant, that is, Israel after the flesh, did not prove acceptable unto God. That the law covenant foreshadowed the new covenant, the seed of which docs prove acceptable, is clearly shown by the words of the apostle: ‘For what was impossible to the Law, thwarted as it was by human frailty, God effected. Sending his own Son in the form of sinful humanity to deal with sin, God pronounced sentence upon sin in human nature; in order that in our case the requirements of the Law might be fully met.’—Rom. 8:3,4, Wey.
“ The reason for the failure of the law covenant was not because of any fault with the law, but was because of the fault of the Jewish nation; hence its failure made it necessary to make a new covenant, in the place and stead of the old in order that God might have a people for his own name; hence, says the scripture: “For if that first covenant had been faultless, then should no place have been sought for the second [covenant]. For finding fault with them, he saith, Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, when I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah.” (Ileb. 8:7,8) It is therefore apparent from these scriptures that neither the old law covenant nor the new covenant is made for the purpose of saving men, but that the purpose thereof is to gather together a people for the name of Jehovah, the faithful ones of which people he promises shall have a part in the vindication of Jehovah’s name, and which proves his side of the controversy and the vindication of his name.
16	It is true that the Lord declared: “ Ye shall therefore keep my statutes, and my judgments; which if a man do, he shall live in them; I am [Jehovah].” (Lev. 18:1,5) This scripture does not say that one would get life by keeping the covenant; hence it does not mean that the purpose of the covenant is to give life. The real purpose, as disclosed by this scripture, is to identify the vindicator of Jehovah’s name. God’s
Apsil 1, 1934
Tile WATCHTOWER,
1C3
promise here is that the man in the covenant who should obey the statutes and judgments of the Lord would thus live in them and would be maintaining his integrity and thus vindicate Jehovah’s name, as against Satan’s challenge to God to produce such a man. Obedience to the terms of the covenant would prove the qualification of the man to be the vindicator of Jehovah’s name when the time should arrive for the issue to be finally settled. That is exactly what Jesus did. To construe this scripture to mean that, had the Jews kept the covenant, they could have lived would mean that the ransom sacrifice could be omitted; whereas there is no means of getting life except by and through the ransom sacrifice. The clear purpose of this declaration above quoted, therefore, is to identify the vindicator. Jesus suffered reproach at the hands of Satan and his agencies, and because of his faithfulness in keeping the law of God, and proving his obedience under such suffering, he thereby demonstrated his qualification to be the vindicator of Jehovah’s name and the author of eternal salvation to all those who obey him; and this is the plain statement of the scripture written by the apostle under inspiration.—lleb. 5:8, 9.
17	This conclusion is further expressed on another occasion by the apostle, lie emphasized the point that the promised seed is of paramount importance. Then he says: “It [the law covenant] was added [to the Abrahamic covenant] because of transgressions, till the seed should come to whom the promise was made; and it was ordained by angels in the hand of a mediator.” (Gal. 3:18,19) The Jews were imperfect, and therefore transgressors or sinners, which prevented them from maintaining their integrity in perfection, and hence the law was added until the promised seed should come. “Which things are an allegory: for these are the two covenants; the one from the mount Sinai, which gendcreth to bondage, which is Agar.”—Gal. 4:24.
18	Further showing that the law covenant was not made to give to the people of natural Israel the salvation of life it is written: “Is the law then against the promises of God? God forbid: for if there had been a law given which could have given life, verily righteousness should have been by the law.” (Gal. 3:21) Is the law against the promises of God ? To be sure, Jehovah knew this beforeh ind, and this proves that in making a covenant he had an objective or purpose different from the salvation of the Jews to life. Salvation of the Jews and Gentiles is not by any covenant. Salvation is through Christ Jesus, whom Jehovah first makes his vindicator, establishes his kingdom, and then brings the people to a knowledge of the truth in order that they, under the kingdom, may receive life everlasting if obedient to its terms. The purpose of the law covenant with the Jews was to get for Jehovah a people for his name; but that failed because of the imperfection of the Jews. When Christ Jesus, the Greater Moses, came he was the seed accord
ing to the promise made by Jehovah to Abraham, and those Jews who were then found faithful were transferred from Moses to Christ and thereby were made a part of the ‘people taken out for his name’. The faithful disciples of Jesus Christ are striking examples of this fact. They were already consecrated to do the will of God and had been baptized into Moses and “in the cloud”, and now it was not necessary for them to again undergo baptism. (1 Cor. 10:1-4; John 1:47) If the law covenant could not give life (which it could not, most emphatically), neither can the new covenant give life, for the reason that the new covenant is a substitute for the old. Life is given only to those who have faith in Jesus ChrL-t and continue faithful. The purpose of the new covenant therefore clearly appears to be to gather out from the human race and unto God a people that will maintain their integrity toward God while suffering reproach and contradiction of Satan and his agents, and which people become the witnesses to the name of Jehovah and who, then continuing faithful, have a part in the vindication of his name.
MEDIATOR
13	Jehovah provides a mediator of the old law covenant and a mediator for the new covenant. The Jews as a nation were incompetent to make a covenant with Jehovah. Moses had faith in the promise of Jehovah and by faith “looked i >v [fonvard to] a city [the kingdom of God under the promised seed] which hath foundations, whose builder ... is God”. (Ileb. 11: 10-25) By reason of his faith and faithfulness to God Jehovah chose Moses as mediator of the law covenant that he purposed to make and afterwards did make in Egypt. This selection of Moses was made at Mount Horeb. (Ex. 3:1-22) That was some time before the covenant was made, and Moses must first give testimony to the name of .! -hovah before the Israelites and before the rulers of Egypt. Concerning this law covenant it is written: "It was ordained by angels in the hand of a mediator.” (Gal. 3:19) The Greater Moses was chosen by Jci.ovah as the mediator of the new covenant, and this ••election was made after Jesus was baptized in the Jordan and following his temptation in the wilderness. It was then that he became the surety (pledge) and mediator of the tn w covenant later to be made. The law covenant was made at the time of the slaying of the paschal lamb in Egypt, and the new covenant was made at the time of the slaying of the antitypical paschal lamb, Christ Jesus; but Jesus had ben selected as the mediator three and one-half years prior to that time.
20	Where there is a m- diator this shows that there are others in the covenant, which Jehovah makes: “Now a mediator is not a mediator of one, but God is one.” (Gal. 3:20) If there were not others in the covenant there would be no need for a mediator. Since the chief purpose of tie- coming of Jesus was and is the vindication of Jehovah’s name, if Jesus were to
104
fffie WATCH TOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
be alone in this covenant work there would be no need for the existence of a mediator. Jesus is the offspring and seed of the Abrahamic covenant, which takes precedence over both the law covenant and the new covenant. A mediator’s being provided for the new covenant therefore shows that the purpose of the covenant is to bring others into it to act with Christ Jesus and under his direct supervision.
21	The new covenant is made more than two thousand years after the Abrahamic covenant, yet it could not take the place of the Abrahamic covenant, the seed of which is the means of blessing all the families of the earth. This is further proof that the new covenant is not a covenant of blessing or giving of life, but that it is a means of providing a people to bear testimony to the name of Jehovah, and who may have a part in the vindication of his name. The mere fact of the provision for a mediator shows that others would be joined with Christ Jesus in the vindication of Jehovah’s name. Who, then, are the others! Necessarily it follows that the “others” are those taken into the new covenant after it is made with Christ Jesus, and after the others mentioned have made a covenant with Jehovah Cod by sacrifice and have been accepted by Jehovah as his sons.
22	As further proof that the covenant is the instrument of Jehovah to accomplish his purpose of vindicating his name, note that Jehovah appoints the mediator before the covenant is made and that he makes this selection unconditionally. He selected his beloved Son Christ Jesus as his high priest, and he makes Christ Jesus his chief officer for the carrying out of all his purposes and Christ Jesus has nothing to do with selecting himself for this office. “So also Christ glorified not himself to be made an high priest; but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten [brought forth and acknowledged as his beloved Son] thee. As he saith also in another place, Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec.” (Heb. 5:5,6) When he appointed Jesus to the high office of priesthood Jehovah bound his word with his oath: “And ... by so much [more, that is, by such oath] was Jesus made a surety [the intermediary or guarantor for the others of the covenant, hence a mediator].”—Heb. 7:20,22.
22	At his baptism in the Jordan Jesus made and began the performance of his covenant by sacrifice and which performance was finished at Calvary. “But now hath he [Jesus] obtained a more excellent ministry [than that of Moses, the mediator of the law covenant], by how much also he is the mediator of a better covenant, which was established upon better promises.” (Heb. 8:6) Because of his covenant by sacrifice, which sacrifice was holy and acceptable unto God, Jesus is made the mediator of the new covenant. “The blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit offered himself without spot to God, . . . And for this cause he is the mediator of the new testament [covenant,
2?.P.], that by means of death, for the redemption of the transgressions that were under the first testament [covenant], they which are called [not the Jews as a nation, nor the world in general, but they that are called to the kingdom, that is, the church] might receive the promise of eternal inheritance [ in heaven ]. ” (Ileb. 9:14,15) The church of Christ does not form any part of the mediator, but Christ Jesus alone is the mediator of the new covenant. (Heb. 12:24) Christ Jesus is the mediator of the new covenant toward his own brethren, that is to say, spiritual Israel, during the period of time God is taking out from the nations a people for his name. (Acts 15:14) The apostle shows his relationship to the covenant, when he says: “Who will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth. For there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time. Whcreunto I am ordained a preacher, and an apostle, (I speak the truth in Christ, and lie not;) a teacher of the Gentiles in faith and verity.”—1 Tim. 2:4-7.
24	This text docs not say, and it does not mean, that the man Christ Jesus is mediator for all men. What the text does say is this: that there is one God, who is Jehovah, and there is one mediator between God and men. What men? The men, that is, human creatures, who have exercised faith in Christ Jesus and agreed to do God’s will. Why should God appoint a mediator in behalf of men who defame his name and the name of Jesus Christ? The text shows that the apostle does not have in mind all the human family, lie is addressing Timothy, and hence others of like precious faith, and was telling Timothy to pray in behalf of “all men”, meaning all men coming into God’s organization. Surely the apostle was not exhorting and advising that prayer be made in behalf of all those who wickedly oppose God and Christ Jesus. He docs advise that prayer be made “for kings and for all that are in authority”. Did he mean all men in authority in Satan’s organization? Surety not; but he did mean those in authority in God’s organization, that is to say, those in the church whom the Lord had placed in positions of authority, and that prayer should be made for all such that all of the church might abide together in peace and in unity. (See The Watchtower 1933, page 137.) It follows, therefore, that the word “men” used in verse five of the foregoing text does not refer to all men of the world but does refer to those who have made a covenant to do the will of God; and concerning all such it is the will of God that they be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of the truth, and for all such there is a mediator in the covenant with God. Who is that mediator? The scripture answers, “the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all.” These last quoted are words of identification which definitely name the one who is the mediator between God and men (but not all men), that is to say, the
April 1, 1934
ffKe WATCHTOWER.
.105
men who have exercised faith in Christ Jesus and have entered into a eovenant to do the will of God. It is not the will of God that any of such be lost as accept Christ Jesus. If any of them are lost it is their own fault. This is proved by the words of Jesus concerning the twelve which God gave to him. (John 17:12) The “man of sin” class at one time was in the covenant to do the will of God. That class will be lost, not by reason of any fault of God, but by reason of their own unfaithfulness.
25	The Authorized Version of the words of the apostle read: “Who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time.” (1 Tim. 2: 6) Some men have added to this text the words “to all”, and manifestly for the purpose of trying to make this text apply to all the human race. Is such a conclusion warrantedT It is certainly not warranted. It is true that Jesus Christ gave his life a ransom for all, and all who accept Jesus Christ as such, and are obedient to him, may live; but that is no reason why there should be added to this text the words to all, which words are not in the text at all. Another translation of the text above mentioned is this: “ ‘Who gave himself as a ransom for all’:—in due time this was attested, and I was appointed to be its herald and apostle (I am not telling a lie, it is quite true), to teach the Gentiles faith and truth.” {Moffatt) “Who gave himself a ransom in behalf of all, the testimony in its own fit times: unto which I have been appointed proclaimer and apostle—Truth I speak, I utter no falsehood— A teacher of nations in faith and truth.” {Rotherham) “Who gave himself a ransom in behalf of all, the testimony in its own seasons: for which I was appointed a herald and an apostle, (I speak truth, I do not falsify,) a teacher of nations in faith and truth.” {Diaglott) In this text, therefore, the apostle identifies Jesus Christ as the Redeemer of mankind, as the mediator between God and men in the covenant, and that he, Paul, is ordained as a preacher and an apostle to teach the Gentiles as well as the Jews. The apostle was here specifically instructing Timothy and in. substance states to him thus: ‘ You should pray for all men in the church, including those in authority, such as the apostles and others appointed to serve in the church.’ (Eph. 4:11-14) These in authority were put there to render aid in preparing a people for the name of Jehovah; it is the will of God that all such men should be saved, and in order to be saved they must be faithful. In this organization there is ‘one God and Father of all, who is above all and over all and in all’; there is one mediator between God and men, that is, all men who are consecrated to do the will of God, and that mediator is Christ Jesus the Redeemer, ‘and I Paul am appointed a special minister to make known these truths.’ (Eph. 4: 3-6) 1 Timothy 2:3-6 can therefore not properly be applied to all mankind, and is not a restitution text. While it does show that Christ Jesus is the redeemer for all men, it clearly appears from the context that its ap
plication is to those who have first entered into the covenant by sacrifice.
26	The new covenant corresponds to the old law dm e-nant. Moses was not the mediator between God and all the Gentiles. He was the mediator for all of God's chosen people, that is to say, the nation of Israel. The Jews “were all baptized unto Moses in the eloud and in the sea”. (1 Cor. 10:2) Moses was therefore the mediator for all such and none other; hence the Jews that were found faithful at the coming of Christ Jesus were transferred from Moses to Christ, and Christ was made the mediator for all such and all Gentiles who covenant to do the will of God. “And Moses verilj' was faithful in all his house, as a servant [mediator], for a testimony of those things which were to be spoken after; but Christ as a son [mediator] over his [Jehovah’s] own house; whose house are we, if we hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end.”—Heb. 3: 5, 6.
ADVOCATE
27	It has been said that Jesus is the advocate for the church and mediator for the world. But the Scriptures do not warrant that conclusion. There is nothing inconsistent in Jesus’ being the mediator for the church, and also the advocate for the church, both of which positions he does actually fill. Docs not a mediator advocate for one who needs help? Moses was mediator of the law covenant, and he advocated for the Israelites who had sinned, when he prayed to God to forgive them. (Ex. 32:29-32) Likewise Christ Jesus, the mediator of the new covenant, is the advocate of those in God’s organization who sin; as it is written: “My little children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not. And if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.” (1 John 2:1) Prior to the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple the holy spirit is designated in the Scriptures as a paraclete, comforter, or advocate or helper. Since the coming of the Lord to the temple the office of the holy spirit as advocate has ceased, but that docs not affect the fact that Christ Jesus at Mount Zion both mediates and advocates.
28	At the Jordan river, when baptized, Jesus presented himself without spot or blemish unto God in fulfilment of the prophecy previously written concerning him. “Then said I, Lo, I come: in the volume of the book it is written of me, I delight to do thy will, 0 my God: yea, thy law is within my heart.” (Ps. 40:7,8) That was the covenant of sacrifice between God and Christ Jesus, since it was the will of God that he should be a sacrifice. There Jesus unconditionally offered himself to do whatsoever is the will of God, and it was then the will of God that Christ Jesus should be his vindicator; and that to qualify for such he must maintain his integrity under the most severe test even unto an ignominious death, and that his lifeblood poured out should be and is the redemptive price for man. ‘And for this cause he is
105
WATCHTOWER
Bbooklyn, N. Y.
made the mediator of the new covenant.’ (Ileb. 9:15, A.lt.V.) Jehovah God gave to Jesus the ministry of the covenant, that is, the work of taking out a people for his name, which ministry is more excellent than that committed to Moses. (Ileb. 8:6) When the apostles believed on the Lord Jesus as the Christ and left all to follow him, that marked the time of their entering into a covenant by sacrifice. (Luke 18: 28-30; Matt. 16:24,25) The covenant by sacrifice means to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ as the ransomer and, based upon this faith, to exercise such faith by unconditionally agreeing to do the will of God. Three and one-half years after Jesus entered into the covenant by sacrifice God made the new covenant with him. This seems clearly to fix the rule that no one can be taken into the new covenant until after having entered into a covenant with Jehovah by sacrifice. All begotten of God necessarily have made a covenant by sacrifice, and all such are appointed to die a sacrificial death, and this includes the “great multitude’’ class. (Ps. 79:11) Not everyone who makes a covenant by sacrifice proves faithful, and hence not everyone, by any means, who makes a covenant by sacrifice is embraced within the class that is ‘the people taken out for his name'. Only the faithful ones are the saints of God, and it is of such Jehovah speaks when he says: “Gather my saints together unto me; those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice.’’ (Ps. 50:5) These saints have been taken into the new covenant with Christ Jesus, the high priest of Jehovah, and to sueh Jesus now says: “Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee the crown of life.” (Rev. 2:10, A.li.V.) This proves that only those who are absolutely faithful after being taken into the new covenant receive the crown of life.
TESTAMENT
tBMen have designated that part of the Bible from Genesis to Malachi inclusive as the Old Testament; and that part from Matthew to Revelation inclusive as the New Testament. There is no Scriptural authority for so doing. The word testament appears for the first time at Matthew 26:28, and there means “covenant”. The text 2 Corinthians 3:6 (Sinaitic MS) is the third mention of the “new testament”, and there means the “new covenant”, and is so rendered by the Revised Version. In the fourteenth verse of the same chapter appears for the first time the words “old testament”, but which are properly rendered “old covenant”, and refer to the law covenant, which became old when it ended. Many have very unwisely concluded that the Scriptures designated “The New Testament” constituted all that is needed for the instruction of the follower of Christ. All scriptures that are written at the dictation of Jehovah God constitute his Word; as it is written: “All Scripture, divinely inspired, is indeed profitable for teaching, for conviction, for correction, for that discipline which is in righteousness; so that the man of God may be
complete, thoroughly fitted for every good work.” (2 Tim. 3:16,17, D’wj.) Jehovah is now revealing to his faithful witnesses the meaning of the prophecies more clearly than at any time heretofore, which gives aid and comfort to the remnant at this time. (Rom. 15:4) He gives the revelation of his Word and a clearer meaning thereof to those who are diligent to learn and to do his will. (Ps. 119:105) It is for those whom the Lord has gathered into the temple that he now spreads a feast. The faithful are feeding upon these divine provisions, and they continue to give praise to Jehovah’s holy name. These constitute a part of the heavens declaring the righteousness of Jehovah God, for they know he is Judge himself and that his day of judgment is at hand.
(To be continued)
QUESTIONS FOK STUDY
Y 1. VVliat is Jehovah’s primary purpose? Who are the children of Zion? By whom are they taught? and where, how, and for what purpose?
IT 2-1. Account for the clearer vision which the consecrated now have of the purposes of Jehovah.
T 5. How only may the anointed hold the key of knowledge anil understanding? Bow is their future rewind related to the purpose of their having been received into the covenant with Jehovah?
T 6. What is a covenant? Uetino and illustrate two kinds of covenants which Jehovah has made with one or more of his creatures.
II 7. Briefly state the points here presented as an aid in the study of Jehovah's covenants.
U 8. Point out facts which prove that in connection with the Abmhaniic covenant Abraham was used to represent Jehovah himself, and that the purpose of the covenant was primarily for the vindication of Jehovah’s name.
U 9, 10. Why is it now of special importance to reconsider the question of the covenants? From Jesus’ words (Jolin 6: 37-10) show whether the new covenant is the means provided for saving and regenerating the human race.
J 11. What is the purpose of the new covenant? To whom does it apply? How is it related to the law covenant? How does the relationship of the new covenant to the law covenant servo to indicate the purpose of the new ?
Y 12. Show, with scriptures to support, that in providing the law covenant and the new eovenant, and each with a mediator, the vindication of his name was and is Jehovah’s paramount purpose.
H 13. Apply the conditional promise recorded in Exodus !!•: 5. (i to the people whom the Israelites there foreshadowed?
T II. To what does Paul refer in Romans 8: 3? What is there shown to be the purpose of the law covenant, and the relationship of the law covenant to the new?
5 15. How does Paul account for the necessity for the new covenant? .What is apparent therefiom as to the pm pose of both the law covenant and the new?
1<>. Explain whether Leviticus 18:5 was a promise of life to those who would keep the law covenant. What, then, was the purpose in that declaration?
f 17, IS. What further information does Paul give on the purpose of the law covenant (and therefore of the new covenant also) and its relation to the Abrahamic covenant?
Y 19. Compare the condition which made necessary a mediator of the law covenant with that necessitating a mediator for the new covenant. On what principle was each of those mediators chosen? Compare the procedure required of each of these from the tune he was chosen until the making of the covenant of which he was to be the mediator.
T 20. Jehovah’s appointing Christ Jesus as mediator of the new eovenant shoos what -js to the purpose of the covenant ?
T 21. What in the statement by Paul (Galatians 3) and in the relation of the law covenant to the new covenant slums whether the latter is a covenant provided for giving life?
April 1, 1934
Tfle WATCHTOWER-
107
T 22. With scriptures, show whether Jehovah’s selection of the mediator of the new covenant is made conditionally. What, does this prove in regard to the purpose of this covenant 1
If 23, 24. How did Moses and Jesus obtain the ministries committed to them? Wherein was that of Jesus a “more excellent ministry’’? Toward whom, and to what end, is Jesus the mediator of the new covenant?
T 25. For whom did Christ Jesus give himself a ransom? To be testified when, by whom, and to whom?
IT 20. Between whom was Moses mediator? What does this show in the same respect concerning the new covenant, and how?
If 27. With scriptures, and by pointing out the relationship of the new covenant to the law covenant and of the mediator of the new covenant to that of the law covenant, show whether Jesus Christ is both the mediator for the church and the advocate for the church.
If 28. Where, wheu, and how did Jesus enter into the covenant by sacrifice? What did this mean for him? Make clear the application of Psalm 50: 5.
T 29. What is the proof that the Scriptures were all provided for those devoted to the purposes of Jehovah and particularly for the faithful remnant in the latter days?
THE COVENANT BY SACRIFICE
Responsibility rests upon each one who has agreed to obey the will of God as that is expressed in his Word, the Bible. In this time of judgment, an understanding of this responsibility is of pressing importance.
Jehovah never interferes with the free moral agency of his creatures. He docs not compel sacrifice or even obedience. It will be observed that his method is to accomplish his purposes by means of covenants or solemn agreements to do the things involved in the covenants. He states the terms of his covenant, and the rules governing the same, and just recompense for disobedience or obedience thereto.
God is always faithful and true; and those on the other side of the covenant with him, who are prompted by love in the performance and who are faithful in the performance of such covenant, always receive a reward at the hands of the Lord. The Christian therefore can go forward with full and complete assurance that faithfulness on his own part is absolutely certain to result in benefit to himself. But be it noted that the moving cause for such performance must not be a desire for the reward, but must be the unselfish devotion of the creature to Jehovah God. Here is where the greatest test comes to the Christians. Satan’s effort is always to cause the Christian to swerve from his faithful devotion to God. To this end he uses all manner of subtlety, fraud and deceit. God permits temptations to be laid before the Christian in order to test the loyalty and faithfulness of the creature. For this reason it is written that Jesus was tempted in all things like as his followers; but that in all these temptations he was faithful and without sin. Jesus is therefore able to sympathize with his followers in their trials and temptations and is able to succor them that are tempted.—Hcb. 2:18; 4: 15.
Throughout the Christian era every one who has professed to be a Christian has been put to the test. The great issue has been and is, Who is God, and whom shall we serve? Satan has encouraged pride and ambition in the minds of the clergy to cause them to fall at this test. They have overlooked God’s statement that the meek or teachable will he guide in judgment. (Ps. 25:9) Becoming wise in their own conceits and feeling their great importance, they have
been easily turned away from the truth and from the Lord. By their lips they have claimed to serve God and by their acts they have denied him and serve the Devil. They have not been humble-minded, but have been arrogant and disobedient. Because thereof God has resisted them and pushed them away from him and thej’ have willingly gone on serving the Devil and his organization. Had they been humble and obedient to God and served him and his truth because of love for him and his Word, he would have favored them.
The Lord’s rule of action upon this point he has caused to be plainly stated by his inspired witness: “God resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the humble. Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time.” (1 Pet. 5: 5, 6) Not willing to wait until God’s, due time, they have sought to exalt themselves. For this reason the clergy have lost the understanding of the Scriptures and now have no vision or understanding of God’s great purpose for the vindication of his great and holy name. They are no longer proper guides for the people. It is now plainly the will of God that the people shall individually and personally study his Word that they may be brought to a knowledge of the truth. An understanding of God’s covenants enables one to see the progressive steps of the divine program looking to the producing of a Vindicator of his name and of a people for his name.
Jehovah makes another covenant looking to the determination of the great issue. That covenant involves the greatest of all sacrifices. It involves a sacrifice on the part of Jehovah himself and the sacrifice of his beloved Son Jesus, and even others arc taken into that covenant. It is therefore appropriately named in the Scriptures the “covenant by sacrifice”. All creatures taken into and participating in that eovenant, and who are faithful to the completion thereof, receive the greatest favor at the hand of Jehovah God. As the complete performance of that covenant nears an end, God commands: “Gather my saints together unto me; those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice.”—Ps. 50:5.
Dumb animals were sacrificed in connection with the Abrahamic covenant and the law covenant, but such were merely the reflection of the sacrifice involvd
108
tte WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
in the great covenant by sacrifice which began when Jesus was baptized in the Jordan river.
As used in the text of Psalm 50, just quoted, the word “sacrifice” refers emphatically to a bloody sacrifice ; that is to say, a covenant in which the shedding of blood is the essential clement. The word “sacrifice” here is translated from the Hebrew word which means “to slay”. The following scriptures are in point: “Then thou shalt kill of thy herd and of thy flock, which the Lord hath given thee.” (Deut. 12:21) “And he slew [margin, sacrificed] all the priests of the high places.” (2 Ki. 23:20) “And the woman had a fat calf in the house, and she hasted, and killed it.” (1 Sam. 28:24) In each one of these texts the word “kill”, “slew,” or “sacrifice” is from the one Hebrew root meaning “to slay”.
Christians living on earth in the days of the apostles had a vision or understanding of the covenant by sacrifice. This being an important feature in the divine program, Satan was energetic to blind Christians thereto. He therefore subtly and stealthily led the ambitious clergy into his trap, caused them to lose all vision of the covenant by sacrifice, and then to become bold advocates of Satan’s cause. These selfish and ambitious men declared and continue to declare themselves to be the representatives of God. They were not willing, however, to follow the humble example of the apostles. God’s faithful witness under inspiration wrote: “But to us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him.”—1 Cor. 8: 6.
Ambitious clergy have not been willing to accept this plain statement of truth. On the contrary, they desire to announce a mysterious dogma which they call ‘the trinity of three Gods in one’. The clergy cannot understand “the trinity” themselves, because it is false. They have known all the time that the people could not understand it. The Devil tickled their ambition and induced them to believe that by announcing this mysterious dogma the people would consider the clergy great men, even supernatural by’ reason of this wonderfully mysterious doctrine. Being selfcentered and willing to disobey the truth, they have continued to walk on in darkness. They have not been willing to follow the example of the apostles and to preach Christ Jesus and him crucified. (1 Cor. 2:2) On the contrary, they have desired to make manifest their own wisdom, that the people might look upon them as something great. Unable to harmonize or to explain as reasonable their erroneous doctrines of ‘inherent immortality’, “eternal torment” and “the trinity”, they’ have concluded it is now wise to call in question the truthfulness of the Scriptures and to claim that the men who wrote them were less learned than the modern clergy-men. Now the major portion of their number boldly deny that there is any efficacy in the sacrificial blood of Christ.
Why have they reached such a condition? The apostle answers: “They- received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie: that they all might be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.” (2 Thess. 2:10-12) They have taken real pleasure in unrighteousness, in denying the sin of man and his fall as a consequence thereof, and in denying the necessity for his redemption and reconciliation, and in denying the blood of Jesus as the basis for reconciliation. They have taken real pleasure in the unrighteousness of advocating the Devil’s organization, particularly the League of Nations as a means for bringing the desire of the people. They boldly state that their ‘chief business is to develop character and by so doing we can lift ourselves up to perfection’. To this end they indulge in politics and have been guilty of associating themselves with wicked profiteers and bootleggers to fasten upon the people, under the guise of law, the fraudulent arrangement of so-called prohibition. They take pleasure further in unrighteousness by bringing into their flocks, and making them the chief members, men who are high in political circles and strong among the financial powers that oppress the people. They take pleasure in the unrighteousness of denying God’s kingdom as a way and means of establishing righteousness on the earth. Truly, then, as the apostle declared, God has sent them an energy of delusion, and they have fallen to the blandishments of Satan and believe his lie rather than believe the truth.
The clergy have now reached the condition as foretold by God’s prophet, namely’, that the Scriptures to them is as a sealed book. (Isa. 29:10,11) Their eyes are entirely blinded to the fact that Satan is the god of this world. (2 Cor. 4:4) They have ignored the plain command of the Scriptures to keep themselves unspotted from the world. (Jas. 1:27) On the contrary, they have become a part of the world itself. They boldly broadcast to the people a message to this effect: ‘The business of religion and the business of the world a»-e inseparable.’ They have entirely lost sight of the fact that their association with the world and their attempt to run the politics of the Devil’s organization make them adulterers in the sight of the Lord and in the terms of the Scriptures, wherein it is written: “Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity with God? whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world, is the enemy of God.” (Jas. 4:4) By their course of action they have become the enemy of God and of Christ and of the people and are working against the best interests of the people. Each one of the clergy’ looks upon his congregation as his own flock, and holds that it is his prerogative to fleece his flock for his own personal gratification. They have lost sight of the fact that God foretold this condition and said to those who claim to be shepherds of the flock: ‘Woe
April 1, 1934
tffe WATCHTOWER.
109
to the shepherds that feed themselves and that do not feed their flocks; that eat the fat, and clothe themselves’ at the expense of the flock. (Ezek. 34:2,3) Contrary to the Scriptures they have assumed titles, such as “Doctor of Divinity”, and sign their names, “Reverend Timothy Jones, D.D.,” etc. They call themselves the watchmen of the flock, and they watch their flock only for the clergymen’s own selfish interests. They have entirely lost sight of the fact that God through his prophet foretold this condition and caused him to write these words: “Uis watchmen are blind; they are all ignorant, they are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark; sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber. Yea, they are greedy dogs which can never have enough, and they are shepherds that cannot un
derstand; they all look to their own way, every one for his gain from his quarter.”—Isa. 56:10,11.
These are the reasons why the clergy assert that the blood of Christ Jesus is of no purchasing value and has nothing to do with the reconciliation of man to God. With pious faces and with assumed righteous indignation, and with hands lifted in apparent holy horror, they denounce the sacrifice of animals by the Israelites as cruel and wicked. Then they add that the death of Jesus was an abnormal thing, and that his death has nothing more to do with the blessing of man than the death of any other man. Let the people get their eyes open to these pious frauds. Forsake them, and then personally and individually seek the truth at the hand of the Lord.
LET
A RESOLUTION AND EXPRESSION OF GRATITUDE
We of the Noithwcst Texas division of Jehovah’s witnesses, being duly assembled at Amarillo, Texas, at 9: 00 a.m. Sunday, December 31, 1933, wish to lieieby express to Jehovah God and our King, Christ Jesus, and to you, our dearly beloved Brother Rutherford, His obedient servant on earth, our appreciation for the food placed upon our table at this time.
Be it further resolved, that we appreciate the fact that Jehovah and his duly installed King, Christ Jesus, are our teachers through the visible organization on earth, the Watch Tower Bible and Tract .Society.
Be it further resolved, that we will not have any part with or spend our time listening to human teachers who desire to express their private interpretation of God’s Word, but will at all times use The Watchtower and other books and booklets put out by the above-named society.
Be it further resolved, that we will be obedient to the best of our ability to the organization now in existence and duly formed for the purpose of preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and that those who are in difl'erent positions of leadership in this organization are there by the will of Jehovah God and our duties as assigned by them will be done as unto the Lord and not as unto man.
Now having come to the time of unity in Christ Jesus, we are grateful to Jehovah for the privilege we have of being his witnesses and going forth in his army until his name is vindicated. God’s will be done, not ours.
This resolution was formed and unanimously adopted by the Northwest Texas division of Jehovah’s witnesses assembled at Amarillo, Texas, December 30, 1933, to January 1, 1934.
PRESSING THE BATTLE
Dear Brother Rutherford:
At the divisional campaign of Jehovah's witnesses, of the Wilson (N.C.) division, assembled at Durham, N.C., on December 30 to January 1, it was unanimously requested, by the brethren there assembled, that an expression of thanks and appreciation be sent you for the inspiring lecture, “His Organization,” heard Sunday morning, December 31, at nine o ’clock.
The reproduction was all that could be desired, and the brethren so thoroughly enjoyed it that they asked that it be put on again Sunday night, which was done, all again expressing their joy and gratitude for such a thiilling message. Surely’ it was a message from Jehovah through you, his faithful servant.
Be assured, dear Brother Rutherford, that we are with you in pressing the battle to the gate and daily remember you in our prayers, asking our heavenly Father, Jehovah, to give you strength and courage, that you may continue to boldly and fearlessly declare his message of truth, as you have been and are now doing.
Yours in the service of Jehovah,
Wilson (N.C.) division of Jehovah’s witnesses.
TERS
UNIFORM METHOD OF GIVING TESTIMONY
Dear Brother Rutherford:
I cannot longer refrain from expressing to you my great gratitude for the precious gift of the book Preparation. The Lord never provided anything for his people before that can compare with this marvelous unfolding of Zechariah’s prophecy. Truly our gracious God is preparing his faithful people for the final and complete vindication of his name when ho gets the victory over his enemies in the complete destruction of the wicked systems of this world, and the full establishment of his glorious kingdom of righteousness.
I have just rounded out my third year in the pioneer service, and words fail to describe the unbounded blessings received from Jehovah in thus striving daily to honor his name by proclaiming his praises to the people.
Every day now I am meeting people of good will who say they are regular listeners to the Watchtower programs on the radio, and who express great satisfaction with the good Word of God as it is so ably unfolded to them.
Another thing I wish to thank the Lord for through you is the uniform method of giving the testimony by means of the testimony card. I have stuck to it religiously and have placed more bound books thus far since the first of January than I had for more than a whole year. Of course, I am confining iny efforts solely to tho business districts, and it is much easier to place literature in sections like that than in tho residential districts. The best part of it is that one can use ixny one of the books he happens to wish to. As a result X am distributing a large supply of Light and Vindication that had not been moving at all.
My joy in the Lord continually increases as the days roll by and we draw steadily toward the great climax. Daily iny prayer is that the Lord God will richly bless you, dear brother, in your faithful efforts to serve his people. Your great courage and loyalty to Jehovah is a constant source of inspiration to all who delight themselves in the Lord. With much Christian love to you personally’, I am
Joyfully yours in Jehovah’s service,
W. B. Fowler, Pioneer.
GRATEFUL
Dear Brother Rutherford:
We will not delay further in expressing to you our gratitude for all the good things coming from headquarters. Now alter receiving Preparation and the Year Hook we are very much thrilled. Your constant thoughtfulness of the pioneers is appreciated to a degree not expressible in words.
Even the mountain rural people are losing faith in the preachers with their confused ideas and different conflicting creeds.
Much love to you.
Yours for the Kingdom,
Bro. and >Sr. Wingo, Pioneers.
110
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
FROM AFIELD
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Il it were not for the fact that ‘the joy of the Lord is our strength’, that “the name of Jehovah is our strong tower” and ‘our rest is in Jehovah’ you eould not do the amount of work and attend to the business of the office Jehovah has set you in: however, you may take a few moments aside occasionally to read letters “from afield”; and even if you do not get time to read this I desire to hereby send greetings and express thanks and appreciation, in the good Lord’s name, for the many good things we are receiving from his gracious Right Hand and the many blessings in his service. I especially want to express my joy and thanks for the Year Book —the report of the work, etc., and daily texts and comments. Today’s (February 15) text and comment, and for January 13, are extra good and strengthening.
The ‘food convenient’ in the Watchtowers is good beyond the expression in words, especially on “Hope”, magnifying and making clear the office and work of Christ Jesus, to the vindication of Jehovah’s name; “Refuge,” especially making clear and magnifying the name and excellent loving-kindness of Jehovah in the first and great commandment; and then what seems to be the grandest yet, and which we had in study during the past two Watchtower study periods: “Satisfied with Thy Likeness.” This last one (January 15) has so much good and strengthening food that it requires nfueh study and meditation to fully appreciate and clearly understand the many important points.
As with Ezekiel in type, so with the remnant now: we must observe and carefully study all tho Lord is showing us and be fully obedient to all his commandments. Failure to carefully study and clearly understand each Watchtower article, as they come out, would result, it seems, in not being able to clearly understand (“see”) later ones.
I also find the A.R.V. Bible (the version so often quoted from and which can also be obtained from the Society) a great help (with footnotes) in these studies and in reading. Surely we can, and do, from our hearts exclaim, “How precious is thy loving-kindness, O God! ” (Ps. 36: 7) Our loving Father, in his own chosen way, through Christ Jesus our Head, has made us to drink of the river of his pleasures; and we are abundantly satisfied with the fatness of his house. (Ps. 36:8) Oh, how good is the understanding of Psalms 36 and 37 (read in A.R.V., especially), and all the provisions of Jehovah’s house! Surely, now, all the “remnant” sing and rejoice together as one man, with our Head, in the praise and magnifying the name of Jehovah and his kingdom, lake Gideon to tho three hundred faithful and fully obedient ones, your leadership, faith, steadfastness, boldness and diligence by the direction and grace of Jehovah, through Christ Jesus our Head, is an example and joy unto the remnant. May the good Lord continue to bless, guide, keep and use yon and bless our united and harmonious service to his glory.
The good Lord’s blessing upon the coming convention in Los Angeles.
With much love I am, by Jehovah’s grace,
Your -brother in the service of the King Eternal,
A. L. Paschall, Pioneer.
MADE GLAD
My dear Brother Rutherford:
Thank you for my gift, the new book Preparation. Received my first blessing in reading your personal message “To the Faithful”. What a privilege to be one of that class that our Lord spoke of, ‘I will show you before they come to pass.’ This is truly a real proof that we are enlisted in his army and as soldiers wo have received our final armor.
Surely we are taught of God. I had often pondered over some of the peculiar statements made by the prophet Zechariah; and as it all unfolded as I read page after page of Preparation, my heart was made glad.
I want to thank you for your part, and 1 assure you that my determination is to press on, never slacking my hand.
Every day is filled with joy because of the privilege of ringing forth Jehovah’s praises.
May the Lord richly bless you as you so courageously press the battle to the gate's.
Yours in the kingdom service,
Clara Myers, Ohio.
INCREASED REVELATION
Dear Brother Rutherford:
We are a party of nine pioneers comprising a little company of Jehovah’s witnesses camped in our house-cars (4) on the edge of one of the towns in Carroll county, Georgia, and desire to take this opportunity to express to you our thankfulness and appreciation for Preparation and for the Year Book.
We are grateful to our heavenly Father for these further manifestations of his love and provision for the “people for his name”. We are happy to realize that we are in perfect harmony with the increased revelation of his word as given through his prophet Zechariah.
It also gives us great joy to see the progress of the witness work in the earth and to have the sweet realization that we are having a small part in that work.
We are witnessing in a portion of the country where there is much ignorance and superstition, nevertheless we are privileged to place the message of God’s kingdom in many homes each day and also to see many rejoice in that message.
We realize that the enemy has launched a special attack upon you in recent months, and we desire to assure you that we constantly remember you at the throne of grace. It is eomfoit-ing also to observe that as the enemy seeks to curb the witness by radio tho Lord has provided another instrument, in tho transcription machine, and that he is blessing this work greatly. In this work also we arc having a joyful part, for which we are grateful.
With fervent love, we are your fellow witnesses by His grace,
Charles Early Edith Early C. B. Henderson Helen Henderson A. D. Haas
Martha Haas
Claude Rounds Jennie B. Rounds Jessie Henderson
VISIONS NOW SPEAK
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Greetings from the field. I wish to express my hearty thanks to the great eternal Jehovah God, and Christ Jesus and you, for the marvelous book Preparation, for tho marvelous unfolding of tho great prophecy of Zechariah.
Many a time have we read it and wondered what it meant and if it could ever be understood.
Surely the prophetic visions of “The Book” were for an appointed time, and now they speak with eloquence and power to those ,who have waited upon the Lord by being busy holding forth the fruits of the kingdom from door to door and having as large a part as possible in the Temple erection and service.
What a marvelous pay day we have had already! Surely, ‘corn shall make the young men [that see the visions) cheerful, and new wine tho maidens’!
“The grand old Book” has been like a flower garden tn the winter, with not much beauty. Now it is springtime, and our great God is calling us forth to behold some of his wonders and beauties even before the rubbish of wintertime is clca»ed away.
We want to thank the Lord and you for the provisions he has made for the pioneers, even the “testimony” that we can hand to the people to read, so they can think a little and we can be still and quiet in their presence (good for us both). It says, “Study to be quiet,” and, “In quietness and confidence shall be your strength.” Surely we must have the Lord’s strength to go through this time.
We love you, dear brother, and know the Lord does. May he keep you and us until we see his face and hear his song.
One of his, desiring and trying to be faithful,
W. F. McLendon, Pioneer.
THANKFUL
Dear Brethren in the King’s Business:
I have so many things to be thankful for that I don't know where to start. I am so thankful to find myself in harmony with this great organization of the Lord’s, that I can see the beautiful light that shines.
And many thanks for the Year Book and the help of the book allowance of the past year. I am so grateful, how we are provided for! God bless all you brethren there.
Your humble sister by His grace,
Mollie Cameron, Pioneer.
April 1, 1934
ffKe WATCHTOWER.
111
UNITY OF SPIRIT AND ACTIVITY
Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society
AND OUR DEAR BROTHER RUTHERFORD,
Jehovah’s witnesses in fellowship with whom we have entire unity of spirit and activity by His grace.
How can words express our gratitude for this I and the precious gifts upon us of the heart- and mind-thrilling book Preparation, and now the most wonderful Year Hook for 1934? Only as you rend its pag<-s on the marvelous report of 1933 can you appreciate our attitude in all this.
Wo get the same inspiration that you do in appreciating we are Jehovah's witnesses in it all, with every other Jehovah’s witness in using with our best endeavors our privilege of hours, and placements. We know it all comes from the Giver of every pood and perfect gift, and have sweet fellowship with you and Jesus, our Head and Director, in all this.
How much we thank you for the gift of books to the pioneers, and the monthly assistance in all this from the Bethel family that may help us to buy that extra pair of shoes (tires) or some other material things we may need. Tlmt is love from
the Scriptural definition, and we want to be filled with that! In love, Rosina C. Mueller and Anna Bonney, Pioneers.
GLORIOUS PROSPECT
Dearly beloved Brother Rutherford:
It is with a deeply grateful heart that I express my appreciation of the gift of the Year Book for 1934. The report of the witness work in foreign lands is thrilling and encourages me to be even more zealous, if possible, in the service of our great Jehovah God.
I am seventy-nine years old. Have been in the service thirty-three years. Bach day has been happier than the last since I have seen our Father’s wonderful purposes. The glorious prospect transports me, and the precious promises fill me wi;h peace that passetii all understanding.
My life is tilled with praise. My gratitude knows no bounds.
May Jehovah’s richest blessings be upon you, his faithful, fearless servant, continually.
Mrs. C. W. Stiver, Pioneer.
(Continued from page 11!)
NEW YORK
Auburn WMBOSu 0:30pm Sa 2:15pm
Bing 'niton WNBF Su 7:00pm
Brooklyn WBBK Su 10: loam
Su fl:30pm Mo 10:30am Tu 10:30am Tu 6:30pm
Wo 10:30am We 6:30pm
Th 10:30am Th 6:30pm
Frl0:30um Fr 6:30pm
Buffalo WGR Su 10:00am
Buffalo WKBW We 10:00am
Freeport WGBB Su 9:00am
Tu 7:00pm Th 7:00pm
Hudson F. WGLC Su 10:43am
Jamestown WOOL Su 7:00pm New York WMCA Su 10:45am Saranac L. WNBZ Su 10:15am
Tu 4:15pm Th 4:15pm
Syracuse WSYR Su 10:30am
TupperL. WHDLSu 10:13am
Th 10:00am
Wh. Pl’ns WFASSu 6:00pm Mo 1:00pm Sa 9:00ain
NORTH CAROLINA
Asheville WWNCTh 5:30pm
Charlotte WBT Su 10:30am
Greensboro WHIG Su 9:45am
Raleigh WPTF Su 10:00am
NORTH DAKOTA Fargo	WDAY Su 10:00am
G’d Forks KFJM Su 5:00pm We 5:00pm Fr 5:00pm
OHIO
Akron WADC Su 1:45pm We 1:00pm
Cleveland WHK Su 6:30pm Tu 3:15pm Fr 6:30pm
Cleveland WJAY Su 9:45am Columbus WAIT! Su 10:00am Th 7:30pm Columbus WBNS Su 10:45am Mo 2:00pm We 2:00pm Fr 2:00pm
Davton WSMKSu 1:30pm Mt" Grab WIIBD Su 4:30pm
Wo 4:30pm Fr 4:30pm Toledo WSPDSu 9:30am
Sa 8:15am
Youngst’nWKBN Su 10:00am We 4:00pm
Zanesville WALR Su 10:00am We 4:15pm
OKLAHOMA
Elk City KASA Su 1:15pm Oki ’a City KOMA Su 1:45pm PoneaCity WBBZ Su 10:00am We 9:00pm
Shawnee KGFF Mo 8:45pm We 8:45pm Fr 8:45pm
OREGON
Klamath F. KF JI Mo 8:15pm Marshfield KOOS Mo 1:30pm Medford KNED Su 10:00am
Th 4:00pm
PENNSYLVANIA
Altoona WEBG Su 12:00 nn
Tu 8:15pm
Erie WLBW Su 10:45am Glenside WIBGSu 1:15pm Johnstown WJAC Su 4:30pm Phil’a WCAU Su 12:00 nn Pittsb’gh KQV Su 10:30am
We 1:45pm Fr 1:45pm Pittsb ’gh WWSW We 5:15pm Reading WEEC Su 3:45pm
We 3:45pm Wash’ton WNBOSu 9:45am W’msport WRAK Su 9:15pm Th 7:15pm
York WORK Su 3:00pm
PHILIPPINE ISLANDS
Manila KZEG Su 7:00pm
Th 7:00pm
SOUTH CAROLINA
Charleston WCSC Su 1:00pm
We 7:00pm Er 7:00pm
Columbia WIS Su 1:15pm
Fr 6:45pm
Greenville WFBC Su 9:30am
Spart’b’g WSPA Su 6:30pm
SOUTH DAKOTA
Pierre KGFX Su 1:00pm
Tu 4:00pm Th 4:00pm
Sioux F ’Is KSOO Su 10:00am
Th 4:30pm
Watertown KGCR Su 9:15am
We 3:45pm Fr 8:45pm
TENNESSEE
Bristol WOPIWe 6:45pm
Ha 6:45pm
Cha’nooga WDOD Su 1:00pm
Th 8:00am
Jackson WTJS Su 1:30pm
We 5:00pm Fr 5:30pm
Knoxville WNOX Su 1:45pm
We 5:30pm
Memphis WMC Su 4:00pm
Memplus WREC Su 9:30am
TEXAS
Amarillo KGRSSu 9:00am
Austin	KNOW Su 10:00am
Beaumont KFDM Su 10:00am
Tu 7:45pm
Borger KSRBSu 5:00pm
Wo 5:00pm Fr 5:00pm
CorpusChr. KGFI Su 9:00am
Wo 6:45pm Fr 6:45pm
Dallas	WRLD Su 5:43pm
Dublin	KFPLTh 8:00pm
Fr 10:00am
El Paso KTSM Su 1:15pm
Ft. Worth KT AT Mo 5:15pm
We 5:15pm Fr 5:15pm
Galveston KLUF Su 10:15am
We 2:15pm
Houston KPRC Su 10:00am
Kerrville KERR Su 10:15am
We 3:30pm Fr 3:30pm
Pampa WREX Su l:3Oom
We 1:30pm Fr 1:30pm
8. Angelo KGKL Su 1:45pm Th 8:45am
S. Antonio KTSA Su 10:45a:n
Wichita F. KG KO Su 12:30pm Th 8:45pm
UTAH
Ogden KLO Su 3:15pm
We 5:45pm
Salt L. City KSL Su 11:15am
VERMONT
Rutland WSYB Su 10:00am
Th 5:30pm
Waterb’y WDEV Mo 1:45pra
We 1:45pm Fr 1:45pm
VIRGINIA
Ch 'lottesv. WEI IC Su 10:45am Danville WBTM Su 9:15pm Lynchb’g WLVA Su 12 :13pm Norfolk WTAR Su 12:30pm Petersb’g WPHlfSu 6:15pm We 10:00am
Richmond WRVA Su 12:13pm Roanoke WDBJ Su 12:30pm We 5:00pm
WASHINGTON
Aberdeen KXROSn 1:15pm Bell’ham KVOSSu 10:00um Tli 5:30pm Seattle KJR Su 10:00:im
Seattle	KVL Mo 6:45pm
Tu 6:45pm	We 6:45pm
Tli 6:45pm	Fr 6:45pm
Sa 6:45pm
Spokane KFIO Su 9:15am We 7:43am Fr 7:45am Spokane KGA Su 4:00pin Tacoma KMO Su 10:30am
We 4:30pm Fr 4:30pm
Tacoma KVI Su 2:30pm
Walla Walla KL'J Su 7:45um
Su 1:30pm Wenatchee KPQ Su l:()opm We 7:00am Yakima KIT Su 10:00am
Th 7:00am
WEST VIRGINIA
Bluefield WHIS Su 9:00am Fr 8:0i>am
Cha’ston WOBU Su 4:0i'pm Hunt’ton WSAZ Th 4:00pm Wheeling WWVA Su 10:00am
WISCONSIN
La Crosse WKBH Su l;Oopiu Madison WIBA Su 10:00am
WYOMING
Casper KDFN S i 10:30am
Th 8:45am
£HIe WATCHTOWER.
RADIO SERVICE
The good news of the kingdom of Jehovah is broadcast each week or oftener by these and other stations at time shown.
[Current local time is shown in each instance.]
AUSTRALASIA
NEW SOUTH WALES
Albury 2-AYTu 8:45pm
Broken Hill 2-XL Su 8:45pm Canberra 2-CA Su 8:45pm Goulburn 2-GN Su 7:30pm Grafton 2-GFTu 7:30pm Gunnedah 2-MOSu 7:05pm Lismore 2-XN We 7:15pm Newcastle 2-I1D Su 9:30am
Su 7:15pm We 6:45pm Sydney 2-UE Su 9:15am W'ga W'ga 2-WGWe 7 :45pm
Tu 7:30pm We 9:30am
QUEENSLAND
Brisbane 4-HC Su 10:15am Mackay 4-JIK Su 11:00am Townsville 4-tOWe 8:00pm
VICTORIA
Ballarat 3-BA Su 8:45pm
Bendigo 3-BOTu 8:00pm Hamilton 3-HA Su 6:45pm Horsham 3-HS Su 7:00pm Melbourne 3-AW Su 12:15pm Mildura 3-MASu 7:15pm Sale 3-TRSu 6:30pm Swan Hill 3 SH Su 7:15pm Wangaratta 3-WR Su 8:15pm
r WEST AUSTRALIA
Kalgoorlie 6 KG Su 7:40 pm Perth 6-ML Su 7:00pm
TASMANIA
Launceston 7-LA Fr 10:15pm
BELGIUM
Hainaut BONNE Sa 5:30pm (330 m) ESPERANCE
CANADA ALBERTA Calgary CFCN Su 5:45pm
NOVA SCOTIA
Sydney CJCB Su 9:00pm
ONTARIO
Hamilton CROC Su 10:30am Su 1:30pm Su 8:15pm
CHINA
Shanghai XHHH Su 10:00am
CUBA
Havana CMK Su 11:30am also Spanish Su 9:00pm
Santa Cl’a CMHI Su 12:00 nn
ESTHONIA
Reval RADIO-Su 3:30tm (296.1m) TALLINN
FRANCE
Beziers RADIO-Th 8:00pm (220.1m) BEZIERS
Bordeaux RADIO- Mo 7:45pm
(237 m) SUD-OUEST Fecamp RADIO-NOR-
(223 m) MANDIE
English Su 4:00pm
French Tu 8:00pm
Paris RADIO L L Er 8:15pm
(370 m)
Paris RADIO- Su 12:00 nn
(312.8 m) VITUS
Th 7:30pm Sa 7:30pm
Toulouse RADIO-We 7:15pm
(385.1m) TOULOUSE
MEXICO
Mexico XECW
Spanish Th 10:00pm
UNITED STATES
ALABAMA
Birm'ham WAPISu 9:45am
Birin ’ham WBRC Su 10:00am
We 4:30pm
M’tgomeryWSFA Su 3:45pm
Muscle S. WNRA Su 6:00pm
We 8:00prn Fr 8:00pm
ALASKA
AnchorageKFQD We 9:30pm Ketchikan KGBU Mo 7:15pm Th 7:15pm Sa 7:15pm
ARIZONA
Bisbee KSUN Su 4:00pm We 4:00pm Fr 4:00pm
Jerome KCRJ Mo 5:15pm
We 5:15pm Sa 5:15pm Spanish Th 4:30pm Prescott KPJM Su 5:45pm
We 5:15pm Fr 5:15pm Tucson KGAR Su 7:00pm
We 5:45pm Fr 5:45pm Tucson KVOA Su 8:45am
Th 8:00pm
Yuma KUMA Su 6:15prn Spanish Su 6:00pm
ARKANSAS
Fay’ville KUOA Su 12:45pm
We 11 :45am Fr 4:30pm HotSp’gs KTIISSu 3:30pm Little R'k KARKSu 9:00am Little R’k KGHI Su 7:00pm
We 5:45pm Fr 5:45pm Little R’k KLRA Su 10:30am Paragould KBTM Su 10:00am We 11:30am Texarkana KCMC Su 6:45pm
CALIFORNIA
El Centro KXO Su 10:00am Eureka KIEM Su 10:30am Fresno KMJ Su 3:45pm Hollywood KNX Su 9:15pm Long B 'ch KGER Su 10:45am Los Angeles KTM Su 8:30am
Su 8:00pm Th 8:00pm
Oakland KLS Su 11:15ain We 2:45pm Fr 2:45pm
Oakland KNOW Su 10:15am Su 6:15pm Mo 7:45pm
Fr 8:15pm Sa’mento KFBK Su 9:30am San Diego XEBC Su 11:45am
We 7:45pm
S.F’cisco KTAB Su 9:30am
'	Sa 8:30am
Stockton KGDM Su 9:30am
We 7:15am Fr 1:15pm
COLORADO
Col’oSpr. KVOR Su 10:30am
We 5:30pm Sa 4:30pm
Denver KFELSu 7:00pra
Grand J’n KFXJ Su 1:15pm Greeley KFKA Mo 7:15pm Lamar KIDW Su 7:15pm
We 2:40pm Fr 2:40pin
Yuma KGEK Su 12:45pm We 12:45pm Fr 12:45pm
CONNECTICUT
Bridgeport WICC Su 10:00am
DELAWARE
Wilm 'ton WDEL Su 7:00pm
Th 8:30pm
Wilm'ton WILM Mo 8:45am
FLORIDA
Miami	WIOD Su 12:15pm
Miami WQAMSu 5:15pm
Orlando WDBO Su 12:45pm
Pensacola WCOA Su 1:00pm We 7:00pm
GEORGIA
Athens	WTFI Su 9:45am
Atlanta	WGST Su 5:45pm
Augusta WRDW Su 3:00pm
Th 7:45pm
Columbus WRBLSu 9:30am
LaGrangeWKEU Su 3:00pm Wo 3:00pm Fr 10:00am
Rome WFDV Su 12:30pm We 8:45pm Fr 8:45pm
Savannah WTOC Su 1:15pm
Thomasv. WQDX We 9:15am We 7:30pm
HAWAII
Honolulu KGMB We 12:05pm Fr 7:15pm
IDAHO
Boise KIDO Su 10:3oam
We 8:45pm
Idaho Falls KID Mo 8:30pm Tu 8:30pm	We 8:30pm
Th 8:30pm	Fr 8:30pm
Sa 8:30pm
Nampa KFXD Su 11:00am Pocatello KSEI Su 2:00pm Su 9:00pm
Twin Falls KTFI Su 10:45am Su 4:45pm
ILLINOIS
Decatur WJBL Su 10:00am
Mo 7:30pm
Harrisb’g WEBQ Su 6:00pm
Mo 10:30pm Fr 10:00pm
LaSalle WJBCSu 2:15pm
Rockford W RO K Su 10:00a ra
Su 10:00pm Wel0:0Opm
Sp’gfield WCBS Su 12:30pm
Sa 11:15um
INDIANA
Ind ’apolis WKBF Su 10:00am
We 2:00pm
Muncie WLBC Su 1:30pm
Fr 7:30pm
IOWA
Decorah KGCA Mo 9:00am We 9:00ain Sa 9:00am Des Moines WHO Su 9:15am Waterloo WMT Su 6:45pm
KANSAS
Coffeyville KGGF Su 1:45pm Th 8:00pm
MAINE Bangor WLBZ Su 9:45am
MARYLAND
Baltimore WBAL Su 4:15pm Cumberl’d WTBOSu 2:00pm
We 2:00pm Fr 2:00pm Hagerst’n WJEJ Su 10:15am
MASSACHUSETTS Babson P. WBSO Su 12:30pm Boston WNACSu 10:00am Sp’gfield WMAS Su 10:00am Worcester WORC Su 10:30am
MICHIGAN
Calumet WHDFTu 6:45pm
Detroit WJRSu 9:45am
Ironwood W.IMSSu 5:00pm
We 7:00pm Fr 7:15pm Jm kson W1BM Su 3:00pm KalamazooWKZO Su 4:00pm
Wo 2:45pm
MINNESOTA
F’gus Falls KG DE Su 10:00am Min’polis WRI1M Tu 8 :00pm Moorhead KGFK Su 7:30pm
We 5:15pm Fr 5:15pm
St. Paul WRIIM Su 12:30pm Th 1:00pm
MISSISSIPPI
Hattiesb’gWPFB Su 1:30pm We 7:45pm
Laurel WAMLSu 12:45pm
Meridian WCOC Su 10:00am
We 6:45 pm
Miss. City WGCM Su 9:45am We 8:45pm
MISSOURI
Columbia KFRUSu 4:30pm We 7:15am
Kans.C’y KWKC Su 2:00pm
Tu 7:00aju
MONTANA
Billings KGHL Su 12:15pm
NEBRASKA
Kearney KGFWSu 10:00am
Lincoln KFABSu 9:30am
Lincoln KFORSu 10:15am
Seottsbl’f KGKY Su 10:15am
We 5:45pm Fr 5:45pm
NEVADA
Reno KOH Su 10:30am
NEW JERSEY AtlanticC’y WPG Su 10:00am
NEW MEXICO
Albuq’que KOH Su 5:45pm
Roswell KG FL Su 5:15pm We 4:30pm Fr 4:30pm
(Continued on pope 111)
WATCHTOWER.
Published Semi-Monthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE €> TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N. Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford President W. E. Van AMBur.cn Secretary "And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” ~ Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man wilfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce tho ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH'S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is tho rightful King of tho world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whoso duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear tho fruits of tho kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and tho Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of tho peoples of earth can come onlv by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ which has now begun; that tho Lord’s next great act is tho destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in tho earth, and that under tho kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall be restored nnd live on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in. the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction
specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruc-• tion in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his Beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of t1 1 Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Brice
United States, 51.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, 51.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 7s. American remittances should bo made by Express or Postal Morey Order, or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, Soutli African un.l Australasian remittances should bo made direct to the respective brarieli otlives. Bemittanees from countries other than those mentioned wav be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ....... ... 31 Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, r.ngland Canadian ....... 40 Irniu Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Australasian . . 7 Beresford Bond, Stratliflcld, N. S. W., Australia South African .... Boston House, Capo Town, South Africa Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
AR sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay tho subscription price may have The IVatchtoicer free upon written appliiation to tho publishers, made once each year, statins the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations. Xotiee to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will bo sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on nddriss label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be seat with the journal one month before tiio subscription expire,. Entered as Second Class Mail Matter at Brooklyn, X. Y., Postotfice. .let of March 3, IriTJ.
RADIO AND THE PRINTED WORD
All witnessing parties ami all individuals who engage in the witness work should mention the radio station in their vicinity that is broadcasting the WATCHTOWER programs. This often proves a means of opening the way to place the books in the hands of the people. Ilnve in mind that the chief purpose of the radio is to call the people’s attention to the truth and then furnish the opportunity for them to get a wider understanding of the message concerning the government of Jehovah by reading what is being printed.
Every one who now participates in the field work in territory served by broadcasts of the watchtower progiatn may fave a share in telling the people that this unique service is available each week. Workers report that distribution of the radio folder (supplied by the Society) is proving to be a convenient and effective method of giving continual public notice of this program while engaging in the house-to-house witnessing.
truth manyfold, so that the desire tor the literature is stimulated and study classes of many interested hearets are being formed. Besides more than 450 such machines m the United States alone, great numbers are now being effectively used in countries near and afar. For more inhumation, write the Society.
TRANSCRIPTION MACHINES
The Society has made arrangements to construct and assemble portable tianscription muehines at our own fm-tory at 117 Adams Street. These machines will be somewhat different tn construction from those previously furnished. They will be spring-wound, and operated f:om a (i-volt wet-cell battery. Every machine will be furnished complete with the battery and a battery charger, so that it can be kept up to its full strength. We are pleas-' i to announce that this machine can be oL’eted at $100, complete, to brcthien in the United States.
PUBLIC LECTURES BY TRANSCRIPTION
Jehovah’s blessing has been markedly upon the use of the portable transcription machine. He has plainly manifested that this machine meets the need of the hour, when the enemy, under Gog, is seeking to curtail the use of the radio by God's anointed and when the people's ears are eager to hear, not man’s message, but God's. The transcription machine Iris increased the power of Jehovah’s witnesses afield to preach His
ANNOUNCING COMPANY MEETINGS
Many hearers of radio tram-.cription lectures have the desire to meet with Jehovah’s witnesses and to study bis Word with them. Hence wheicver the kingdom message is rmlim-ast. ti.e time and place of meeting of the local company of Jehovah 's witnesses should be announced after the trt:n“etiptmn. Tito time on tl.c nr being paid for, the station manager ought to readily grant your request to make such announcement.
Vol. LV	April 15, 1934	No. 8
HIS COVENANTS
PART 2
"Gather my saints together unto me; those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice. And the heavens shall declare his righteousness: for God is judge himself.”—Ps. 50:5, 6.
JEHOVAH is carrying forward his purposes according to his sovereign will, and not according to the ideas of any creature. It is his name that is involved. The controversy is between him and his enemy, Satan. Jehovah is supreme, and this he will prove to all of his intelligent creation. His name Jehovah stands for his purpose, and he has declared his purpose to be that all shall know that he is the Almighty God, the Most High. (Ex. 9:14) The time has come when the testimony to the name of Jehovah God, the Supreme One, must be given, and the people taken out from the nations for his name must give that testimony.
2	It now, by his grace, is made plainly to appear that the covenants of Jehovah are for the purpose of bringing the great issue to a climax and to convince all that he is God. lie has placed his name upon his people taken out from among the nations, and who are made a part of his elect servants under Christ the Servant, and this honor he has given to none other. (Isa. 42:8) Satan and his servants have defamed the name of Jehovah God, but now the time is at hand when Jehovah’s name shall be exalted and only those who love his name shall live. “His name shall endure for ever: his name shall be continued as long as the sun; and men shall be blessed in him: all nations shall call him blessed.” (Ps. 72:17) His covenant people he has chosen and gathered unto himself for his purpose. Therefore let us keep in mind that the new covenant is Jehovah’s instrument to gather unto himself a people to bear testimony to and have a part in the vindication of his name.
RELATIONSHIP
3	There is a relationship between the old law covenant and the new covenant, because the latter became the substitute for the first and accomplishes what the first failed to accomplish. The making and inauguration of the first is related to the making and inauguration of the other. The old covenant was made in Egypt, on the 14th day of Nisan, at the slaying of the passover lamb. “Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel, I made a covenant with your fathers in the
day that I brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondmen.” (Jer. 34:13) This Jehovah did that they might be his people and he might be their God. “But I will for their sakes remember the covenant of their ancestors, whom I brought forth out of the land of Egypt in the sight of the heathen, that I might be their God: I am the Lord.” (Lev. 26:45) “According to the word that I covenanted with you when ye came out of Egypt, so my spirit remaineth among you; fear ye not.” (Hag. 2:5) The making of that covenant in Egypt at the time of the slaying of the paschal lamb pointed forward to and was typical of the slaying of the Lord Jesus, the Lamb of God, which latter covenant was made on the day that Jesus died.
4	The lifeblood of Christ Jesus was the blood that made good or operative the new covenant: “And lie took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it: for this is my blood of the new testament [covenant, II.V.], which is shed lor many [that is to say, for as many as are brought into the covenant, and also for all mankind who accept God’s gracious gift of life through Christ Jesus] for the remission of sins.” (.Matt. 26:27,28) “And he took the cup; and when he had given thanks, he gave it to them: and they all drank of it. And he said unto them, This is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many.” (Mark 14: 23, 24) “Likewise also the cup after supper, saying, This cup is the new testament [eovenant, ZLF.] in my blood, which is shed for you [who are joined with me in the covenant]. But, behold, the hand of him that betrayeth me is with me on the table.” (Luke 22: 20, 21) “After the same manner also he took the cup, when he had supped, saying, This cup is the new testament | covenant, It. I'.J in my blood: this do ye, as oft as ye drink it, in remembrance of me.”—1 Cor. 11:25.
5	Here is the Scriptural proof that three and one-half years after being appointed as mediator of the new covenant Jesus announced to his faithful disciples the making of that covenant between God and himself, and true Israelites, such as Nathanael, were invited into that covenant. This proves that those
115
116
Tile WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
who were baptized into Moses, and who continued faithful until the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, were transferred from Moses to Christ. This announcement of the new covenant to the disciples must have thrilled them at that moment and caused them to think seriously. They must have been familiar with the prophecies, and there began the fulfilment of Jeremiah’s prophecy recorded in Jeremiah 31:31-34. From that time forward every one who should be brought into the new covenant, and who should abide therein faithfully, should know Jehovah, from the least unto the greatest of them. The typical ceremony or celebration of the law covenant had been kept or observed by Jesus and his faithful disciples for the last time. From that time onward the fulfilment of the type of the law covenant took place, beginning with the death of Jesus on that day. (1 Cor. 5:1) The death of Jesus on the tree as a sinner and in the place and stead of sinful man served to ‘blot out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to the cross [tree]’. (Col. 2:14) Mark that this covenant was made on the earth in the world of Satan’s organization, symbolized by Egypt; “which spiritually is called . . . Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified.” (Kev. 11:8) The lifeblood of Christ Jesus shed that day in the world made firm or put in force the covenant, and from that moment the new covenant became operative.—See lieconciliation, page 290.
6	In further support of the conclusion that the new covenant became operative from the death of Jesus, mark these words authoritatively written concerning the new covenant by the apostle: “For where a eovenant is it is necessary for the death to be brought in of him that hath covenanted; for a covenant over dead persons is firm, since it is not then of force when he is living that hath covenanted.” (Ileb. 9:16,17, Itoth.) The shedding of the blood of Christ Jesus put the new covenant in force. The death of the disciples and the others of the faithful followers of Christ Jesus, including the remnant of this day, was and is entirely unnecessary to the making and putting in operation of the new covenant. In Egypt there was just one sacrifice, the lamb slain, and immediately the law eo\enant was made and went into effect. Likewise the new covenant went into effect when the antitypical Lamb, Christ Jesus, was slain, and the making and operation of the new covenant did not have to wait until the death of the last member of the body of Christ Jesus and which must take place at the end of the period of sacrifice. Vv'e must keep in mind that the blood of the body members of Christ is not necessary to the making and operation of the new covenant.
T The law covenant was inaugurated at Mount Sinai, at which time, as shown by the Scriptural record of that ceremony, only “burnt offerings” and “peace offerings of oxen [not goats] ” are mentioned. “And he sent young men of the children of Israel, which offered burnt offerings, and sacrificed peace offerings
of oxen unto the Lord. And Moses took half of the blood, and put it in basons; and half of the blood he sprinkled on the altar. And he took the book of the covenant, and read in the audience of the people; and they said, All that the Lord hath said will we do, and be obedient. And Moses took the blood, and sprinkled it on the people, and said, Behold the blood of the covenant, which the Lord hath made with you concerning all these words.”—Ex. 24: 5-8.
THE BLOOD
8	In Egypt Moses was a type of Jesus; but, as Moses could not be put to death and at the same time complete the type, the lamb was slain in the stead or place of Moses, and it was the blood of the lamb that sanctified or perfected and made operative the law covenant. Concerning that lamb it is written: “Your lamb shall be without blemish, a male of the first year; . . . And they shall take of the blood, and strike it on the two side posts, and on the upper door post of the houses, wherein they shall cat it.” (Ex. 12: 5, 7) When the Israelites reached Sinai there were performed the ceremonies of inaugurating the. law covenant and Moses took the blood and sprinkled it on the people and said: “Behold the blood of the covenant, which the Lord hath made with you.” (Ex. 24:8) The blood of Jesus shed at Calvary made operative the new covenant on the day of his death, and immediately preceding his death Jesus took the cup of wine, symbolic of his blood, and said to his disciples: “This is [represents] my blood of the new [covenant], which is shed for many for the remission of sins.” (Matt. 26: 28) Ilis shed blood was both for the making complete and putting in operation the new covenant, and also served as the redemptive price for mankind. Only by faith in the shed blood of Christ Jesus can one be brought into a covenant with God. Prior to the exercise of such faith all were aliens from God, and only those who accepted Chiist Jesus and exercised faith in his blood could be brought nigh God. “At that [past] time ye [Gentile followers of Christ] were without Christ, being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise [including the new covenant], having no hope, and without God in the world: but now, in Christ Jesus [the mediator], ye [Gentiles] who sometimes were far off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ. For he is our peace, who hath made both one, and hath broken down the middle wall of partition between us.”—Eph. 2:12-14.
9	The Jews who deliberately violated the law covenant were put to death; so likewise those who count the blood of Christ Jesus, which is the blood of the new covenant, an unholy or common thing shall die. “Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who hath trodden under foot the Son of God [the Greater Moses], and hath counted the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was samti-fied, an unholy thing, and hath done despite unto the
Apbil 15, 1934
WATCHTOWER.
117
spirit of grace?” (Ileb. 10:29) It is Jehovah God who perfects the ones taken out for his name, and this he does through the blood of the new covenant. “Now the God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you that which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ; to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.” (Ileb. 13:20,21) “For by one ofi'ering he hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified.” (Ileb. 10:14) These texts last quoted prove beyond all doubt that the new covenant has no application to the restitution or regeneration of the human race, but that it applies exclusively to those who have consecrated themselves to do the will of God. It is through such consecrated ones that God takes out a people for his name. He sanctifies them for his purpose, and this he does after such persons have made a consecration to do his will and have been accepted by him through the merit of Jesus Christ’s shed blood. The Scriptures call the new covenant the “everlasting covenant” for the reason that it is a part of the original expressed purpose of Jehovah to bring forth a seed, the primary purpose of which seed is to accomplish the vindication of Jehovah’s name. Only those taken into the new covenant and who then prove faithful unto the end are taken out and made a part of the seed of promise.
WITH WHOM MADE
10	The law covenant was made by Jehovah with the natural descendants of Israel, Moses being the glorified mediator. The Israelites as a nation were unfaithful to that covenant and were east off as a nation. The new covenant was made with Christ Jesus, tho glorified mediator, with and for the benefit of spiritual Israel. There is a natural or earthly Israel, and there is a spiritual or heavenly Israel. Natural Israelites having broken the terms of the law covenant made in Egypt, it would be entirely inconsistent for God to make with that same people a new covenant, which new covenant is higher and more exalting than the old law covenant. This of itself would preclude the conclusion that tr.e new covenant is made with the natural descendants of Abraham. The natural or fleshly Israelites were a typical people, the antitype of which are those who covenant to do the will of God and who are designated spiritual Israelites. It is written that Jehovah makes the new covenant ‘with the house of Israel and the house of Judah’, but it would be entirely inconsistent to conclude that Jehovah would make a new covenant with the natural descendants of Jews regathered at Palestine in unbelief and who continue to reject Christ Jesus. Concerning this matter the apostle wrote: “Israel [that is to say, the nation of Israel, the natural descendants of Abraham] hath not obtained that which he seeketh for; but the election [the faithful in Christ] hath
obtained it, and the rest were blinded.” (Rom. 11:7) This proves that the new covenant is not made with the nation of Israel or the natural descendants of Israel, but that it is with spiritual Israelites that the new covenant is made. Christ Jesus is the One that “hath covenanted”. (Ileb. 9:16,17, lioth.) It is true that Christ Jesus by human birth was a natural Israelite. Also those who first became the followers of Christ Jesus were natural Israelites of both houses. •The new covenant, however, was made with Jesus Christ after he was made the Head of the spiritual house of Israel, and the others were invited into the covenant after they had accepted Christ Jesus as the promised seed, and hence after they had become spiritual Israelites. “They are not all Israel, which are of Israel: neither, because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all children: but, In Isaac shall thy seed be called.” (Rom. 9:6,7) Only those who are begotten of the spirit after exercising faith in tho shed blood of Christ Jesus are spiritual Israelites. “For he is not a Jew, which is one outwardly; neither is that circumcision, which is outward in the flesh: but he is a Jew, which is one inwardly; and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, ami not in the letter; whose praise is not of men, but of God.”— Rom. 2: 28, 29.
11	Those taken into the old law covenant, were a ransomed and redeemed people, as it is written that Jehovah went to Egypt for that very purpose. “And what one nation in the earth is like thy people, even like Israel, whom God went to redeem for a people to himself, and to make him a name, and to do tor you great things and terrible, for thy land, before thy people, which thou redeemedst to thee from Egypt, from thejiations and their gods? For thou hast eon-firmed to thyself thy people Israel, to be a people unto thee for ever: and thou, Lord, art become their God.” (2 Sam. 7:23,24) “And what one nation in the earth is like thy people Israel, whom God went to redeem to be his own people, to make thee a name of greatness and terribleness, by driving out nations from before ihy people, whom thou hast redeemed out of Egypt? For thy people Israel didst thou make thine own people for ever; and thou, Lord, becamest their God.” (1 Chron. 17:21,22) To be ransomed and to be redeemed from Egypt the natural Israelites must have an unblemished passover lamb slain in their behalf, and it was then that Jehovah made the covenant and led the Israelites by the hand out of Egypt to Mount Sinai, where the covenant was inaugurated with fitting ceremonies.
12	Before anyone could be brought into the new covenant the antitypiral lamb must be slain. Those brought into the covenant must first be ransomed and a redeemed people. These are redeemed “with the precious blood of Christ [Jesus], as of a lamb without blemish and without spot”. (1 Pet. 1:19) “Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ; who
118
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.” (Titus 2:13,14) This text proves that the purpose of the new covenant is to take out from the nations of the world a peculiar people, zealous for good works, that is, of bearing witness to and having a part in the vindication of Jehovah’s name.
13	All spiritual Israel, that is to say, those taken out for the name of Jehovah, must be brought into the new covenant. In former days the scripture record at Romans 11:25-29 has been so applied as to link or connect the natural Israelites with the new covenant, but it now appears that the new covenant has nothing whatsoever to do with the twelve tribes of natural Israel, but that the covenant relates exclusively to the ‘‘Israel of God”, that is to say, the spiritual Israelites.
14	Again calling attention to the argument of the apostle Paul, note that ne states that natural ‘‘Israel hath not obtained that which he seeketh for; but the election [that is to say, those Israelites who became spiritual] hath obtained it, and the rest were blinded [hardened, wiaryinj Addressing himself particularly to the Gentiles the apostle says: ‘‘For I would not, brethren, that yc should be ignorant of this mystery, lest yc should be wise in your own conceits; that blindness in part is happened to Israel, until the fulness of the Gentiles be come in.” (Rom. 11: 25) The greater part of the people of the nations of Israel were hardened at heart, were made blind, and only a “remnant” of the Jews remained faithful and were not blinded. Nor does this scripture say that it was temporary blindness that resulted to the Jews, which temporary blindness would vanish at a time certain, but it does plainly say a part, that is to say, the greater part, of the Jewish people became blind. When Jesus came there were a few Jews that were willing to accept and did accept him as the Messiah, and they were not made blind. When the apostle uses the words “until the fulness of the Gentiles be come in”, that does not mean to the end of the Gentile times or the end of the world, but does mean until the time came to fill up the required 144,000 from the ranks of others than the Jews or natural Israelites. Since only a small remnant of natural Israel accepted Christ Jesus and were transferred to him and became spiritual, it follows that the required 144,000 members of the body of Christ, the spiritual Israelites, must be made up from the Gentiles, that is, those other than Jews. For three and one-half years after Pentecost the gospel was taken exclusively to the Jews or natural Israelites that they might have an opportunity to become spiritual. At the end of that time the gospel was taken to Jews and Gentiles, Cornelius being the first of the Gentiles to become a follower of Christ Jesus. That marked the “fulness of the Gentiles” coming in. Even so today there is a remnant of spiritual Israel brought under the robe of righteousness and given the gar
ments of salvation: “receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls; of which salvation the prophets have inquired and searched diligently, who prophesied of the grace that should come unto you.” (1 Pet. 1: 9,10; Isa. 61:10) The salvation here mentioned refers to the remnant of spiritual Israel, and concerning which the prophet wrote: “When the enemy shall come in like a flood, the spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against him. And the Redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob, saith the Lord.” (Isa. 59:19,20) Then the apostle continues: “And so all Israel shall be saved: as it is written, There shall come out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob.” (Rom. 11:26) It is at the time of the coming out from Zion of the Deliverer Christ Jesus that ungodliness is taken away from all spiritual Israelites so that then “all Israel”, that is to say, spiritual Israel, shall be saved. The One coming out of Zion, that is, God’s organization, the Deliverer, is Christ Jesus, and it is he that turns away ungodliness “from Jacob”, that is to say, from the people taken out for Jehovah’s name, and it is then that all spiritual Israel are delivered, being gathered unto God as a people for himself.
13	In 1918 Christ Jesus as “the messenger of the covenant” suddenly or straightway appeared at the temple of Jehovah for judgment and purged the sons of Levi, which resulted in turning away of ungodliness from Jacob, that is, God’s covenant people. Otherwise stated, the Lord Jesus Christ at the temple turned away such ungodliness as “character development”, formalism, ceremonies, creature worship, which is the “sin of Samaria”, the pyramid hobby, submission to political and commercial powers as though they were the “higher powers”. The turning away of ungodliness from Jacob means the taking away of these ungodly things from the remnant, and permitting them to see and to appreciate Jehovah’s purpose. Natural Israel or Jews, who once were thought to be the ones referred to in this text and from whom is turned away the “ungodliness from Jacob”, continue to this day in ungod.iness and are still blind as bats to the purposes of Jehovah, and this shows that the apostle here had no reference to natural Israel when he spoke of turning away ungodliness from Jacob, but that this scripture applies exclusively to those who become of the spiritual house of Israel.
16	It is entirely unreasonable and therefore unscrip-tural to conclude that the day comes when Jehovah will make a new covenant with ail natural descendants of Israel and then save all the Jews. A few days before Jesus was crucified he rode into Jerusalem, offering himself as King to the nations, and was rejected. Then and there he said to them: “Behold, your house is left unto you desolate.” (Matt. 23: 3S) There the Jews as a nation were cast away; but there was a remnant of the Jews that remained faithful, and this remnant remaining faithful became the chil-
Apkil 15, 1931
fffie WATCHTOWER.
119
drcn of promise, as plainly staled by the apostle. (Rom. 9: 8) The nation of Israel had failed to obtain the great privilege of being Jehovah’s witnesses, but those of the Jews who continued faithful, and henee become a part of the spiritual house of Israel, did by election obtain that favor. The gospel was not taken to anyone except the Jews until Peter took the gospel to Cornelius. It was after that that the apostles held a meeting in Jerusalem to determine why the gospel had been taken to the Gentiles, and it was on that occasion that James said: “Men and brethren, hearken unto me: Simeon hath declared how God at the first did visit the Gentiles, to take out of them a people for his name.” On that occasion Paul and Barnabas testified that God had wrought miracles and wonders amongst the Gentiles by them. (Acts 15:12, 15) Paul was made an apostle especially to the Gentiles. Now in his letter to the Bomans, particularly the fifteenth chapter of Homans, Paul is emphasizing his diligent endeavors to show the Jews their privilege of becoming the servants of Christ Jesus. He said: “For I speak to you Gentiles, inasmuch as I am the apostle of the Gentiles, I magnify mine office; if by any means I may provoke to emulation them which are my flesh, and might save some of them.” (Hom. 11:13,14) If there had been a .sufficient number of the nation of natural Israel to fill up the 144,000 of the spiritual Israelites or members of the body of Christ that privilege of being in the body of Christ would never have come to the Gentiles. After the gospel went to the Gentiles the opportunity was open to Jews and Gentiles alike, but not alone to natural Israelites. Paul is here emphasizing the fact that the opportunity of becoming a people for Jehovah’s name was a great favor from God to both Jews and Gentiles. Continuing his speech he said in substance: ‘The casting away of the nation of Israel opened the way for those of the world to become reconciled to God, including all individual Jews who cease their unbelief; and, that being true, what would be the effect to those individual Jews who would now accept Christ Jesus and devote themselves wholly to God?’ He answers his own question, that the reception would be for them “life from the dead”. (Hom. 11:15) He then warns the Gentiles to not boast because favor has come to them, but to fear. The Gentiles doubtless were inclined to boast; hence Paul says: “Thou wilt say then, The branches were broken off, that I might be grafted in. Well; because of unbelief they were broken off; and thou standest by faith. Be not highminded, but fear; for if God spared not the natural branches, take heed lest he also spare not thee.” (Rom. 11:19-21) The apostle emphasizes the fact that only by faithfulness to God and Christ Jesus would anyone have the guarantee of safety. He tells the Gentiles that God is able to bring the Jews into the covenant again if they would believe and obey him. The time had come for the gospel to go to the Gentiles, and those who were selected were not considered from the standpoint of
flesh, but entirely from the fact that the}' were spiritual, that is to say, that they had accepted Christ Jesus and devoted themselves wholly to God. God was from that time forward making no distinction between Jew and Gentile so far as flesh is concerned. “There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus.”—Gal. 3:28.
17	Because the favor had come to the Gentiles and the opportunity been given them to become a people for Jehovah, that did not mean that all the Jews were included merely because they were the natural' descendants of Abraham. On the contrary, the Jews after the flesh and the Gentiles now stood on a common level, and whether a man were a Jew or Gentile, bond or free, if he devoted himself wholly to God by faith in the blood of Christ Jesus he might become one of the promised seed. The time must come when there would come out of Zion the Deliverer, and that came when Christ Jesus appeared at the temple; and it was at that time that the prophecy applies: “There shall come out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob.” (Rom. 11:26; Isa.-59:20) That being the time of cleansing the “sons of Levi”, the turning away ungodliness from the spiritual house of Israel, then all such faithful ones shall be saved, and thus the argument of the apostle Paul clearly appears to apply, not to Israel after the flesh, but to the salvation of Israel after the spirit.
“The apostle then quotes from the words of the prophet Jeremiah and states a part of the terms or provisions of the new covenant. “For this is my covenant unto them [that is to say, spiritual Israel, represented on earth at the present time by the faithful remnant], when I shall take away their sins.” Spiritual Israel had sinned and stood guilty of iniquity before God, and God was displeased with them; and such condition existed at the time of the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple for judgment, and then it was that God forgave their sins and turned his anger away from them. “And in that day thou shalt say, 0 Lord, I will praise thee: though thou wast angry with me, thine anger is turned away, and thou eom-fortedst me.” (Isa. 12:1) The great “messenger of the covenant”, Christ Jesus, the Judge with all power and authority, had now come to the temple, and he sits in judgment for the purpose of purging the “sons of Levi” and cleansing them from their sins, in order that those sons of God might offer an acceptable sacrifice unto God. that is to say, from that time onward. (Alai. 3:3) The acceptable sacrifice here mentioned clearly is that these people taken out for the name of Jehovah must become Jehovah’s witnesses and, in order to be pleasing to God, must thereafter ‘offer the sacrifice of praise to Jehovah continually, that is to say, the fruit of their lips, bearing testimony to his name’.—Heb. 13:15.
19	The natural Jews refused the gospel of “Jesus Christ, and him crucified”, and refused him as the
120
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Vindicator of Jehovah’s name and the Savior of man. Hence they were the enemies of God. “As concerning the gospel, they are enemies for your sakes: but as touching the election, they are beloved for the fathers’ sakes.’’ (Rom. 11:28) Being enemies, and hence blind, such Jews could not be taken into the new covenant. Nor does this text mean that the Jews became blind and willing to step aside so that the Gentiles might receive the favor of God. Even in Paul’s day they resented any divine favor’s coming to the Gentiles. (Acts 22:21-23) The blindness of the Jews operated beneficially to the Gentiles in this, that it afforded the Gentiles an opportunity of coming into God’s organization. Hence the majority of the Jews were enemies of God for the sake of or benefit of the Gentiles. Not so, however, with the faithful remnant of the Jews. Concerning them the apostle's words are: “As touching the election, [the faithful Jews who did not become blind] are beloved for the fathers’ sakes.” Their fathers Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were faithful, and hence beloved of God, and God extended his love to the remnant of Israel by offering them an opportunity to become a part of the election; hence the apostle says: “But the election [that is, the faithful remnant of natural Israel who became spiritual] hath obtained it.”—Rom. 11:7.
ISRAEL AND JUDAH
20	The spiritual house of Israel embraces all who, trusting in the blood of Christ Jesus as the redemption for man, have made a covenant to do the will of God and have been begotten of God, and this necessarily includes the “great multitude” as well as the “little flock”. Judah means “praise” and applies specifically to those who have been and who are performing their duty in kingdom service. The prophet Jeremiah, in the thirty-first chapter, prophesies concerning the recovery of Jehovah’s faithful remnant, that is, the delivering of them from Satan’s organization and bringing them into the kingdom organization of Jehovah. The word Jacob likewise refers to the kingdom company. The prophecy referring to the delivery of the true spiritual Israelites from Satan’s organization and bringing them into God’s organization, which takes place when Christ Jesus comes to the temple, says: “For the Lord hath redeemed Jacob, and ransomed him from the hand of him that was stronger than he. Therefore they shall come, and sing in the height of Zion, and shall flow together to the goodness of the Lord, for wheat, and for wine, and for oil, and for the young of the flock and of the herd: and their soul shall be as a watered garden; and they shall not sorrow any more at all. Then shall the virgin rejoice in the dance, both young men and old together; for I will turn their mourning into joy, and will comfort them, and make them rejoice from their sorrow.” (Jer. 31:11-13) This prophecy clearly applies to the time of joy when the Lord Jesus comes to the temple and invites the faithful ones to enter into the joy
of the Lord. (Matt. 25:21) Jehovah is now about to call attention to something that had never before been plainly mentioned in the Scriptures, that is to say, the making of the new covenant; hence he speaks by his prophet and says: “Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah.”— Jer. 31:31.
21	This prophecy last quoted eould have no reference to the Jews after the flesh, because they have rejected God and Christ Jesus, and because they have been cast oft and their law covenant has long ago been called off for the reason that the Jews were unfaithful to that covenant. This prophecy is concerning a new covenant to be made with the house of spiritual Israel, meaning that it embraces all of spiritual Israel, including the ‘great company’ class, and with the house of Judah, thus identifying the kingdom company, which company is to be associated with Christ Jesus, who is “the Lion of the tribe of Juda”. (Rev. 5:5) He being the head of the tribe of Judah, those who are taken into the temple as his body members and made a part of the kingdom are designated “the house of Judah”, whereas the “house of Israel” embraces not only the kingdom class, but all of the spiritual class begotten by the spirit of God.
22	The apostle says, “The days come.” The question is, When will the days come for the making of this new covenant? Necessarily after the Jews failed to comply with the terms of the law covenant, which becomes old. The apostle Paul takes up this prophecy relative to the new covenant and says: “For finding fault with them he saith, Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, when I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah.” (Heb. 8:8) The apostle Paul continues to quote from the prophecy of Jeremiah, and by the language employed the time of the making of the covenant and the terms are ascertainable. Says the apostle: “For this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days, saith the Lord; I will put my laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts: and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people.” (Heb. 8:10) His language shows that the new covenant was made when 1 he first one became old. “In that he saith, A new covenant, he hath made the first [covenant, meaning the law covenant] old. Now that which decayeth and waxeth old is ready to vanish away.” (Heb. 8:13) In Jeremiah’s day, and when his prophecy was uttered, that law covenant was decaying, but it had not fully decayed. By the mouth of his prophet, Jeremiah, Jehovah made known what he would do about the old covenant when it was fully decayed and what he would do concerning a new covenant. “Those days,” mentioned bj- the prophet Jeremiah, began on the passover day of A.D. 33. Jesus had celebrated for the last time the passover instituted in Egypt, and immediately thereafter set up a memorial of his own death; and at that time the new covenant
April 15, 1934
WATCHTOWER.
121
was made. Jesus died that same day. The day of making the law covenant in Egypt is definitely fixed as the 14th day of Nisan, and the day of making the new covenant is definitely fixed as the 14th day of Nisan A.D. 33. “Those days,” meaning the days of the old covenant, had ended.
23	The law covenant was made in Egypt, but the new covenant would not be made ‘according to that’, as stated by Jeremiah. “Not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers, in the day that I took them by the hand, to bring them out of the land of Egypt; which my covenant they brake, although I was an husband unto them, saith the Lord.” (Jer. 31:32) That covenant made in Egypt was made upon the sacrifice of a literal lamb with a human mediator, and the terms of that covenant were afterwards written on tables of stone and on parchment. The new covenant is different and will accomplish what the old covenant failed to accomplish. Egypt, the place of making the old covenant, foreshadowed the world of Satan, where also the Lord was crucified ; hence the new covenant was made while Christ Jesus was yet on the earth, where he was crucified. The nation of Israel had proved unfaithful to the law covenant, and therefore unworthy that the new covenant be made with that nation. Jehovah had been a “husband unto them”, that is, to the nation, as pictured by Abraham’s acting as a husband unto Ilagar. Referring to himself as the husband unto natural Israel Jehovah shows that his relationship unto them by the law eovenant was in order that a people or seed might be produced for his name. Ilagar failed to bring forth unto Abraham a seed acceptable to Jehovah ; so likewise the typical covenant-organization of fleshly Israel failed to bring forth a whole nation or people for Jehovah’s name. Hence the new covenant, according to the prophet’s language, is “not according to the covenant” made in Egypt. Jehovah then defines the covenant that he will make with the house of Israel after the spirit, to wit: “But this shall be the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel: After those days, saith the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and will be their God, and they shall be my people. ’ ’—Jer. 31:33.
21	When was the covenant, here described by the words of the prophet Jeremiah, made? The answer is, at the death of Jesus in A.D. 33. The apostle quotes this prophecy of Jeremiah as it appears at Hebrews 8:8-10. This prophecy was written aforetime for the benefit of the church, and Paul was addressing the church. Why should he be telling the church about the terms of the covenant to be made after the church is completed ? lie surely would not be doing any such thing; and that shows that the covenant is not to bo made for the benefit of natural Israel and the world of mankind. These things were written aforetime for the aid, comfort and hope of the church. (Rom. 15: 4) Manifestly what the language of the scripture means
is this: “After those days,” meaning after the law covenant had ended and become old, God makes a new covenant with the house of Israel and Judah. The Jew was cast off, and at that moment the law covenant ended and hence became old. The new covenant was made the next day, as stated by Jesus; and the very moment the old covenant ended it became old, and immediately following God made the new covenant with Christ Jesus.
25 The new covenant was made with Jesus in behalf of whom? The answer is, the entire house of spiritual Israel, that is to say, all the spirit-begotten ones. This covenant is not with or in behalf of any of the natural descendants of Jacob, but in behalf of all who become righteous by faith in Christ Jesus. “Even the righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ, unto all and upon all them that believe: for there is no difference.” (Rom. 3: 22) “For there is no difference between the Jew and the Greek; for the same Lord over all is rich unto all that call upon him. For whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved.” (Rom. 10:12, 13) “For he is our peace, who hath made both (Jew and non-Jew who are true believers | one, and hath broken down the middle wall of partition between us; having abolished in his flesh the enmity, even the law of commandments contained in ordinances [of the old law covenant] ; for to make in himself of twain [Jew and Gentile] one new man, so making peace; and that he [as Mediator] might reconcile both unto God in one body by the cross, having slain the enmity [the law covenant] thereby.”—Eph. 2:14-16.
28 Jehovah declares his relationship to those in the new covenant when he says by his prophet: ‘And I will be their God, and they shall be to me a people.’ This language definitely fixes the purpose of the new covenant, to wit, to prepare a people for Jehovah’s name, which people must be witnesses to the name of Jehovah to deliver their testimony before the destruction of Satan’s organization. (Isa. 43: 9-12) Jehovah visits the Gentiles as well as the Jews and takes out from the nations a people for his name, which people must bear testimony after they are taken into the new covenant and made the qualified witnesses for Jehovah.
22 Jehovah makes known how he will prepare this people for his name, when he saj's by his prophet: “I will put my law in their inward parts and write it in their hearts,” and not upon tables of stone. This work of preparing a people for his name is done after they are begotten of the spirit and come under the terms of the new covenant, and shows that the covenant is for the very purpose of preparing a people as his instruments to be used by Jehovah. Addressing his brethren, who were devoted to the Lord, the apostle says: “Forasmuch as ye are manifestly declared to be the epistle of Christ ministered by us, written not with ink, but with the spirit of the living God; not in tables of stone, but in fleshy tables of the heart.” (2 Cor. 3:3) When one is taken into God’s organi
122
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn', N. Y.
zation he desires the truth in his mind and heart, in his inward parts; as expressed by the psalmist: “Behold, thou dcsircst truth in the inward parts; and in the hidden part thou shalt make me to know wisdom. Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean: wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow. ’ ’—Ps. 51: 6,7.
2S The true follower of Christ Jesus, who is the Head of spiritual Israel, says as did the apostle: “I delight in the law of God after the inward man.” (Korn. 7:22) Jehovah’s law is written in the heart of such as are his .faithful sons, and it is to these he reveals the deep things of his Word. (1 Cor. 2:10) His lawin the heart of his saints reveals to them the divine commission bestowed upon them to proclaim the message of his kingdom. (Isa. 61:1-3) It is to such that the testimony of Jesus Christ is committed, and it is these that faithfully keep God’s commandments and thereby prove their love for him. (Rev. 12:17 ; 1 John 5:3) Those taken into the covenant and who are entirely faithful must ‘preach this gospel of the kingdom’ in obedience to the commandment of the Lord. (Matt. 24:14) When Jehovah says to them, “I . . . will be their God,” he must mean that no false rulers will be tolerated ; therefore there must not be practiced the ceremony of giving honor and glory and worship to creatures, because such is as the “sin of Samaria”. All formalities performed for show must be put away. Honor and glory must be given to Jehovah, to whom honor and glory is due. (Ps. 1)6:8) It is now easy to be seen by those in the temple that this work of writing the law of God in the hearts of his people and in their inward parts has been the very work the Lord has been doing in them in preparing them to be his witnesses; and this is further proof that the new covenant applies exclusively to spiritual Israel.
(To be continued)
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
7 1. By who«e authority is the testimony to the name of Jehovah God now being given throughout the earth? Point out the occasion for such testimony, and the puipose thereof.
7 2. What is now clearly seen to be the purpose of Jehovah’a covenants and of his gathering unto himself a people from among the nations?
7 3, 4. With scriptures, show the relationship of the making and inauguiation of the law covenant to that of the new covenant.
7 5, 6. With setiptures, show (a) the time and manner of the termination of the law covenant; (b) the time and occasion when the new covenant became operative; (c) who would be invited into the new covenant; (d) whether the blood of the followers of Christ Jesus is necessary to the making and operation of the new covenant.
5 7. Describe the inauguration of the law covenant.
7 8, 9. Explain the necessity for a lamb to be slain in the making of the law covenant. The blood of Jesus shed at Calvary serves what twofold purpose?
7 10. Prove that the new covenant is made with spiritual and not with natural Israel.
5 11, 12. With scriptures, compare the law covenant and the new covenant in regard to preparation and requirements of those brought into the covenant.
IF 13. Apply Romans 11: 7,25.
7 II, 15. Explain the ‘coming of the Deliverer out of Zion’ and his 'turning away ungodliness from Jacob’.
If 16. Describe the occasion on which Jesus spoke the wolds of Matthew 23: 38. What light does this shed upon the application of Romans 11:26? Account for Jehovah’s ‘visiting the Gentiles’ to take out of them a people for his name. What was the occasion for Paul’s warning as lecorded at Romans 11: 2J?
7 17. Explain the position of the Jews in regard to the privilege of becoming members of the promised seed.
7 IS. Apply Romans 11:27.
7 19. How are the Jews, ‘as concerning the gospel, enemies for the Gentiles’ sakes, but, as touching the election, beloved for the fathers’ sakes’?
7 20, 21. With sciiptures in support, identify Israel and Judah as referred to in Jeremiah 31:31.
7 22. How docs the apostle Paul in his letter to the Hebrews locate the time of the termination of the law covenant and indicate the time of making the new covenant?
7 23. Wherein is the new covenant “not according to’’ the law covenant?
7 24. Why was Paul telling the church about tho terms of the new covenant?
7 25. How do the words of Paul serve to identify “the houso of Isiael” and “the house of Judah’’?
7 26-28. When and how does Jeremiah 31: 33 have fulfilment?
RANSOM FORESHADOWED IN PASSOVER
A RANSOM for man must be provided because God gave his promise that he would provide it and purchase man, saying, long ago, through his prophet Hosea (13:14): “I will ransom them from the power of the grave; I will redeem them from death: O death, I will be thy plagues; 0 grave, I will be thy destruction.” “Ransom” means an exaet corresponding price; that is to say, that which purchases at the market-place or has the purchasing power. A perfect man violated God’s law and was put to death therefor. The law of God is his will expressed. Looking to the provision lor redemption God’s law provided a ‘life for a life’. (Deut. 19:21) Strictly construed, that law means that a perfect human life must be given as a substitute for or in the place of the perfect human life which God took away
from the first man Adam because of Adam’s wrongdoing.
‘Sacrificing’ means the slaughter of a victim, and involves the act of offering or presenting the life of that victim to the one authorized to receive the same. Since a perfect human life must be given to provide a ransom for man, it follows that there must be a sacrifice of a perfect human life. And since the loss of life by Adam was because of sin, it follows that the sacrifice of the perfect human life to provide the ransom or purchase price also involves the act of offering or presenting the value of that perfect life as a sin-offering. Jehovah God being the One authorized to receive the sin-offering, that sin-offering must be presented to Jehovah by one having access to Jehovah.
Aram 15, 1934
WATCHTOWER
123
The life of all flesh is in the blood. For this reason God commanded that the blood of a creature should not be eaten. (Gen. 9:4; Deut. 12:23) “For,” says God’s law, “it is the life of all flesh; the blood of it is for the life thereof: therefore I said unto the children of Israel, Ye shall eat the blood of no manner of flesh: for the life of all flesh is the blood thereof: whosoever cateth it shall be cut off.” (Lev. 17:14) The blood of a creature poured out means that a victim has been sacrificed or slaughtered, and that the life has been poured out. It follows, then, that the provision for the ransom and sin-offering must involve the shedding of blood of a perfect human creature.
Pious frauds, called preachers or clergymen, who have no faith in God and no sincere desire to honor his name, hold up their hands in pretended horror at the mention of the slaughter of animals by the Jews in connection with their atonement day ceremonies. If these sanctimonious clergymen believed the Bible, which they claim to teach, they would know that the Jews in sacrificing animals as an offering did so because the law of God commanded the same to be done. (Lev. 17:11) It being done in obedience to the law of God, all men must know that it was right. “As for God, his way is perfect.” (Ps. 18:30; 2 Sam. 22:31) All of his works are perfect. (Job 37:16; Deut. 32:4) ‘Jehovah’s word is right.’ (Ps. 33:4) “The law of the Lord is perfect.” (Ps. 19: 7) In the face of all these declarations from the Word of Jehovah men stand before a company of people and denounce the sacrifice of animals which God commanded must be done. Surely no one could say that such men represent Jehovah.
“Law” means rule of action. Whatsoever rule of action or law God has made for the obtaining of everlasting life, that way is perfect and right, the opinions of men notwithstanding. God's way is complete and there is no other way. Whatsoever law or rule of action God has made to foreshadow the way to life, God had good reason for so making, and such law or rule is just and true. Uis law or rule commanded the Jews to do certain things which formed living pictures or moving pictures. Note now, first, the picture; second, what the picture foreshadowed, and, third, the reality in fulfilment thereof. One understanding these in the order named will have his faith in God increased, and will love God more and will have a greater desire to walk in the way which the Lord God has commanded.
"When the Israelites were about to take their departure from Egypt and out of their house of bondage, there Jehovah prepared to make, and did make, a wonderful picture. The importance of this picture is suggested by the fact that God commanded that the day of the making of it should mark the beginning of months with the Israelites. The picture began on the tenth day of the first month and reached its climax on the fourteenth day thereof. That month is called
Nisan, and corresponds approximately with the present month of April. The Israelites were required to repeat this picture at the same time each year, throughout their generations.—Ex. 12:1-14.
Speaking to the Israelites through the prophet Moses God commanded that on the tenth day of the first month each house or family of the Israelites should select a lamb for sacrifice. In obedience to God’s command Moses assembled the leaders of Israel and instructed them in detail as to what they should do. The substance of his instructions follows:
“Your lamb shall be without blemish, a male of the first year; ye shall take it out from the sheep, or from the goats: and ye shall keep it up until the fourteenth day of the same month: and the whole assembly of the congregation of Israel shall kill it in the evening. And they shall take of the blood, and strike it on the two side posts, and on the upper door post of the houses, wherein they shall eat it. And they shall eat the flesh in that night, roast with fire, and unleavened bread ; and with bitter herbs they shall eat it. And thus shall ye cat it; with your loins girded, your shoes on your feet, and your staff in your hand; and ye shall cat it in haste; it is the Lord’s passover. For I will pass through the land of Egypt this night, and will smite all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both man and beast; and against all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgment: I am the Lord.
“And the blood shall be to you for a token upon the houses where ye arc: and when I see the blood, I will pass over you, and the plague shall not be upon you to destroy you, when I smite the land of Egypt. And this day shall be unto you for a memorial; and ye shall keep it a feast to the Lord throughout your generations; ye shall keep it a feast by an ordinance for ever. And it shall come to pass when your children shall say unto you, What mean ye by this service? that ye shall say, It is the sacrifice of the Lord’s passover, who passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, when he smote the Egyptians, and delivered our houses. And the people bowed the head, and worshipped.”—Ex. 12: 5-8,11-14, 26, 27.
There is no proof that indicates that the Jews understood the meaning of what they were about to do. They had the command from Jehovah through Moses, and that was sufficient. Because of their faith they proceeded. On the tenth day of the month a lamb without blemish was selected by each household. On the evening of the fourteenth day of the month the lamb was killed. The blood of the lamb was then put upon the lintel of the door and the two doorposts at the sides of the door. Then the lamb was roasted whole, without a bone’s being broken.
All the members of the house assembled within the house, and there together they ate the lamb with unleavened bread and bitter herbs, and waited for the angel, as the executive officer of Jehovah, to pass through the land. At midnight God’s angel, as his executive officer, passed throughout the land of Egypt
124
WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N.Y.
and slew the first-born of every household of the Egyptians, from the slave to the king. The Jews who had obeyed God had the blood of the lamb sprinkled upon their doorposts, as above indicated; and where this blood appeared in obedience to God’s command the angel of the Lord passed by and the first-born of that household was saved.—Ex. 12: 28-30.
Can it be said, then, that the Israelites were protected and their first-born saved from death because of the lamb’s blood? No; the blood of the animal did not of itself save them. God saved them because of their faith in him, and they exercised their faith in what that blood represented. Their obedience then to God’s command showed their faith. The blood of the lamb poured out and sprinkled upon the doorposts foreshadowed much more than any man could then understand. In God’s due time he would permit man to understand the full import thereof.
Aside from the vindication of the name and word of Jehovah God the ransom sacrifice is the most important thing foreshadowed by this picture. Many other minor things are foreshadowed, but the ransom is of superior importance. The picture foreshadowed that some time in the future there must be a victim selected for sacrificing; that the victim must be sacrificed by the pouring out of his blood; and that this would be of the greatest value to others. It would mean, and does mean, that only those who would exercise faith in the life poured out would ever find the way to everlasting life.
The command was that a lamb should be selected, a male of the first year. A lamb is a harmless creature. The victim foreshadowed by the lamb must he harmless. The command further provided that the lamb must be without blemish, which foreshadowed that the
victim for sacrifice must be perfect and without blemish or sin. The lamb must be selected four days before it was slain. That foreshadowed that the victim which the lamb represented must be selected four literal days, and also four symbolic days of a thousand years each, before the life was poured out. For, it will be remembered, the apostle Peter set forth the rule that “one day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day’’.—2 Pet. 3: 8.
The pouring out of the blood of the lamb foreshadowed that the blood of the victim, which the lamb represented, must be poured out; and, since “the life is in the blood”, it foreshadowed that the life of the victim would be laid down for the benefit of others. All the members of the family must eat the flesh of the lamb roasted. To eat means to receive and Io partake of food for the purpose of sustaining life. The eating of the flesh of the lamb foreshadowed that all people must receive that which the llesh of the lamb represented, and partake thereof by faith for the purpose of obtaining and sustaining life.
' The passover was the beginning of God’s law to Israel. (Gal. 3:17) That law was given to foreshadow good things to come; the apostle Paul, in his epistle to the Hebrews (10:1), speaks of “the law [as] having a shadow of good things to come”. That law required the Jews to repeat the ceremony at the same time once each year, which would mean that they must continue it until that good thing which the law foreshadows should come.
With the coming of the Lord Jesus and the laying down of his life as a ransom for all mankind these good things foreshadowed in the passover did begin to come.
GOD’S EMPIRE AND ITS RULERS
BECAUSE of exemplary faith and obedience toward Jehovah God Abraham the Hebrew was called “the friend of God”. After a grand demonstration of such faith and obedience God made this promise to Abraham: “I will multiply thy seed . . . and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.”—Gen. 22:17,18.
The apostle Paul plainly states that when God made the promise to Abraham and told Abraham that in his seed all the families of the earth should be blessed, this seed of promise referred to, through whom the blessing must come, is Christ the Messiah.— Gal. 3:16.
The apostle Peter, testifying under inspiration at Pentecost, after the holy spirit had been poured out upon the faithful disciples, told the Jews that the One whom they had wickedly crucified, and who was afterwards raised from the dead, is Christ.—Acts 2:23-36.
Zion is the name of God’s organization. Zion is God’s organization. The apostle Paul, writing concerning Jesus Christ the Redeemer and Savior of mankind, says: “There shall come out of Sion the Deliverer.” (Rom. 11:26) Thus the sacred Scriptures definitely identify the Logos, the only begotten Son of God, afterward Jesus, who was crucified and who was raised from the dead, as the great Deliverer of the human race.
From the time of the conception of Jesus in the virgin’s womb, and before his birth, until he hung upon the tree on Calvary, Satan the enemy used every possible means to destroy him. God permitted the adversary to go to the full extent of his power; but never at any time did he permit him to succeed, even as he can never succeed against God. God fiue-ordained that death should not hold his beloved Son, and when Jesus was raised from the dead he had
April 15, 1934
THE WATCHTOWER.
125
fulfilled the prophecy that “death is swallowed up in victory”. (1 Cor. 15:54; Tsa. 25:8) He it is who once was dead and now is alive for evermore, and who holds the keys to hell (the tomb) and death. He is clothed with all power and authority and is able to save and deliver to the uttermost, and in God’s due time he will deliver the human race and bring to all the obedient ones the blessings that God has in reservation for them that love him.
“Empire” means a vast government possessing and exercising supreme power, sovereignty, sway and control. The empire herein referred to is God’s government or kingdom, organized, possessing and exercising supreme power for the benefit of his creatures, and particular!}’ for the benefit of man. That government or empire is delegated to his beloved Son ; hence it is properly called the empire or government of Messiah. The supreme power proceeds from the God of heaven, and therefore the empire is properly called the kingdom of heaven. We must not infer that God has not always governed his obedient creatures. There is no record of the beginning of the exercise of Jehovah’s sovereign power. In fact, the Scriptures speak of the priest Melehizedek, priest of the Most High God, as picturing the executive officer of God, carrying out the divine purpose at all times. There is no record of the beginning of his days nor of the end of his life.
But here we consider God’s purpose and provisions pertaining to man. God created the earth for the habitation of man. So the Scriptures definitely state. (Isa. 45:12,18) The expressed purpose of God is to the effect that the perfect man shall have dominion or rule over the earth. Man’s first invisible overlord was Lucifer, who committed the great crime of treason against God, and induced man to turn away from God; and man thereby lost life and the right to life. Lucifer, who is now Satan the Devil, builded a great organization of his own to hold man in subjection to himself and to keep the mind of man turned away from Jehovah, to the end that Lucifer might receive the worship of man. God’s purpose is to deliver man from the power and influence of Satan and to restore him to his former condition of life and of blessings incident thereto. To this end God builds a mighty empire or kingdom, with his beloved Son as King. His arrangement is that Christ Jesus shall have associated with him one hundred and forty-four thousand others who shall form a part of his empire. In building this empire God has made no haste, but has majestically progressed with it according to his good pleasure.
Both Zion and Jerusalem are names applied to God’s organization. It is out of this organization of Zion that the Deliverer must come. (Rom. 11:2(1) Of necessity the foundation of the great empire must be laid in God’s organization. Therefore in Isaiah’s prophecy (28:16) it is written: “Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure
foundation: he that believeth shall not make haste.” This prophecy, without doubt, refers to Jesus Christ the beloved Son of God, to whom God has committed all power in heaven and in earth. The great empire is symbolically represented as a stone structure, the foundation stone of which is Christ Jesus. He was tried and tested, and under the most severe test proved his loyalty and faithfulness to God. It is certain that God can always trust him. He justly earned the title “The Faithful and True”.
Jesus is called the “precious corner stone” because he is the dearest treasure of Jehovah’s heart. He is the fairest of ten thousand and altogether lovely; and to him these prophetic words are addressed: “Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, 0 most Mighty, with thy glory and thy majesty. Thou lovest righteousness, and hatest wickedness: therefore God, thy God, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. ’ ’—Ps. 45: 3, 7.
Jesus is the one spoken of as the “sure foundation”, the one that can never be removed; always upholding the dignity and honor and good name of Jehovah God. This foundation stone is the foundation and chief corner of the empire that shall carry into operation God’s great purpose for the deliverance of man.
As to the time of the laying of this foundation, we have the proof from the Scriptures that it was at the time of the anointing of Jesus. About that time John the Baptist said of and concerning him: “Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world.” (John 1:29) About this time Jesus came to the Jordan to be baptized by John, and it was there that the prophecy written of and concerning him was fulfilled, to wit: “Then said I [Jesus], Lo, I come: in the volume of the book it is written of me, I delight to do thy will, 0 my God: yea, thy law is within my heart.”—Ps. 40:7,8; Hcb. 10:7.
Jesus is also pictured as the lamb slain. From that time he was counted as slain and as the great sin-offering on behalf of man. In the book of Revelation (13:8) it is written concerning him: “The Lamb slain from the foundation of the world.”
Before Jesus’ first advent God had formed his purpose. That purpose provides that there shall be a building upon this precious foundation stone, composed of other stones that shall form a part of the mighty empire. It necessarily follows that the class of persons to be thus made a part of the empire, also the manner of their selection, testing and completion, was prearranged according to the good pleasure of God. Hence it is written: “Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ: according as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love: having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will.” (Eph. 1:3-5) These words of the apostle
126
Me WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn’, N. Y.
Paul apply to those, and to those only, who shall constitute part of God’s great empire which in due time shall govern and rule all the nations of the earth.
It is of keen interest to note that those who are to be associated with Christ Jesus in his empire are not selected from amongst the angels of heaven. It is God who selects them through Christ Jesus, acting as the representative of the Most High God. He lays hold upon or takes them from the human race; that is to say, he selects men possessing the faith of Abraham, as it is written: “Besides, he does not in any way take hold of angels, but he takes hold of the seed of Abraham.”—Heb. 2:16, Dia'/.
That which distinguishes Abraham above any who preceded him is his faith in God. Trusting implicitly in Jehovah, Abraham deported himself accordingly. Such faith as exhibited by him furnishes the criterion for the selection of the members of the royal line of Jehovah’s house. This is in harmony with the lesson which Jesus impressed upon his disciples as of paramount importance, namely, “Have faith in God.” (Mark 11:22) It is clearly manifest from the Scriptures that God grants his great favor only to those who implicitly rely upon his Word.
Much that Jesus taught his disciples they could not comprehend at the time. Much he did not teach them until after his resurrection and ascension on high. Without doubt he guided the minds of the disciples then. On the last night he was with them in the flesh he said: “I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now.” (John 16:12) Why could they not understand at that time? The answer is, Because the holy spirit had not been given. It was essential that Jesus die, be raised from the dead and then appear in heaven in the presence of Jehovah
God and present the merit of his sacrifice unto Jehovah, before the holy spirit could be given. The giving of the holy spirit to the disciples was an evidence that his disciples had been taken into the covenant for the kingdom or empire.
Jesus had said to his disciples: “Nevertheless I tell you the truth ; It is expedient for you that I go away : for if I go not away, the comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you.” (John 16:7) The comforter here mentioned is the holy spirit. (John 14:26) The promise here is that when the holy spirit should be given, then the disciples would understand all that Jesus had taught them and what he should yet teach them. He said: “Howbeit when he, the spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you into all truth: for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak: and he will shew you things to come.”—John 16:13.
The holy spirit is the invisible power of God, operating upon mind or matter as God may will. Prior to the coming of Jesus the holy spirit, by God’s will, operated upon the minds of only such men as God chose for servants and as prophets. These holy men as prophets spoke as God, by his spirit, moved their minds to speak or write. The apostle Peter (2:1:21) declares: “For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the holy [spirit].”
At Pentecost, fifty days after the resurrection of Jesus from the dead and ten days after his ascension to heaven, the holy spirit did come upon the faithful apostles and their fellow disciples, and then it was that they began to understand concerning God’s great empire or kingdom over which he has anointed Christ Jesus to be the Head.
"JOB’S COMFORTERS”
THE expression “Job’s comforters” has become proverbial. In the Bible book of Job is presented a vivid word picture of the three so-called “friends” of Job. Entertaining, as well as instructive, are the slow-motion eapers of this trio, whose real purpose in talking as they did to Job may now be clearly understood.
After his repeated efforts Satan must have felt very much chagrined at his failure to turn Job away from the Lord God. Bent on his evil course, Satan would not give up the battle, but would concoct other schemes or methods to use against Job. He would never give over the fight until his complete defeat; and thus is pictured the persistency of Satan the Devil in opposing God until he is destroyed. Satan is the very embodiment of wickedness.
Three men residing in different places came together by appointment to visit Job. “Now when Job’s three friends heard of all this evil that was come upon him,
they came every one from his own place; Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite: for they had made an appointment together to come to mourn with him, and to comfort him.”—Job 2:11.
Why did those three men go on an agreed mission to Job? Whom did they represent, and why should they take part in the controversy? Did they go with an honest purpose to render aid and comfort to Job? Did God send them to comfort Job? It is not reasonable that God would do so. The real issue was, Would Job maintain his integrity and devotion to God under the great test? Up to this point he had done so and Satan had failed. Victory was on the side of the Lord. It would therefore be inconsistent for God now to send three men to comfort Job, because that would interfere with the full and complete test being put upon him.
The word “friends”, as used in the text, must bo
April 15, 1934
STle WATCHTOWER.
127
used ironically. The same word, identically, was used by Jesus when he spoke to his enemies. In Matthew 26, verse 50, it is written that Jesus said to Judas: “Friend, wherefore art thou come?’’ The Scriptures plainly declare that Judas, who had come to betray Jesus, was the instrument of Satan. Other instances of the use of the word “friend’’ in this ironical manner are found in Matthew 20, verse 13, and Matthew 22, verse 12.
The words in Job 2, verse 11, “to mourn with him, and to comfort him,’’ are also ironically used. The argument used by the three men before Job shows that they were agreed as to how they would humble Job and convince him of his lack of fidelity and integrity. If the three men called the “friends’’ of Job did not go as the representatives of God, whom did they represent ?
All the evidence proves that the three supposed friends of Job were the agents or representatives of Satan the Devil. In the picture, therefore, these three men represented the Devil’s organization. Ilis organization is made up of three distinct elements. Those three men claimed to be acting by divine right, and were then fore hypocrites. Satan’s organization appears before mankind as the representative of God on earth and, in fact, is hypocritical. The names and origin of the three men who visited Job throw some light on the matter under consideration.
Elipkaz means “the endeavor of God”, therefore means that he endeavored to represent God. He was a Temanite and a descendant of Esau. (Gen. 36:4, 10,11,1G) Ue belonged to the Edomites, who were greatly in the disfavor of God.
Bildad the Shuhite evidently was a descendant of Abraham by Keturah. Shuah was one of the sons of Keturah. (Gen. 25:1,2) The name Bildad means “son of contention”. He was the kind that Satan would use to speak for him in a controversy.
Zophar was an inhabitant of Naamah, since he was called the Naamathite. His name signifies “hairy, rough, or a goat, or forward”. That signified he was disposed to butt into matters which did not belong to him..
They were men of advanced years. They were well to do and high of standing amongst the people who knew them. They were considered great men. They held high-sounding and flattering titles given to them by men, and reveled in them. This is indicated by the words spoken by them, as shown by the record. “Great men are not always wise; neither do the aged understand judgment.”—Job 32:9.
Satan’s organization is made up of the well to do, the self-righteous, the elite, the titled savants, doctors of divinity, philosophers, and great men who hold titles and revel in them. The three elements of the Devil's organization are the religious, the commercial, and the political. The religious leaders pose with great gravity and sanctity before the people, and the principal ones in their flocks are usually the heartless
profiteers and the conscienceless politicians. They claim to be men of “great character”, having developed it by their course of action. They hold themselves forth as examples by which the people should be guided. These bear themselves in the presence of others with heavy dignity and speak in a pious and sanctimonious tone. They have always assumed the attitude of “more holy than thou”.
The political element of this wicked organization claims to rule bj’ divine right, and they and the preachers harangue the people concerning the “divine right” of rulers. The commercial element claim that they hold all the wealth because of their favor from God, and the clergy element claim to be the representatives of God on earth and the sole interpreters of his Word. These have always assumed that no one aside from themselves should dare attempt to teach or even to think concerning the meaning of the Word of God. Such is the element that Satan has used to misrepresent God and to turn honest people away from the Lord. The Scriptures and the facts therefore fully agree that the three supposed friends of Job were actually three frauds and pictured the Devil’s organization.
The record is clear that Satan was doing all within his power to cause Job to renounce God, and that the three supposed friends were his instruments to accomplish that purpose. The. record plainly shows that these three men were “forgers of lies”, and, furthermore, that God’s wrath was kindled against them because they had not spoken the truth. (Job 13:4; 42:7) Mark those three pious frauds on their way to “comfort” Job. With long hair, long flowing beards, long garments and long solemn countenances, they approached with great pomp and dignity in keeping with their self-esteem and self-righteousness. They traveled in single file, with hands folded before them. The motley and ragged company of poor and unclean followed at a respectful distance, and with awe watched the performance of these three sanctimonious frauds. When those three pious and important “great” men reached a vantage-point from which they could view Job in his misery, and where Job could see them, “they lifted up their voice and wept” with great crocodile tears, and every one rent his mantle and pawed the dust and sprinkled it upon his head toward heaven. Then they advanced with solemn tread near to Job and sat down on the ground, and there they remained quiet for seven days and nights.—Job 2:11-13.
They had not come to speak words of comfort and consolation to Job, but to condemn him as a willful sinner. Job had been the richest man among them all, and now these representatives of Sedan would magnify their own righteousness and teach Job that he was a willful sinner anti for that reason had lost all his property and was sobering at the hand of God. It was a subtle trick of Satan to turn Job away from his course of fidelity and cause him to curse God.
DOINGS OF GOD
Judge Rutherford,
Sir: I wish to express my appreciation of your works, and have many things to credit you with.. I have read all your books, and think they are wonderful and contain the truth of God’s teachings, in which I have evidence that God is interested in your teachings. I will tell you of the experience my wife and I had about two years ago, of which you can form your own opinion.
We have been raised Catholics all our lives; but, owing to their constant appealing for money, of which we had not much, we did not want to burden them witli our attendance, and had fallen by the wayside. Finally picking up courage we started to read the Bible, and were surprised to see the many tilings that were different from what we were taught; so we became more interested in the Bible and decided that we had to join some church. But being taught Catholic, we hated to give up that church, but had decided that they had to do lets of explaining on the Bible.
Believing tho Bible most, we prayed with sincere hearts that tho heavenly Father would send us the true teachings of tho Bible, that we could accept the right church. We did this for about a week. Finally, one day we were reading the Bible and decided to go to all the churches and find out how they taught before we picked any church. When we were very deeply concerned in tho matter, a knock came to the door. Tho wife asked me to go and open the door. I said, "You arc the nearer; go, open it.” So she went and opened it, and there was a man there. I did not hear what he said, but I knew
by the expression on her face that it was out of the ordinary; so I asked what was wrong, and she seemed dumb and could not answer until I asked her the second time. Then she answered that the man said he was a messenger of the Lord and had a message for us. I could not speak for a minute myself. Finally I said, ‘‘If the man has a message from the Lord, just open the door and let him fly right in.” So he came in, and looked around and saw the Bible that I had just laid down. He said, ‘‘I see that you are reading the Bible”; and I answered, ‘‘Yes; but I am sure up against it: the Bible reads one thing and the churches teach the other.” He said, ‘‘I have come to tell you the truth of the Bible.” lie started telling us about the Bible, and said, ‘‘Did you ever hear Rutherford talk I” I told him that I had not. He gave me a list of the stations and started telling us about the' books, wanted to know how much I.thought the books were worth, I told him if they contained tho truth they were worth their weight in gold, but if they did not they were not worth the paper they were written on. We spent the day together and had a nice meeting discussing the Bible.
We did not like the books to start with, owing to the way that you spoke of other churches, so we went to the other churches to find out; and every time wo came home we were more satisfied with the books. I have turned out to be a worse ridiculer than you are; and tho more we read the Bible, the more we can see that it was the doings of God that sent your messenger to our home; and wo praise God for it.
Yours respectfully,
F. J. Toyer, Washington.
SERVICE APPOINTMENTS
T. E. BANKS
Rome, Ga.............Hay	1, 2
Athens, Ga............”	3, 4
Greslmnn iile, Ga....."	0, G
Carrs Station, Ga....."	8,9
Thomson, Ga...........”	10,11
Taylors Creek, Ga....."	12,13
Jacksonville, Fla.....”	15,10
Plainview, Tex.   May	2
T fnLGL.M The	”	f!
G. H. DRAPER
Littlefield, Tex........”	u
Farwell, Tex............”	4
Amarillo, Tex...........”	5
Dalhart, Tex............"	6
Borger, Tex.............”	8
Panina, Tex.............”	9
Trinidad, Colo..........”	11-13
Pueblo, Colo........... ”	15
M. L.
I,umberton, Miss. ___Apr.	21,22
Franklinton, La........”	24,25
Folsom, La............."	2(1, 27
Ocean Springs, Miss. ”	28.29
Lucedale, Miss........May	1,2
Waynesboro, Miss.......”	3,4
Heidelberg, Miss.......”	5, 6
Philadelphia, Miss.	— ”	8, 9
Valdosta, Ga..........May	17.18
Thomasville, Ga......”	19, 20
De Funiak Sp'gs, Fla. "	22, 23
1'ensacola, Fla......”	24. 25
New Orleans, La......’’	2<i, 27
Baton Kougo, La......”	29, 30
Amite, La........May31,Junel
Canon City, Colo......May	IB
Salida, Colo..........."	17
Cripple Creek, Colo...."	18
Colorado Up gs. Colo.	"	19.	20
River Bend, Colo.......”	22,	23
Denver, Colo..........."	24-27
Fort Morgan, Colo......”	29
Hill, Colo.............”	30
Greeley, Colo..........”	31
HERR \ieksburg, Miss.....May 11-13
Greenville. Miss........."	15, IB
Shelby, Miss...........	”	17 20
Tutwiler. Miss...........”	22,23
Sardis, Miss............••	24, 25
Pontotoc, Miss...........”	20 27
Troy, M iss.............’’	29. 30
Iuka, Miss.........May 31, Junel
J. C. RAINBOW
Brisbane, N. Dak....May 1,2
Fort Yntes, N. Irak..’*	3, 4
Valley City, N. Dak. ..”	0
Kathryn, N. Dak........ ”	8
Enderlin, N. Dak......."	9
De Lamere, N. Dak._____"	10
Wyndmere, N. Dak......."	11
Fargo, N. Dak..." 12,13
Grand Forks, N. Dak.	"	15
Lawton, N. Dak. ______ "	16
W. J. THORN
Lockport, N. Y......May
Medina, N.Y.......... "
Rochester, N. Y. ____”
Newark, N. Y........."
Auburn. N. Y. „.......”
Ithaca, N. Y. __...__”
Elmira, N. Y. ......."
Binghamton, N. Y......”
Oneonta, N. Y. ______”
S. H. TOUTJIAN
17
Is
19, 20
22
Minot. N. Dak........May
Mohall, N. Dak.......”
Angus, Minn..........”
Badger, Minn.........”
Red Lake Falls, Minn. "
Beltrami Minn........"
Bagley. Minn.........”
Bemidji, Minn........”
Bemidji, ” (Hural)	”
Red Luke, Minn......."
25. 211
28
29
30
Norwich, N. Y.........May	20
Syracuse, N. Y.........”	22. 23
Fulton, N.Y............”	21
Chittenango. N. Y......”	25
Oneida, N. Yi .........”	20
Rome, N. Y.............”	27
Utica. N.Y............’’	29.:m
Fort Plain, N. V.......”	31
Richmondville, N. Y.	June	1
A. H. MACMILLAN
Lakeland, Fla.......May	1, 2
St. Petersburg, Fla..”	3, 4
Bradenton, Fla......— ”	5, 0
Wauchula, Fla.......- ’’	8
Avon Park, Fla......9
Sebring, Fla...........”	10
Arcadia, Fla-----------”	11
Fort Myers, Fla........ ”	12
Miami, Fla.............”	13,14
Naranja, Fla. _________”	15
Key West, Fla........May 16,17
Fort Lauderdale, Fla.	”	19
Lake Worth, Fla......"	20
Pahokee, Fla............”	22,23
Okeechobee, Fla.........”	24
Melbourne, Fla.......”	25
Titusville, Fla...... ”	2G
Orlando, Fla.........." 27, 2S
Sanford, Fla......29
New Smj rna, Fla.....”	30
Etowah, Tenn. .......May
Martel. Tenn..........”
Oakdale, Tenn.........”
Knoxville, Tenn.......”
Luttrell. Tenn........”
New Tazewell, Tenn. ”
Kingsport, Tenn. _____”
Johnson City, Tenn....”
Bristol. Tenn........May IB
Waynesville, N. C..............."	17
Asheville, N. C..........” 18-20
Hickory, N. C..........."	22
Shelby. N. C....................”	23
Charlotte, N. C..........” 21.25
Kannapolis. N. C........” 20. 27
Salisbury, N. C. May 30, June 1
Eureka, Calif.......April 28, 29
Crescent City, Calif. May "
G. Y. M’CORMICK
Ashland, Oreg........
Klamath Falls. Oreg, Grants Pass, Oreg. ... Myrtle Creek, Oreg. . Roseburg. Oreg.......
Charleston, Oreg. ... Springfield, Oreg, ... Bend, Oreg...........
Albany, Oreg. —......
1 2,3
4 5, 6
8
9 10 11,12 13 15
Siletz, Oreg.............May
Dallas, Oreg..........”
Salem, Oreg............”
Newberg, Oreg......... ”
Willamette, Oreg......"
Hood River, Oreg......”
Portland, Oreg........"
La Center, Wash.......”
Kelso, Wash........... ”
Chehalis, Wash........"
Tenino, Wash. ________June
J. C. WATT
17	Michigan City, Ind, May
19, 20	Valparaiso, Ind.......”
22	Gary, Ind............."
23	Hammond, Ind..........”
24,25	Knox, Ind. ............”
2G.27	Culver, Ind............”
29	Francesville, Ind. ___”
30	Logansport, Ind. _____”
31	Lafayette, Ind. ______”
1	Attica, Ind. ---------’’
128
2, 3	Romney, Ind.........May 17
4	Frankfort. Ind.........”	18
5,6	Elwood, Ind............”	19.20
8, 0	Anderson. Ind.........."	22, 23
10	New Castle, Ind........"	21
11	Muncie, Ind............"	25, 2d
12	Marion, Ind............”	27,2s
13	Liberty Center, Ind...”	30
15	Portland, Ind..........”	31
16	Union City, Ind.....June 1
WATCHTOWER.
Published Semi-Monthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N. Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Butherfoed President W. E. Van Amblt.gh Secretary "And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.''-Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to liis creatures; that tho Logos was the beginning of his creation and his active agent in tho creation of all things; that tlie Logos is now tho Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for tho earth and placed him upon it; that man wilfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men aro born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and tho man Jesus suffered death in order to produce tho ransom or redemptivo prico for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divino and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is tho rightful King of tho world; that tho anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to tho supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in tho Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to tho establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is tho destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall be restored and live on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
UIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction
specifically designed to aid Jehovah's witnesses. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptuies.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his Beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of tho Scriptures. It docs not indulge in controversy, and its columns aro not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 7s. American remittances should bo made by Express or Postal Money Order, or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the respective branch oilices. Remittances from countries other than ilio^o men tioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreion Offices
British .......... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England Canadian...........40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Australasian . . 7 Beresford Hoad, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia South African .... Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa Please address tlie Society tn every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who, by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to tho publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. Wo are glad to thus aid the needy, but tho written application once each year is required by the postal regulations. Rot ice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Chance of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires. Entered as Second Class Mail Matter at Brooklyn, U. Y., Bostoffce.
Act of March .1,
“THE NATIONS’ HOPE” TESTIMONY PERIOD
A period of nine days has been specially designated as “The Nations’ Hope” Testimony Period. This begins with June 30 and concludes with July 8. During this period of nine days Jehovah’s witnesses will have the privilege of distributing a pew booklet, World Recovery? All people of good will are invited to join with Jehovah’s witnesses in the proclamation of this good news of the kingdom. To have a part in the giving of this witness is a blessed privilege.
“WORLD RECOVERY?”
The Watchtower is pleased to announce that a new booklet is now off tho press and will shortly be distributed to the nations of the world, extending further the witness that must be given to all tho peoples. This booklet, World Recovery? contains several lectures Brother Rutherford has ghen over hundreds of radio stations. It is beautifully illustrated, and its cover is very attractive. The 5c contributed for each copy of this booklet will be used in further publisliing the message.
TRANSCRIPTION MACHINES
The Society has made arrangements to construct and assemble portable transcription machines at our own factory at 117 Adams Street. These machines will be somewhat different in construction from those previously furnished. They will be
spring-wound, and operated from a 6-volt wet-cell battery. Every machine will be furnished complete with the batteiy and a battery charger, so that it can be kept up to its full strength. We aro pleased to announce that this machine can be offered at $100, complete, to brethren in the United States.
PUBLIC LECTURES BY TRANSCRIPTION
Jehovah’s blessing has been markedly upon the use of the portable transcription machine. He has plainly manifested that this machine meets the need of the hour, when tlie enemy, Under Gog, is seeking to curtail tho use of the radio by God’s anointed and when the people's ears aro eager to hear, not man’s message, but God’s. The transcription machine has increased tho power of Jehovah's witnesses afield to pieacli His truth manyfold, so that the desire for the literature is stimulated and study classes of many interested hearers are being formed. Besides more than 450 such machines in the United States alone, great numbers are now being effectively used in countries near and afar. For more information, write the Society.	-------------
LITERATURE FOR THE BLIND
Of the booklets of the new series, Hereafter, Cause of Death, Who Is God? and What Is Truth? can be supplied, in Braille, for the blind. These are obtainable at $1 a copy, or may Ie had on loan by any blind reader. Address the Society's branch for the blind, 1210 Spear St., Logansport, Ind. '
feWffCHTOWER
AND HERALD OF CHRIST’S PRESENCE
Vol. LV	May 1, 1934	No. 9
HIS COVENANTS
PART 3
“Gather my saints together unto me; those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice. And the heavens shall declare his righteousness: for God is judge himself.’’—Ps. 50:5, 6.
JEHOVAH writes his law into the heart of those who delight to do his will. His beloved Son, al-waj's faithfully devoted to his Father, says: “1 delight to do thy will, O my God: yea, thy law is within my heart. I have preached righteousness in the great congregation: lo, I have not refrained my lips, O Lord, thou knowest. I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart; I have declared thy faithfulness and thy salvation: I have not concealed thy lovingkindness and thy truth from the great congregation.” (Ps. 40:8-10) This Psalm expresses the heart condition of those who are in the new covenant and who are diligent in proving their faithfulness to God. It is entirely unreasonable and unscriptural to conclude that Jehovah would make a new eovenant with the Jews and then bring other nations in and make them proselytes to the Jews, causing them to become Jews; and hence The conclusion should be entirely put aside that natural Israel has anything whatsoever to do with the new covenant. (Matthew 11:24) The new covenant, is made with Christ Jesus in behalf of those who agree to do the will of God, and those who are brought into that covenant, and who continue faithful, must have the law of God written in their hearts and must from the heart declare the righteousness of Jehovah ; otherwise they could not be ‘the people of God taken out for his name’.
2 The preceding issue of The Watchtower gave consideration to the prophecy of Jeremiah concerning the new covenant, and which consideration is now here continued: ‘‘And they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord: for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more.” (Jer. 31:34) Clearly this prophecy reaches a climax after the Lord has come to the temple and gathered unto himself his faithful followers. This prophecy has no reference to teaching or delivering the truth to such as ‘every man of the world’, but applies entirely to those in the covenant and who continue faithful. According to another rendering of the text the apostle quotes
131
from this prophecy as follows: ‘‘And in nowise shall they teach every one his fellow-citizen and every one his brother, saying, Get to know the Lord! because all shall know me from the least unto the greatest of them.” (Ileb. 8:11, Hath.) This scripture, as here rendered, definitely limits the application thereof to those in the covenant and who are fellow citizens and whose citizenship is in heaven. We have now reached the end of the world, which means not merely the end of a certain time, and which is often spoken of as ‘the end of the age’, but the end of the operation of Satan’s organization by the sufferance of Jehovah, and hence the time when preparation is being made to completely destroy Satan’s power and his organization. The time feature is not the important thing, but the wrecking of Satan’s organization is the important thing, because that has to do with the vindication of Jehovah’s name. At the present time the Lord has gathered his people into his organization. It is the time of the fulfilment of Psalm 50: 5. Jehovah has taken out of the nations a people for his name; hence the climax of the new covenant is reached, and now the teaching of God’s people is no longer done by men, particularly by such men as ‘‘elective elders”, but. all in Zion are children of God by his organization and arc now taught of God.—Isa. 54:13; John 6:45.
3 The Watchtower is not the teacher of God’s people. The Watchtower merely brings to the attention of God’s people that which he has revealed, and it is the privilege of each and every one of God’s children to prove by the Word of God whether these things are from man or are from the Lord. Christ Jesus at the temple is Jehovah’s great High Priest in charge of the temple organization, and he is made the Teacher of the temple class; hence he teaches all the children of Zion. Jehovah is the great Teacher, and he and Christ Jesus are the teachers of God’s people; hence the Lord says to his children: ‘‘Yet shall not thy teachers be removed into a corner any more, but thine eyes shall see thy teachers.”—Isa. 30:20.
* All at the temple will realize that their spiritual food comes to them from their Teachers, Jehovah and Christ Jesus, and not from any man. No one of the
132
Sfo WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
temple company will be so foolish as to conclude that some brother (or brethren) at one time amongst them, and who has died and gone to heaven, is now instructing the saints on earth and directing them as to their work. Such a conclusion smacks of the “sin of Samaria”. In times past Jehovah and Christ Jesus have been pushed on the side and men have been looked to as the teachers in the church; but not so any more, after the cleansing of the temple. Concerning those faithful ones in the temple, and therefore in the new covenant, the prophecy of Jehovah here considered says: “They shall all know me.” This clearly implies that the revelation of Jehovah’s glory from the temple and the revelation of the meaning of his name and titles are made known to all the temple class. Such revelation Jehovah has given to his people taken out for his name, and they appreciate the fact that their greatest privilege is to now have a part in the vindication of his name.
5	That those at the temple are equally favored is shown by these words: “They shall all know me. from the least of them unto the greatest of them”; that is to say, those who are symbolically pictured by Mordecai and Naomi, being first brought into the temple, and those pictured by Esther and Ruth, who were later brought into the temple, are all on a common level and know Cod from the least to the greatest of them. All of these discern that the chief issue is Jehovah’s name. All such have received the “penny”, that is to say, the new name, and all are at unity and are joyfully singing the praises of Jehovah and his King. All this in fulfilment of the prophecy uttered by Jeremiah, as above slated.
8	There was a time when iniquity was upon Jehovah’s covenant people, which lawlessness or iniquity embraces man worship, formalism, particularly a failure to bear testimony to the name of Jehovah and his kingdom. That iniquity was due largely to ignorance, and the ignorance of God’s law is an excuse; hence Jehovah says concerning those in the covenant: “For I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more. ” (Jer. 31: 34) Such shows that forgiveness of their iniquity is directly related to the great revelation that came to them when gathered unto the Lord God at his temple. The iniquity here mentioned is not inherited sin from Adam, because the ones addressed have been previously made free of that sin by the precious blood of Christ Jesus applied to them when justified. The iniquity and sin here mentioned by the prophet is the same as described by the prophet Isaiah, when he says: “Then said I, Woe is me 1 for I am undone; because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips, for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts. Then flew one of the scraphims unto me, having a live coal in his hand, which he had taken with the tongs from off the altar; and he laid it upon my mouth, and said, Lo, this hath touched thy lips, and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin purged.”
(Isa. 6:5-7) This prophecy of Isaiah began to have fulfilment upon God’s people about 1919. The forgiveness is not granted in order that the covenant people might be taken to heaven, but is granted for the sake of Jehovah’s name, that these cleansed ones might be made a people ready for his name and to testify to his name. “I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins.” (Isa. 43: 25) The basis for forgiveness of such iniquity and sin is the precious blood of Christ Jesus, which is the blood of the new covenant, and which is shed for the remission of sins.— Matt. 26:28; Ilcb. 9: 22; 12: 24.
IMPORTANT
7	The importance of the new covenant is magnified in the Scriptures. The prophets of old, the Lord Jesus and the apostles speak of it, and by their testimony Jehovah makes known to his children the importance of the covenant. Let it be kept, in mind that these things were written for the comfort and hope of the church. (Rom. 15: 4) This is a further reason that the new covenant applies exclusively to the church and has no application to the world in general. In further support of this conclusion, that the new covenant was made with spiritual Israel, that is to say, with those who are sanctified in Christ Jesus, note the words of the apostle written by direction of the Lord: “For by one offering he [Jesus Christ] hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified.” (Ileb. 10:14) Who are the “them that are sanctified” here mentioned? Manifestly those who are brought into Christ: “For both he that sanctifieth and they who arc sanctified, are all of one: for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren.” (Ilcb. 2:11) And by what means are they sanctified? The answer is, “[By] the blood of the [new] covenant, wherewith he [the man] was sanctified.” (Ileb. 10:29) Continuing the apostle says: “Whereof [of all which perfecting of the sanctified ones by the one offering of Jesus’ blood] the holy [spirit] also is a witness to us [the ehurcl ].” (Ileb. 10:15) Witness to us how or through what channel? The prophecy of Jeremiah answers, as set forth in Jeremiah 31:31-33. Then continuing the apostle says: “For after that he hath said [before], This is the covenant [new covenant] that I will make with them after those days, saith the Lord ; I will put my laws on their heart, and upon their mind also will I write them; then saith he, And their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more. Now where remission of these is, there is no more offering for sin.” (Ileb. 10:15-18, A.Zf.F.) Here the inspired apostle of the Lord specifically applies the terms of the new covenant to the sanctified ones. This Scriptural proof should satisfy every child of God who appreciates His word that the new covenant was made with Christ Jesus at the time of his death for and in behalf of his sanctified ones and that it is the instrument of Jehovah by which he takes out from the na
May- 1, 1934
WATCHTOWER
133
tions a people for his name, which people must be his faithful and true witnesses even to the end.
INAUGURATION
8	The making of the covenant is one thing; the inauguration thereof is another and later thing. The covenant is made by Jehovah witli the one competent to enter into an agreement, hence with the mediator, in behalf of all who shall be brought under the terms of or into the covenant. Inauguration means the appropriate ceremonies inducting one into office and investing him with specific authority. The inauguration of the new covenant is the appropriate ceremonies inducting into office and vesting with specific authority those who are selected to perform the duties enjoined upon them by the covenant. The primary purpose of the new covenant is the vindication of Jehovah’s name, and to this end he takes out from the nations a people for his name who, proving faithful up to a certain point, are invested with authority to be the witnesses to his name.
0 The making and inauguration of the law covenant foreshadowed the making and inauguration of the new covenant; hence there are certain things done in connection with these covenants that correspond. Years before the law covenant Hoses was chosen by the Lord as his priest and mediator and sent to Egypt. The Israelites had refused Moses and he had fled from Egypt. “This Moses, whom they refused, saying, Who made thee a ruler and a judge? the same did Clod send to be a ruler and a deliverer, by the hand of the angel which appeared to him in the bush.” (Acts 7: 35) In due time Clod sent Moses back to Egypt to make a name for Jehovah and to mediate the law covenant. Moses received his appointment and authority from God while he was in the wilderness at Mount Sinai. (Acts 7:38) Christ Jesus, the Greater Moses, was likewise refused or rejected by the nation of Israel in A.D. 33 and was crucified in antitypical Egypt and was later raised from the dead and taken to heaven. After waiting a long period of time Christ Jesus is sent back, in the year 1914 (A.D.), clothed with full power and authority to rule. (Ileb. 10: 12, 13; Ps. 110: 2) After casting the great Pharaoh, Satan the Devil, out of heaven Jesus Christ came to the temple of God, to wit, in 1918, and there sits as a refiner and judge and begins the inauguration of the new covenant. Those whom Jesus the great Judge found faithful at this judgment are the saints of Jehovah, and these are the ones who thereafter offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness. (Mal. 3: 3) These are the ones concerning whom the Lord Jesus says: “Blessed is that servant, whom his lord, when he cometh, shall find so doing. Verily I say unto you, that he shall make him ruler over all his goods.” (Matt. 24:46,47) These faithfid ones are inducted into office and clothed with authority to perform specific duties, that is to say, the duties of looking after the kingdom interests, designated as the Lord’s
“goods” which he commits to them, and which duties they perform by faithfully bearing testimony to the name of Jehovah.
10 Paul says concerning the dedication or inauguration of the covenant: “Whereupon neither the first testament was dedicated [Diaglott, instituted ; Uother-ham, consecrated; Moffatt, inaugurated; all meaning the same thing] without blood.” (Ileb. 9:18) The appropriate ceremony was performed at the inauguration of the law covenant, concerning which the apostle says: “For when Moses had spoken every precept to all the people according to the law, he took the blood ()f calves and of goats, with water, and scarlet wool and hyssop, and sprinkled both the book, and all the people, saying, This is the blood of the testament which God hath enjoined unto you.” (Ileb. 9:19, 20) Some time prior thereto the covenant had been made with Israel in Egypt, but now at the inauguration the Israelites were instructed as to their relationship to God and their duties to be performed according to his commandments.
“Concerning the ceremony performed at Mount Sinai it is wtitten: “And Moses wrote all the words of the Lord, and rose up early in the morning, and budded an altar under the hill, and twelve pillars, according to the twelve tribes of Israel. And he sent young men of the children of Israel, which offered burnt offerings, and sacrificed peace offerings of oxen unto the Lord. And Moses took half of the blood, and put it in bavit.;,-. and half of the blood he sprinkled on the altar. And he took the book of the covenant, and read in the audience of the people: and they said, All that the Lord hath said will we do, and be obedient. And Moses took the hood, and sprinkled it on the people, and said, Behold the blood of the covenant, which the Lord hath made with you concerning all these words.” (Ex. 24:4-8) The Israelites, although a party to the covenant from the day they left Egypt, were now, at Mount Sinai, told by Moses the commandments and Kxtstes of God which they must obey’. Since the coming of the Greater Moses, Christ Jesus, to the temple, that is to say, to Mount Zion, he, according to the will of Jehovah, has opened up the Word of God’s prophecy, giving an understanding thereof, and these things before the consecrated people of God who had previously been parties to the new covenant under its terms, but who are now made to nEtwnstfid what are the chief duties to be performed bythem, to wit, to faithfully bear testimony to thename of Jehovah. These, having taken the new name given them by Jehovah, have fully agreed to all the terms of the covenant.
“Moses, at Mount Sinai, set up a witness by building an altar and twelve pillars. (Ex. 24:4) Then Moses sent FKjfermen “which offered burnt offerings, and sacrificesjgseeofferings of oxen unto the Lord”. Those “young men” seemed to picture the remnant described by the prophet Joel at chapter 2: 28. Since 1918, and more particularly since 1922, the remnant
134
*3Te WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
have been sent forth as Jehovah’s witnesses to offer to the Lord, and in the presence of the people, ‘sacrifices of peace and thanksgiving,’ that is to say, an offering in righteousness.—Mal. 3:3; Heb. 13:15.
13	Paul, quoting from Exodus, says Moses “took the blood of calves and of goats’’, whereas the word “goats’’ is not mentioned in the Exodus record. The apparent reason for this is that the blood of Jesus Christ is the blood that makes valid the new covenant and puts it into operation both at the time of its making and at the time of its inauguration. The “Lord’s goat” pictures those whose lives as human creatures are sacrificed, which must precede their selection as Jehovah’s witnesses. The sacrifice takes place at the time of consecration and acceptance and begetting by God, but only those who arc adjudged faithful by the Lord are pictured here by the Lord’s goat. The inauguration of the new covenant docs not need to wait until the remnant have actually undergone dissolution of the human organism. Their right to human existence ceased when they were taken into the covenant by sacrifice. Since the primary purpose of the new covenant is the vindication of Jehovah’s name, and the covenant is the instrument of Jehovah to gather out from the nations an approved people for his name, who must bear testimony to his name, it follows that the new covenant must be inaugurated or dedicated before the vindication of Jehovah’s name takes place at the battle of the great day of God Almighty.
14	Moses took half of the blood and put it in basins and half thereof he sprinkled on the altar. (Ex. 24: 6) This part of the ceremony foreshadowed that at the inauguration of'the new covenant the appropriate time and opportunity had come for God’s approved ones to offer an offeiing in righteousness, that is to say, the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving to his name, the altar being the basis on which such sacrifice must be offered. The sprinkling of the blood on the altar signified that it was sanctified for the offering of such sacrifices and that the time had come to make such sacrifice; and thus the ceremony inaugurating the law covenant corresponds with the ceremony inaugurating the new covenant. Then Moses read to the people what was written in the book of the covenant which God had given him. Even so the Greater Moses, the Lord Jesus Christ, “the Lamb that was slain,” takes the book of instruction out of the hand of Jehovah, looses the seals thereof, and reveals to the faithful ones what is the will and purpose of Jehovah, and this he docs at the inauguration of the new covenant.—Rev. 5:1-10.
15	The book of the law was also sprinkled with the blood. “For when Moses had spoken every precept to all the people according to the law, he took the blood of calves and of goats, with water, and scarlet wool and hyssop, and sprinkled both the book, and all the people.” (Heb. 9:19) The sprinkling of the book with the blood shows that the laws and commandments of God set forth in his Word, the Bible, are now living
and in force and effect toward the remnant, his witnesses, and that they must obey his commandments delivered by the Greater Moses. It is therefore appropriate that the Lord should make known to the remnant the meaning of the prophecies after his coming to the temple. The remnant have come to realize that what is written in Deuteronomy 18:19, and at Acts 3:23, now applies specifically to them, and has no application to the world. (See The Watch lower, 1933, pages 147-153.) They have been brought into the agreement or covenant of obedience, and they must obey the Greater Moses.
16	At the inauguration of the law covenant Moses sprinkled the blood upon the people. This would prove that one must first be in the covenant of sacrifice in order to receive the privileges and benefits of the new covenant. Those, such as Paul, who died faithful prior to the coming of the Lord, actually shed their blood in death, but they must wait until the appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ at the temple to receive the crown of life, at which time the new covenant is inaugurated and after which special witness work must be done to the name of Jehovah by his remnant in the earth. Since the coming of the Lord to the temple the saints who died in faith have been gathered to the Lord, and later the faithful remnant are gathered unto the temple, so that all, including those of the remnant who remain faithful to the end, are ‘for ever with the Lord’. (1 Thcss. 4:17) Just what the saints in the spirit organism arc doing we do not know; but the remnant do know what is required of them, because the Lord has made it plain.
17	In the ceremony of sprinkling the people, water, scarlet wool and hyssop were used. (Heb. 9:19) The water may well represent the truth concerning Jehovah’s name and his purpose, both of which have been revealed to the remnant since the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple. The scarlet wool, being of royal or kingdom color, and that of a sheep or lamb, refers to the royal Lamb of God who mediates and inaugurates the new covenant in his own blood. He, the Greater Moses, is now upon his throne and reigns. (Ps. 2:6; 110:2) The hyssop symbolizes a cleansing of the “sons of Levi” at the temple by a mediator, and at the inauguration of the covenant, which mediator is the great High Priest and Judge acting under specific authority from Jehovah. (Ex. 12:22; Lev. 14:4-7) “Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean: wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow. ”—Ps. 51: 7.
13	This is further proof that the now covenant has nothing to do with the natural descendants of Israel and with mankind in general, but that it is limited Io spiritual Israel. The remnant of Israel after the spirit are ‘sanctified by the blood of the covenant’. (Heb. 10:10,14,19) The sprinkling of the remnant who arc of spiritual Israel shows that the life merit of the sacrificed victim, Jesus Christ, has been applied to them and that the covenant has been made firm unto them and they must be strictly obedient to the me
May 1, 1934
WATCHTOWER.
135
diator of that covenant. Those of the remnant, therefore, are purged from dead works and are made servants of the living God. (Heb. 9:14,16,17) It is the Greater Hoses, Christ Jesus, “who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity [lawlessness], and purify unto himself a [company of] people, zealous of good works.” (Titus 2:14) Such cleansed or purified ones are the saints who are yet on earth, who are gathered unto Jehovah and made his official witnesses in the earth to declare his name and his works. (Ps. 50:5,6) At the inauguration of the law covenant Moses foreshadowed the mediator, Christ Jesus, and Moses was accompanied by the elders, who went with him up into Mount Sinai. “Then went up Moses, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel.” (Ex. 24: 9) The brethren of Moses who accompanied him into the mountain were members of his house and of the prospective priesthood. (Ex. 19:6) They correspond to the “four and twenty elders” seated round about Jehovah’s throne, as described in Bevelation 4: 4. Those who accompanied Moses into the mountain seemed also to bear relation to the seventy elders whom Jehovah commanded Moses thereafter to gather unto himself to assist him in bearing the burdens of his office. “And the Lord said unto Moses, Gather unto me seventy men of the elders of Israel, whom thou knowest to be the elders of the people, and officers over them; and bring them unto the tabernacle of the congregation, that they may stand there with thee. And the Lord came down in a cloud, and spake unto him, and took of the spirit that was upon him, and gave it unto the seventy elders: and it came to pass, that, when the spirit rested upon them, they prophesied, and did not cease.”—Num. 11:16,25.
” Those seventy men selected by Jehovah were by him enabled and qualified to assist Moses in the administration of the law covenant; and this finds a correspondency in the office of the “able ministers of the new [covenant] ”, Concerning himself and his fellow disciples the apostle wrote: “God . . . hath made us able ministers of the new [covenant] ; not of the letter, but of the spirit: for the letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life.” (2 Cor. 3: 5, 6) For what purpose are these made able ministers of the new covenant? Manifestly for the purpose, as stated by the same apostle in another place, to wit, “for the perfecting of the saints, . . . till we all come [to] the unity of the faith.” (Eph. 4:11-13) Such is the work of ‘taking out a people for his name’, which work the new covenant accomplishes. The ministry of Paul to the church proved him to be such an able minister to the new covenant. No consecrated and spirit-begotten child of God could be counted an able minister of the new covenant, however, until he has attained maturity in Christ, that is to say, has become an elder in fact, and not by mere election of fellow creatures. When all are brought to unity in Christ all such are elders in fact. The “seventy ciders” therefore would picture
both the resurrected saints gathered unto Jehovah and also the remnant gathered unto the Lord at the temple. These are called “nobles of the children of Israel”, which designation appears in the record concerning the inauguration of the law covenant.—Ex. 24:11.
20	Those who accompanied Moses into the mountain of Sinai saw the manifestation of the glory of. Jehovah: “And they saw the God of Israel: and there was under his feet as it were a paved work of a sapphire stone, and as it were the body of heaven in his clearness.” (Ex. 24:10) Likewise since Jehovah has builded up Zion and appeared in his glory he has revealed his glory to those of Zion, including the remnant, all of whom are at unity, and hence in the temple, and are taught of Jehovah and have discerned his glory, his name and his purpose. (Ps. 102:16; Isa. 54:13) They also see Jehovah’s glorious organization, of which Christ Jesus is the Head, and they discern that this organization includes the faithful witnesses of Jehovah now on earth ‘seated in heavenly places in Christ Jesus’, upon which organization Jehovah sits and rules.—Deut. 33:26; Ps. 68:32,33; Ezek. 1:26.
21	By his prophet Isaiah Jehovah identifies those of his servant company, which he has taken out for his name: “Thou whom I have taken from the ends of the earth, and called thee from the chief men thereof, and said unto thee, Thou art my servant; I have chosen thee, and not cast thee away.” (Isa. 41:9) These are the antitypical seventy elders or “nobles of the children of [spiritual] Israel”. “And upon the nobles of the children of Israel he laid not his hand: also they saw God, and did eat and drink.” (Ex. 24:11) Upon these Jehovah “laid not his hand” to do them hurt, in spite of the fact that they have a vision of his glory. Likewise Jehovah did not turn his hand against Isaiah when the prophet saw the glory of the Lord at his temple; and there Isaiah pictured the faithful remnant now on earth. “Then said I, Woe is me! for I am undone; because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips: for mine eyes have seen the King: the Lord of hosts.” (Isa. 6:5) The remnant here pictured by Isaiah being cleansed and made members of the faithful servant class, and hence Jehovah’s witnesses, Jehovah says to them: “Fear thou not; for I am with thee: he not dismayed; for I am thy God: I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee; yea, I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness. Behold, all they that were incensed against thee shall be ashamed and confounded: they shall be as nothing; and they that strive with thee shall perish.” (Isa. 41:10,11) Compare the foregoing text with the fourth chapter of Revelation. Jehovah God now feeds his own people upon food convenient for them, foreshadowed by the fact that the “seventv elders” “did eat and drink”. Jehovah has separated his people from others and has spread a feast for them, and they, the remnant, now on earth enjoy that feast and
136
Tfie WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
sing praises to Jehovah. “Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine enemies: thou anointest my head with oil; my cup runneth over.” (Ps. 23:5) The faithful remnant class shall continue to cat, but those who give glory to creatures and are lawless shall not be spiritually nourished; as Jehovah has declared: “Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Behold, my servants shall cat, but ye shall be hungry: behold, my servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty: behold, my servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed: behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall howl for vexation of spirit. And ye shall leave your name for a curse unto my chosen: for the Lord God shall slay thee, and call his servants by another name.”—Isa. 65:13-15.
82 Mount Sinai, the place of the inauguration of the law covenant, pictured Mount Zion, God’s organization, to which his people are gathered and where the new covenant is inaugurated. “And the Lord said unto Moses, Come up to me into the mount, and be there: and I will give thee tables of stone, and a law, and commandments which I have written; that thou jnayest teach them.” (Ex. 24:12) Jehovah there made Moses the teacher of those of his house. Now Jehovah by and through Christ Jesus, the Greater Moses, teaches the remnant on earth who are members of his house, and they, that is, the faithful ones, ‘see their Teachers,’ learn the truth from them, and rejoice.
23 At God’s commandment Moses read to the Israelites the law which he had received from Jehovah while in the mountain, and which reading took place prior to the gathering of Moses and his brethren into the mountain at Jehovah’s command. Because of the fear of the Israelites they requested a mediator: “And all the people saw the thundcrings, and the lightnings, and the noise of the trumpet, and the mountain smoking: and when the people saw it, they removed, and stood afar off. And they said unto Moses, Speak thou with us, and we will hear: but let not God speak with us, lest we die. And Moses said unto the people, Fear not: for God is come to prove you, and that his fear may be before your faces, that ye sin not. And the people stood afar off: and Moses drew near unto the thick darkness where God was.”—Ex. 20:18-21.
28 Jehovah then spoke to Moses and directed him as mediator to speak to the people, and Jehovah commanded what they should do “in all places where I record my name”. (Ex. 20:24) This shows that the purpose of the covenant was looking to the vindication of Jehovah’s name; so likewise upon the coming of the Lord Jesus, the Greater Moses, to the temple and there gathering unto himself the faithful remnant, they must have a mediator, or else they would “fall into the hands of the living God”, which they would not want to do, because of their imperfection. When the holy spirit ceased to perform the office of helper or comforter and advocate, the Lord Jesus at the
temple stands between Jehovah and the remnant and performs the office of mediator and advocate as well as the inaugurator of the new covenant.
25 As hereinbefore stated, the new covenant was made “after those days”, meaning after the law covenant had become old, which occurred just prior to the death of Jesus. As to the inauguration of the new covenant there is a proper application of the words “after those days” also. The nation of Israel foreshadowed “Christendom” or “organized Christianity”, so called, which were in an implied covenant with God to do his will because they had taken the name of Christ. At the time Jesus inaugurated the new covenant “Christendom” had broken all the laws and commandments of God, which laws and commandments “Christendom” claimed to be keeping. The transgression of “Christendom” included the breaking of the “everlasting covenant” concerning the shedding of blood. “The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof, because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant.” (Isa. 24:5) The inauguration of the new covenant, therefore, may properly be said to be “after those days”, that is to say, after “Christendom” had broken all of Jehovah’s laws and commandments.
28	The nation of Israel as a whole was under the law covenant and bound by its terms. That nation broke the covenant, and the covenant did not produce a people for Jehovah’s name for that reason. There were a few individual Israelites, however, who were faithful to God and who accepted Christ Jesus at his eoming. and who were transferred from .Moses to Christ, and hence brought under the terms of the new covenant. “Even so then at this present time also there is a remnant according to the election of grace.” (Bom. 11:5) After the making of the new covenant all who made an unconditional consecration to do the will of God, and who were accepted and begotten by the spirit of God came under the terms of the new covenant, the purpose of which covenant was and is to produce a people for Jehovah’s name. Not all, by any means, of such as came under the terms of the new covenant proved faithful, and hence they were not selected as a people for the name of Jehovah. It is only a remnant “in the day of the Lord” who arc found faithful. “The remnant shall return, even the remnant of Jacob, unto the mighty God. For though thy people Israel be as the sand of the sea, yet a remnant of them shall return: the consumption decreed shall overflow with righteousness.”—Isa. 10:21,22.
27	It is the remnant found faithful that participate in the inauguration of the new covenant and toward whom the new covenant is inaugurated. Such are gathered unto Jehovah because they have been faithful, and such are the ones made members of the fleet servant of Jehovah. “Behold my servant, whom I uphold, mine elect, in whom my soul delighteth ; I have put my spirit upon him; he shall bring forth
May 1, 1934
(?Ke WATCHTOWER.
137
judgment to the Gentiles. He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the street A bruised reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax shall he not quench; he shall bring forth judgment unto truth. He shall not fail nor be discouraged, till he have set judgment in the earth: and the isles shall wait for his law. Thus saith God the Lord, he that created the heavens, and stretched them out; he that spread forth the earth, and that which cometh out of it; he that giveth breath unto the people upon it, and spirit to them that walk therein; I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles; to open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house. I am the Lord; that is my name: and my glory will I not give to another, neither my praise to graven images. ’ ’—Isa. 42:1-8.
28	It is upon the faithful remnant or visible part of the servant class that Jehovah confers the new name. The new covenant has produced these as a people for Jehovah’s name. To them the testimony of the Lord Jesus Christ is committed, and because thereof and because they keep the commandments of Jehovah in delivering this testimony Satan attempts to destroy them; as it is written: “And the dragon was wroth with the woman, and went to make war with the remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ.’’ (Rev. 12:17) Their preservation now depends upon continued faithfulness unto Jehovah in obedience to the commandment. “The Lord preserv-eth all them that love him: but all the wicked will be destroy.’’ (Ps. 145:20) “And it shall come to pass, that every soul, which will not hear that prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people.” (Acts 3:23} These gathered unto Jehovah must continue to sing forth his praises.
(To bo continued)
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
T 1. How does the psalmist express the heart condition of those who are in the new covenant and diligently proving their faithfulness to God!	'
2. How may we know to whom and when Jeremiah 31: 34 applies 7
H 3, 4. By whom and how are the children of Zion now taught! For what purpose!
K 5. Apply the statement, “They shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them.”
K 6. When and how is the promise fulfilled, ‘I will forgive their iniquity, and will remember their sin no more’! On what basis was this done, and for what purpose!
f 7. Prove that the new covenant applies to spiritual Israel exclusively.
U 8. Distinguish between the making of the new covenant and the inauguration thereof. What is the primary purpose of the new covenant, and how is that purpose accomplished 1 f 9. Point out correspondencies which show that the making and inauguration of the law covenant foreshadowed that of the new covenant.
I 10-12. What does Paul say in regard to the “blood of the testament” at the inauguration of the law covenant! How is this presented in the record by Moses? What was the purpose of the inaugural ceremonies at Mount Sinai! How does that prophetic picture have fulfilment!
1 13. Account for Paul’s reference to taking the blood of calves and “goats”, the latter not mentioned in the Exodus record.
1 14. Apply Exodus 24:6 and Moses’ ‘reading the book of the covenant in the audience of the people’.
15, 16. Explain (a) Moses’ ‘taking the blood and sprinkling both the book and all the people’, and (b) what was therein foreshadowed.
f 17, 18. Explain the symbolism of the water, the scarlet wool, and the hyssop, used in the inauguration of the law covenant. Point out the proof therein as to who are received into the new covenant.
1 19. Who accompanied Moses into the mountain of Sinai, anil what was pictured therein!
1	20, 21. Apply the prophetic picture described in the record at Exodus 24: 10. Also that of verse 11.
f 22-24. How do the prophetic invitation and promise of Exodus 24: 12 have fulfilment!
11	25. What is the significance of the statement that the new covenant would be made “after those days”!
*[ 26. How Could Paul in his day make the statement recorded at Romans 11:5! What of its further application!
H 27, 28. Who have part in the inauguration and purpose of the new covenant! Why are they granted this privilege! How does Jehovah in his prophetic record set forth tho fact and the purpose of their commission, as well as the basis of their security and the source of their confidence and strength!
REQUIREMENTS
THE only true and almighty God is Jehovah, the Creator of heaven and earth and of everything good therein. He is the fountainhead of life, and no creature can obtain life everlasting save through God’s appointed way. His name Jehovah means his almighty purpose concerning his creatures. Having purposed to do certain things, he will do them, regardless of opposition. His people are no longer ignorant of his purpose. The accomplishment of his purpose will prove to all intelligent creatures that the name of Jehovah stands for everything that is righteous and that all who live must be in harmony with him.
For centuries the name of Jehovah God has been reproached, dishonored and made infamous by Satan, his angels and his wicked servants amongst men. The practice of hypocrisy has been one of the chief means employed to make the name of Jehovah infamous. Today the whole world lies under the domination of Satan, and that part of the world which heaps upon God’s holy name tho greatest amount of infamy is composed of the nations called “Christendom”, or “organized Christianity”. For this reason what God is now requiring to be done on earth is confined chiefly to “Christendom”. God has laid upon his chosen and anointed people the responsibility of doing certain
138
(Hie WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
work in the earth, and that which is specifically required of them he has made plainly to appear.
The vindication of his name is the paramount issue before all intelligent creatures of the universe. Hore than six thousand years ago God expressed his purpose to produce a “seed” whom he would use as the vindicator of his name. In due time he sent Jesus his beloved Son to the earth to carry forward his purpose and for Jesus to prove his qualifications to be the vindicator of Jehovah’s name. The perfect man Jesus must make this proof under conditions of adversity and suffering. The greatest thing that Jehovah required of his beloved Son was that of full obedience while undergoing contradiction of sinners and suffering at the hands of Satan operating through a wicked and perverse generation of men. Jesus met the test and won, and, “being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him.” (Heb. 5: 9) Thus the divine rule is fixed that obedience is the chief thing required of all who are to be associated with Christ Jesus iu his great work.
We have been told in times past that God’s chief purpose is to save men and take them to heaven. That information given us was wrong. Jehovah's primary purpose is the vindication of his name; and the salvation of obedient creatures by and through faith in the shed blood of Christ Jesus is a secondary matter. Until the name of Jehovah God is vindicated no man of the world can get life everlasting. Within a short time now God’s name will be vindicated at the battle of Armageddon, and then the way of life will be o]K‘u to the peoples of earth; but before that God requires that his people now on the earth bear testimony concerning his name, his pur(>ose, and his kingdom, and the ones upon whom God has laid this obligation who fail or refuse to be wholly obedient thereto shall die without anj’ hope of resurrection. Lawlessness or disobedience will no longer be tolerated.
In order to magnify in the minds of creatures the importance of his purpose and to make pictures foreshadowing the outcome thereof Jehovah revealed himself by his name to Hoses and then sent Moses into Egypt to make for Him a name and to deliver God’s chosen people. Hoses was a type of Christ Jesus, and what Moses did foreshadowed what Jesus must do on a far greater scale. In Egypt God made a covenant with Moses as mediator for his chosen people the Israelites, the primary purpose of which covenant was the selection of a people who should serve God’s holy name to the vindication thereof. That law covenant was inaugurated at Mount Sinai, where God said to the Israelites: “If ye will obey my voice ... ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation.” (Ex. 19:5, 6) The nation of Israel failed to produce a people for Jehovah’s name; and in that they foreshadowed that “Christendom” would fail and that there would come out from “Christendom” a class of men who would be known as God’s remnant, and who would constitute a people for Jehovah's name.
Then Jehovah sent Jesus to the earth to make a name for Jehovah and to redeem mankind. The chief purpose of Jesus’ coming to earth, as stated by him, was to bear testimony to the truth concerning Jehovah. (John 18: 36, 37) The salvation of the human race was and is secondary to that chief purpose. After Je^iis had borne testimony as required the law covenant came to an end, and immediately God made a new covenant with Christ Jesus in behalf of all those who should agree to do the will of God. That new covenant was made on the day that Jesus died, the memorial of which we celebrated March 28, 1934. The blood of Christ Jesus put the new covenant into force and effect, and therefore all who have made a consecration to do the will of God have been brought under the terms of that covenant.
The purpose of the new covenant is not to save men and give them life, but to take out from amongst the consecrated a people for Jehovah’s name who shall be wholly devoted to God and who shall faithfully follow in the footsteps of Christ Jesus by giving a true and faithful witness. The Jaw covenant made in Egypt failed to bring forth a people for Jehovah’s name, but the new covenant in its place and stead has brought forth a people for Jehovah’s name. The law covenant made in Egypt was inaugurated at Mount Sinai. The new covenant made on earth, antitypical Egypt, where Jesus died, is inaugurated at Mount Zion, meaning God’s capital organization. That inauguration took place upon the coming of Jesus to the temple for judgment, and those found faithful at that judgment were made members of the “faithful and wise servant” class, and toward these faithful ones the new covenant is inaugurated. The unfaithful and lawless ones are gathered out and cast into darkness.
At the inauguration of the law covenant Jehovah told Moses of his purpose to raise up a great Prophet of whom Moses was merely a type. For years thereafter Moses led the Israelites through the wilderness, and then God halted that people upon the plains of Moab and there Moses disclosed to the Israelites the fact of the future coming of the great Prophet of Jehovah, which great Prophet is Christ Jesus. On the plains of Moab God made a covenant with Moses and the Israelites and that is properly called the covenant of faithfulness, because faithfulness to God was the chief requirement specified therein. That covenant was a type prophetically foretelling the covenant that God would make with Christ Jesus for the kingdom of the world. Into that covenant for the kingdom Jesus Christ as Jehovah’s great High Priest invited his faithful follower’s to join with him.—Luke 22:28,29.
Some of you have for years been the followers of Christ Jesus. In times past you looked to men as your teachers, but now you discern Jehovah and Christ Jesus as your teachers, who are no longer pushed into a comer, but who now disclose to you the fulfilment of the piophecies, spreading a feast of truth for all
May 1, 1934
WATCHTOWER.
139
the faithful, and this in the presence of God’s enemies. Now you are plainly taught by the Lord that in 1914 the kingdom was born and shortly thereafter Satan was cast out of heaven, and that straightway Christ Jesus, the Greater Hoses, came to the temple of Jehovah and began the judgment of those who had agreed to do the will of God. At that judgment the Lord did a cleansing work, that the cleansed ones might offer unto Jehovah sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving in righteousness. Those who were found faithful and approved, and those who have since continued to be faithful, have had their eyes of understanding opened and have received a forcgleam of the glory of Jehovah God and his kingdom and have learned that the kingdom will bring the vindication of Jehovah’s name, and this to be followed by great blessings to the peoples of the world.
At the time of temple judgment the new covenant is inaugurated toward those who are faithful to their covenant of sacrifice. Such faithful ones are then brought into the covenant for the kingdom. Are those faithful ones thus taken into the kingdom covenant there for the mere purpose of getting them into heaven? No, that is not the primary purpose; but if they meet the requirements now laid upon them they will reach heaven; but they must first meet that which is now required of them. These faithful ones are designated as the remnant of Jehovah or the people taken out for his name, and they must now do a specific work in conjunction with the vindication of Jehovah’s name. To that faithful company the following scripture specifically applies, to wit: “But you arc a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for a purpose; that you may declare the perfections of him who called you from darkness into his wonderful light; who once were not a people, but now are God’s people; who had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy. ’ ’—1 Pet. 2: 9,10, Diag.
Now Christ Jesus has come to the temple. Those gathered unto him to the temple, and taken into the covenant for the kingdom, must render full and complete obedience unto Christ Jesus, the Greater Moses, because God has taken them out of the world and gathered them to himself for that very purpose, and they must obey the commandments given to them by Christ Jesus. Concerning those in the kingdom covenant this scripture now applies, to wit: “And it shall come to pass, that every soul, which will not hear that prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people.” (Acts 3:23) What God said to the Israelites at the making of the covenant in Moab now applies with greater force to those taken into the kingdom covenant today, which latter covenant is the covenant that affords opportunity for those in it to prove their faithfulness to God under the most adverse conditions. To those in the covenant Jehovah now says: “See, I have set before thee this day life and good, and death and evil; in that I command thee this day to love the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, and to keep his
commandments.” (Deut. 30:15,16) Those at the temple and in the covenant are to receive the crown of life provided they are now faithful unto death. See, therefore, the great crisis has come.
Jehovah God has one capital organization, over which he has placed Christ Jesus, and every one who is of that organization must be obedient to the instructions coming from the Lord to his organization. They must not ‘do every man whatsoever is right in his own sight’ (Deut. 12:8), but they must carry forward the work of God and his organization in his appointed way. All those who insist on taking a contrary course are lawless, and their fate is plainly marked out in Jehovah’s judgments. The Lord requires his people to be separate from the world and to refuse to compromise with any part of Satan’s organization. With them there is no alternative; they must ‘obey God, and not men’. They must be holy even as God is holy; which means that they must be wholly and unreservedly devoted to Jehovah and his organization if they would be his people and obtain his final reward. (2 Cor. 6:16-18; Acts 5:29) These faithful ones cannot ask help from the world, but it is their privilege and duty to demand that the rulers of this world cease interfering with their service to Almighty God. And whether the rulers cease to interfere or not they arc to go straight forward in giving the testimony to Jehovah’s name.
As Jehovah has placed his name upon Christ Jesus, his Chief Executive Officer, he has also given a new name to those whom he has brought into the temple and taken into the covenant for the kingdom. This is the greatest honor that was ever given or ever will l>e given to creatures, and concerning this it is written: “I am the Lord; that is my name: and my glory will I not give to another, neither my praise to graven images.”—Isa. 42:8.
Notice and warning of the battle of the great day of God Almighty, which is now impending and immediately about to fall, must be given, and for this purpose Jehovah says to you: “Ye are my witnesses.”
Ilas Jehovah for centuries carried forward his purpose as set forth in his Word merely to save the church and take the members thereof to heaven, there to participate in ruling and blessing the world during tile millennial reign of Christ? Most certainly not. Salvation of man comes by faith in the shed blood of Christ Jesus, and in no other way. The covenants God has made with creatures are not for the purpose of saving men and giving them life, but for the purpose of providing a people for himself to be specifically used at the great crisis, which is now at hand. Before his wrath falls upon Satan’s organization Jehovah will have the nations of the world told that he is the only true and almighty God and that he can put men on earth who will maintain their integrity toward him under severe tests; that the time for his kingdom has come, and that he has placed Christ Jesus at the head of his organization and made him the
140
WATCHTOWER.
Bbooklyn, N. Y.
Commander and Leader of all who love righteousness; that with his kingdom he will vindicate his name; and that the kingdom under Christ is the hope of the world, and all must obey his orders or die. Therefore the commandment is given: “This gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come.” (Matt. 24:14) This proves that the great tribulation will fall suddenly upon the world immediately following the completion of the delivery of this testimony.
Jehovah would have no purpose in tairing out a people for his name unless he would use them to testify concerning his name. Those whom he has taken out he has brought to unity in Christ; therefore all of these who receive his final approval and enter fully into the kingdom, must dwell and work together in peace and in unity. Anyone in the covenant for the kingdom who shall now bceome a eomplainer, faultfinder, opposcr or fearful of the enemy and refuse to joyfully go forward, shall certainly fall and be consumed. (Jude 14-18) To be worthy of the name which Jehovah has given his anointed people they must bo found at complete peace and unity, fighting shoulder to shoulder for the faith of the gospel and never for one moment manifesting fear of man or devil. Your fearlessness and faithful devotion to duty will astound the enemies and strike terror into their hearts. You will be reproached, opposed, persecuted, and afflicted while doing this work, but such is the great privilege given by the Lord God to those whom he has honored with his name.—Phil. 1:27-29, IVey-mouth.
Let the anointed witnesses of Jehovah now have in mind what God required of Moses and Aaron in Egypt before he brought destruction upon that world power. As Aaron was the mouthpiece of Moses, even so now you are the visible representatives of Christ on earth to carry out his commandments, and every one who hears his voice must and will testify to the truth.
God directed Moses to call down upon Egypt ten plagues, thereby prophetically foretelling that Christ Jesus would call down upon Satan’s organization ten plagues, nine of which would be in the nature of notices and warrings. Those plagues must have an antitypical fulfilment; and nine of them have been called down upon the world and are now in course of fulfilment or have been fulfilled. The antitypical fulfilment of these plagues began after the coming of the Lord to the temple, and you have had a part therein. Those plagues upon Egypt constituted notice and warning to the rulers that the execution of God’s vengeance was near at hand and would be executed against Egypt unless that power yielded and obeyed God. The antitypical fulfilment is notice and warning to the visible rulers of the world, as well as to the invisible, that the day of God’s vengeance is at hand and will be fully executed against all who oppose his purpose. The rulers of Egypt refused to hear and obey God’s warning, and his goodness in sending such
notice and warning only served to harden Pharaoh’s heart. Likewise notice and warning in fulfilment of nine of these plagues have now been given to “Christendom”, and her rulers have refused to hear and obey God and have continued to oppose his purpose. God’s goodness in giving them such notice and warning by and through his witnesses has only served to harden their hearts and cause them to identify themselves as the enemies of God and his organization.
The ninth plague upon Egypt was that of great darkness upon all except God’s chosen people. The ninth plague upon the world antitypically fulfilled is accompanied with great darkness upon all the ruling powers, and especially upon the clergy. These are among the leaders of the world, and hence of the firstborn, or chief ones, of the world. Instead of profiting by’ the goodness of the Lord in sending them notice and warning, these firstborn ones have become bitter against Jehovah and his people and continue to exercise all their power and efforts to stop the giving of the testimony of truth. They continue to cause the arrest and imprisonment of many, and the death of some, of Jehovah’s witnesses. In every part of “Christendom” Jehovah’s witnesses are truly hated by the clergy and their close allies. As Pharaoh denounced Moses and Aaron, so now these mighty men of “Christendom” say to Jehovah’s witnesses: ‘Be gone; we will see you no more; for in the day you bother us further you and your works shall die.’
With calmness and dignity, and with full confidence in Jehovah and his King, you as his witnesses now withdraw and you will cease further efforts to enlighten the visible rulers of the world. Jehovah God has set the stage for the vindication of his name, and he will soon give a full expression of his vengeance by the complete destruction of Satan’s organization, including the firstborn of the world.
Just preceding the execution of the tenth plague Jehovah caused his own people to be instructed. Even so now, just before the antitypical execution of the tenth plague, the Lord has taken his people into his secret place, which is a place of darkness to all on the outside, but of brilliant light to those inside. There in the secret place the Lord fully instructs his people and gives them an understanding of his purpose, and then sends them forth to declare from the housetops his message concerning the execution of his purpose. (Matt. 10:27-33) This message now to be delivered is notice and warning to the people of good will informing them of the impending destruction of this wicked world, and of the full establishment of God’s kingdom. You who have been taken out, made separate from the world as a people for Jehovah’s name, must now deliver God's message to the people. This obligation is not merely discretionary, but is mandatory, because to you has been committed the testimony of Jesus Christ.—Kev. 12;17.
The time has come for the dividing of the people. The great antitypical Moses, Christ Jesus, sits in jmtg-
May 1, 1934
WATCHTOWER.
141
ment, and now the people must hear the truth, in order that those who desire may, at the destruction of Satan’s world, escape by now taking their stand on the side of God and receiving his favor.
The giving of this testimony will be attended by much opposition because Satan’s representatives on earth, the Catholic clergy and their allies, have murder in their hearts; but to his faithful witnesses the Lord now says: “Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul: but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.” (Matt. 10:28) Memorial week Jehovah’s witnesses began a forward movement throughout “Christendom” in bearing testimony to the name of Jehovah and pointing the people to his kingdom as their only hope. How long this work must continue we don’t know; but, whether for a few days or many days, we know that it will be done according to the will of God.
Today Jehovah has set before his anointed ones life and death, and those who live must obey. (Deut. 30:15) If any now, because of fear or for any other reason, fail or refuse to obey the commandments in giving testimony to his name, such failure or refusal will constitute a denial of the Lord; and concerning this Jesus says: “Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before my Father which is in heaven. But whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in heaven.”—Matt. 10:32,33.
When Jehovah made the covenant of faithfulness with his people in Moab, which covenant foreshadowed the kingdom covenant into which you have now been brought, he instructed them that they would be attacked by their enemies but they must obey and carry out his orders. As he there said to his people, so even now he says to his anointed: “Ye approach this day unto battle against your enemies; let not your hearts [be] faint; fear not, and do not tremble, neither be ye terrified because of them. For the Lord your God is he that gocth with you, to fight for you against j our enemies, to save you.”—Deut. 20: 3, 4.
Armed in the holy cause of righteousness, and under the leadership of Jehovah’s great Field Marshal, Christ Jesus, you have no cause to fear, because you cannot fail if you obey his commandments. As Jehovah’s anointed witnesses you are the people of Jcsh-urun, which means Ged’s righteous ones. As Jehovah said to his assembled people on the plains of Moab, so now he says to j*ou: “As thy days, so .shall thy strength be. There is none like unto the God of Jeshurun, who rideth upon the heaven in thy help, and in his excellency on the sky. The eternal God is thj’ refuge, and underneath are the everlasting arms: and he shall thrust out the enemy from before thee; and shall say, Destroy them.”—Deut. 33:25-27.
Satan’s organization, including the Roman Catholic hierarchy, is now desperately fighting against the truth, but the entire organization soon will go down
to complete and everlasting defeat. Do not be at all disturbed because of sueh opposition. Jehovah has set the stage of battle. It is not your fight, but the Lord’s; and he knows no defeat. (2 Chron. 20:15) Men will not and can not destroy Satan's organization, but the Lord will completely wreck it at Armageddon. The only part you as Jehovah’s witnesses have in connection with that conflict is to sing the praises of Jehovah, making known his judgments. (Ps. 149: 5-9) Therefore be kind, firm, brave and bold in declaring the message of the kingdom. All in the kingdom covenant who maintain their integrity and remain faithful will be fully instructed by the Lord and will not fear, because concerning them it is written: “All thy children shall betaught of the Lord; and great shall be the peace of thy children. No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper; and every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou shalt condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord; and their righteousness is of me, saith the Lord.” (Isa. 54:13,17) Those now in God’s organization who become unfaithful and rebellious shall die, but the faithful will be carried through to victory bj’ and through Christ Jesus.
The people of all nations are now in great distress and perplexity. Thej’ see that the remedies pro[>osed bj’ the great religious, financial and political leaders of the world are complete failures. Now it is the privilege and duty of Jehovah’s witnesses under commandment from the Lord to point the people to God’s King and kingdom as the only remedy for suffering humanity and to say to them: “In his name shall the nations hope.”
Nineteen centuries ago God sent a company of angels from heaven to announce the birth of his beloved Son, and those heavenly messengers announced that the day would come when through Christ Jesus there should be peace on earth and good will toward men. That great prophecy is now being fulfilled. Jehovah has sent Jesus to take charge of the affairs of the world, and by and through his kingdom he will bring to the peoples of earth everlasting peace, prosperity, happiness and life to all who obey him.
It is now a time of unspeakable joy to those who know Jehovah’s purpose and who have the privilege of making these truths known to others. The obligation of delivering this testimony is laid upon God’s anointed, and they must deliver the message; and it is their privilege to invite the Jonadab class to join them in delivering the message, because they are people of good will toward Jehovah.
Let us all now- obej’ Jehovah’s commandments and lift high his standard, that the people may see the right wajr to go. Upon the shoulders of Jehovah’s King, Christ Jesus, the new government of the world shall rest, and every creature that renders obedience to that mighty, wise and faithful Ruler shall live for ever to the praise and vindication of Jehovah’s holy name.
PROTEST
FOR many years Jehovah’s witnesses in Germany, unitedly working under the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, have engaged in bearing testimony to the name and kingdom of Jehovah God. During the past year the German government without cause or excuse has wrongfully seized, confiscated and destroyed the Bibles, song books, furniture and other property of these faithful Christians, prohibited them to meet together and worship God according to His commandments, and has cruelly persecuted and imprisoned many of them, and, like Pharaoh of old, that government has wickedly opposed Jehovah and defamed his name.
Therefore, We their brethren as followers of Christ Jesus do earnestly and vigorously protest against such unwarranted treatment of Christians by the German ruling power, and we call upon all true Christians and fair-minded people throughout the earth to join in this vigorous protest and demand that Jehovah’s witnesses, without let or hindrance on the part of the German government or others, shall be permitted to go on in their worship and service of Jehovah God in the manner which he has commanded, and we register our protest by declaring against Satan and all such oppression and by taking our stand on the side of Jehovah and his kingdom and his people.
GOOD HOPES FOR 1934*1935
THE work of the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society is the preaching of the gospel of Jehovah’s kingdom. Every consecrated child of God is privileged to participate in this work. Since the organization of the Society the work during the year has always been outlined in proportion as the Lord provided the money through his consecrated children. We continue to follow that example, as appropriate in the church.
Each one who has been enlightened by the truth appreciates the fact that this blessing came to him as a gracious gift; and as he has a zeal for the Lord he appreciates his privileges of using time, energy, and money in telling the message to others. Some who are doing as much house-to-house witness work as their conditions allow are also blessed with some money which they desire to use in the Lord’s service, to the end that hungry souls which they cannot personally reach might be fed upon the precious kingdom-gospel.
The custom of setting aside each week so much to be used in the Lord’s service has always proved beneficial to the giver. A notice to the Society that you hope to give so much, enables us to outline the work, based upon what is expected.
Upon receipt of this issue of The Watchtower kindly write two cards, exactly alike. One of these put aside for your own record of what you have, prom
ised ; the other send to us. Or, if you prefer, put it in the form of a letter, keeping a copy of the letter for your own convenience. We suggest that it be brief and that nothing be written except the following:
By the Lord’s grace I hope to be able to give to his work for spreading the gospel during the ensuing year the amount of $------------------ I will remit in such amounts and at
such times us I can find convenient, according as the Lord prospers me. (.Signed) ________________________________
Kindly address this card to the
Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, Financial Department, 117 Adams St., Brooklyn, N. Y.
Brethren residing outside of the United States should write their respective offices in the countries where they reside, and remit their “Good Hopes’’ to such offices.
Of our own selves we can do nothing, but we are assured that the prayers of the righteous avail much. Hence we ask the brethren to present us daily before the throne of heavenly grace, that we may be given wisdom and grace to use the money to the best advantage in spreading the gospel to the Lord's glory and to do the work entrusted to us.
SERVICE LEADERS AND REGIONAL SERVICE DIRECTORS
IN MAY of each year the companies of Jehovah’s witnesses in the United States have been asked to renew their requests for service leaders for the ensuing year.
The Society sends out representatives who, as regional service directors, serve all companies and sharpshooters that are organized for service, at least once a year. In addition to this, an effort is being made to extend the kingdom testimony bj’ means of portable
142
transcription machines in sections of the country where radio reception is poor because of the inability of the people to own or maintain radios. A few brethren are sent into those sections to conduct public meetings of this nature and to assist those interested in the truth to more effectively study the purposes of Jehovah and have some part in his service.
All being members of one body, anointed to serve the Lord in unity, it is the desire of the Society to
May 1, 1934
WATCHTOWER.
keep in touch with every company. To this end we request that the secretary bring this matter to the attention of the company immediately, and furnish us with the following information, answering all questions, if possible, and send the answers to the service department at Brooklyn. Isolated brethren and sharpshooters are requested to do likewise.
Mark each answer to correspond with the letter shown before each question below. Write plainly, and give street address where possible, as telegrams cannot be delivered to a post office box.
(a)	State the number in your company who are in harmony with the Society and the work it is doing.
(b)	Are those interested in the kingdom work organized for field service?
(c)	Average number of field workers reporting monthly.
(d)	If not organized for service, would you like to have the assistance of a regional service director to help you organize ?
(e)	Are weekly meetings held?
(f)	At what hours are Sunday meetings held?.
(g)	Are conditions such that your company can entertain a service leader or regional service director?
(h)	Is your territory covered by radio stations carrying Brother Rutherford’s lectures?
(i)	Does your company own a portable transcription machine?
(j)	If not, is there a portable transcription machine in your division that you can use? Give details.
(k)	Do you require the assistance of a brother with a portable transcription machine? State how many meetings you wish put on, and give other information regarding this work.
(1)	Give full name and street address of the company secretary.
(m)	Give name and address of another to whom we could send notice.
(n) Give the name of your railway station.
(o) If in the country, state distance from station and if the brother will be met.
{Continued from page 144)
NEW YORK
Auburn WMBOSu 6:30pm Sa 2:15pm
Bing’mtonWNBF Su 7:00pm Brooklyn WBBR Su 10:15am
Su 6:30pm	Mo 10:30am
Tu 10:30am	Tu	6:30pm
We 10:30am	Wo	6:30pni
Th 10:30am	Th	6:30pm
Fr 10:30am	Fr	6:30pm
Buffalo	WGR Su 10:00am
Buffalo WKBW We 10:00am Freeport WGBB Su 9:00am
Tu 7:00pm Th 7:00pm
JIudsonF. WGLC Su 10:45am Jamestown WOOL Su 7:00pm New York WMCA Su 10:45am SaranacL. WNBZ Su 10:15am
Tu 4:15pm Th 4:15pm Syracuse WSYR Su 10:30nm TupperL. WHDL Su 10:45am
Th 10:00am
Wh. Pl’ns WFASSu 6:00pm Mo 1:00pm Sa 9:00am
NORTH CAROLINA
Asheville WWNC Th 5:30pm Charlotte WBT Su 10:30am Greensboro WBIG Su 9:45am Raleigh WPTF Su 9:45ain
NORTH DAKOTA Fargo	WDAY Su 10:00am
G’d Forks KFJMSu 5:00pm We 5:00pm Fr 5:00pm
OHIO
Akron	WADC Su 1:45pm
We 1:00pm
Cleveland WHK Su 6:30pm
Tu 3:15pm Fr 6:30pm
Cleveland WJAY Su 9:45am Columbus WAIU Su 10:00am Th 7:30pm
Columbus WBNS Su 10:45am Mo 2:00pm We 2:00pm Fr 2:00pm
Dayton WSMKSu 1:30pm
Mt" Grab WHBD Su 4:30pm
We 4:30pm Fr 4:30pm
Toledo WSPDSu 9:30am Sa 8:15am
Youngst’nWKBN Su 10:00am We 4:00pm
Zanesville WALK Su 10:00am
We 4:15pm
OKLAHOMA
.Elk City KASA Su 1:15pm Oki’a City KOMA Su 1:45pm PoncaCity WBBZ Su 10:00am
We 9:00pm
Shawnee KGFFMo 8:45pm Wo 8:45pm Fr 8:45pm
OREGON
Klamath F. KF JI Mo 8:15pm Marshfield KOOS Mo 1:30pm Medford KNED Su 10:00am
Th 4:00pm
PENNSYLVANIA
Erie WLBW Su 10:45am
Glensido W1BG Su 1:15pm Johnstown WJAC Su 4:30pm Phil’a WCAU Su 12:00 nn Fittsb’gh KQV Su 10:30am
We 1:45pm Fr 1:45pm
Pittsb ’gh WWSW We 5:15pm
Reading WEE U Su 3:45pm We 3:45pm
Wash’ton WNBO Su 9:45am W ’msport WRAK Su 9: J 5pm
Th 7:15pm
York WORK Su 3:00pm
PHILIPPINE ISLANDS
Manila KZEG Su 7:00pm
Th 7:00pm
SOUTH CAROLINA
Charleston WCSC Su 1:00pm
We 7:00pm Fr 7:00pm
Columbia WIS Su 1:15pm
Fr 6:45pm
Greenville WFBC Su 9:30am
Spart’b’g WSPA Su 6:30pm
SOUTH DAKOTA
Pierro KGFX Su 1:00pm
Tu 4:00pm Th 4:00pm
Sioux F -ls KSOO Su 10:00am
Th 4:30pm
Watertown KGCR Su 9:15am
We 8:45pm Fr 8:45pm
TENNESSEE
Bristol WOPIWo 6:45 pm
Sa 6:45 pm
Cha ’nooga WDOD Su 1:00pm
Th 8:00am
Jackson WTJS Su 1:30pm
We 5:00prn Fr . 5:30pm Knoxville WROL Su 7:00pm Memphis WMCSu 4:00pm Memphis WREC Su 9:30am
TEXAS
Amarillo KGRS Su 9:00am Austin KNOW Su 10:00am Beaumont KFDM Su 10:00am
Tu 7:45pm
Borger KSRB Su 2:30pm We 4:15pm Fr 4:15pm
CorpusChr. KGFI Su 9:00am
We 6:45pm Fr 6:45pm
Dallas KRLDSu 5:45pm
Dublin KFPLTh 8:00pm
Fr 10:00am
El Paso KTSMSu 1:15pm
Ft.Worth KTATMo 5:15pm
Wo 5:15pm Fr 5:15pm
Galveston KLUF Su 10:15am
We 2:15pm
Houston KPRC Su 10:00am
Pampa WREX Su l:3’ipm
We 1:30pm Fr 1:30pm
S. Angelo KGKLSu 1:45pm
Th 8:45am
S. Antonio KTSA Su 10:45um
Wichita F. KGKO Su 12:30pm Th 8:45pm
UTAH
Ogden KLO Su 3:15pm
We 5:00pm
Salt L. City KSL Su 11:15am
VERMONT Rutland WSYB Su 10:00am Th 5:30pm
VIRGINIA
Ch’lottesv. WE1IC Su 10:45am
Danville WBTM Su 9:15pm
I.vne.lib’g WLVA Su 12:45pm Norfolk WTAR Su 12:3lipui Petcrsb’g WPIIR Su 6:45pm We 10:00am
Richmond WRVA Su 12:15pm
Roanoke WDBJ Su 12:30pm Wo 5:00pm
WASHINGTON
Aberdeen	. KXROSu	1:15pm
Bell ’ham	KVOS Su 10:00am	
	Th	5:30pm
Seattle	KJR Su 10:00am	
Seattle	KVL Mo	6:15pm
Tu 6:	45pm We	6:15pm
Th 6:	45pm Fr	6:45pm
	Sa	6:45pm
Spokane	KFIO Su	9:15am
We 7:45am Fr		7:45am
Spokane	KGA Su	4:0')pm
Tacoma	KMO Su 10:30am	
We 4:	:30pm Fr	4:3(q in
Tacoma	KYI Su	2:30pm
Walla Walla KUJ Su		7:45am
	Su	1:30pm
Wenatchee KPQ Su		1 iOOpin
	We	7:00aiu
Yakima	KIT Su 10:00am	
	Th	7:00am
WEST VIRGINIA
Bluefield WHISSu 9:00nm Fr 8:00am
Clia’ston WOBU Su 4:09pm
Hunt’ton WSAZ Th 4:0n,>m
Wheeling WWVA Su 19:oo.im
WISCONSIN
La Crosse WKBII Su
Madison WIBA Su IfliOvani
WYOMING
Casper KDFN Su 10:3i’:im
Th 8:45am
WATCHTOWER.
RADIO SERVICE
The good news of the kingdom of Jehovah is broadcast each week or oftener by these and other stations at time shown.
[Current local time is shown in each instance.]
AUSTRALASIA
NEW SOUTH WALES
Albury	2-AY Tu 8:45pm
Broken Hill	2-XL Su 8:45pm
Goulburn	2-GN Su 7:3<)pm
Grafton	2-GFTu 7:30pm
Gunnedah	2-MO Su 7:05pm
Lismore	2-XNWe 7:15pm
New Castle	2-HDSu 9:30am
Su 7:15pm We 6:45pm	
Sydney	2-UE Su 9:15am
W’gaW’ga2-WG We 9:30am	
	We 7:45pm
QUEENSLAND
Brisbane	4-BC Su I0:15am
Mackay	4-MK Su 11:00am
Townsville 4-TOWe 8:00pm
TASMANIA
Launceston 7-LA Fr 10:15pm
VICTORIA
Ballarat	3-BA Su 12:45pm
Bendigo 3-BOTu 8:00pm Hamilton 3-IIA Su 6:45pm
Horsham 3-HS Su 7:00pm Melbourne 3-AW Su 12:15pm Mildura 3-MA Su 7:13pm Sale 3-TRSu 6:30pm Swan Hill 3-SIL Su 7:15pm Wangaratta 3-WR Su 8:15pm
WEST AUSTRALIA
Kalgoorlie 6-KG Su 7:40pm
Perth 6-ML Su 7:00pm
BELGIUM
Hainaut BONNE Sa 5:30pm (330 m) ESPERANCE
CANADA ALBERTA Calgary CFCN Su 5:45pm
NOVA SCOTIA
Sydney CJCBSu 9:00pm
ONTARIO
Hamilton C KOC Su 10:30am Su 1:30pm Su 8:15pm
CHINA
Shanghai XMHA Su 9:45am
CUBA
Havana CMK Su 11:30am also Spanish Su ' 9:00pm
Santa Cl’a CMHI Su 12:15pm
ESTHONIA
Reval RADIO-Su 3:30pm (296.1m) TALLINN
FRANCE
Beziers RADIO-Th 8:00pm (220.1m) BEZIERS
Bordeaux RADIO- Mo 7:45pm (237 m) SUD-OUEST
Fecamp RADIO-NOR-(223 m) MANDIE
English Su 4:00pm
French Tu 8:00pm
Paris RADIO L L Fr 8:15pm (370 m)
Paris RADIO- Sul2:00nn
(312.8 m) VITUS
Th 7:30pm Sa 7:30pm
Toulouse RADIO- We 7:15pm (385.1m) TOULOUSE
MEXICO
Mexico XECW
Spanish Th 10:00pm
UNITED STATES
ALABAMA Birm’ham WAPISu 9:45am Birm ’ham WBRC Su 10:00am We 4:30pm M’tgomeryWSFA Su 3:45pm Muscle S. WNRASu 6:00pm Wo 8:OOpm Fr 8:00pm
ALASKA
AnchorageKFQD We 9:30pm KetchikanKGBU Mo 7:15pm
Th 7:15pm Sa 7:15pm
ARIZONA
Bisbee KHUN Su 4:00pm We 4:00pm Fr 4:00pm
Jerome KCRJ Mo 5:15pm We 5:15pm Sa 5:15pm
Spanish Th 4:30pm Prescott KPJMSu 5:45pm We 5:15pm Fr 5:15pm
Tucson KG AR Su 7:00pm We 5:45pm Fr 5:45pm
Yuma KUMA Su 6:15pm Spanish Su 6:00ptn
ARKANSAS
Fay'villa KUOA Su 12:45pm We 11:45am Fr 4:30pm
Hot Sp 'gs KTHS Su 3: 30pm Little R’k KARK Su 9:00am Little R’k KGHI Su 7:00pm
We 5:45pm Fr 5:45pm Little R’k KLRA Su 10:30am Paragould KBTM Su 10:00am We 11:30am Texarkana KCMC Su 6:45pm
CALIFORNIA
El Centro KXO Su 10:00am Eureka KIEM Su 10:30am Fresno KM.J Su 3:45pm Hollywood KNX Su 9:15pm LongB’ch KGER Su 10:45am Los Angeles KTM Su 8:30am
Su 8:00pm Th 8:00pm Oakland KLS Su 11:15am
We 2:45pm Fr 2:45pm Oakland KROW Su 10:15am
Su 6:15pm Mo 7:45pm We 8:15pm Sa’mento KFBK Su 9:3*>am San Diego XEBC Su 11:45am
We 7:45pm S. F’cisco KTAB Su 9:30am Sa 8:3o;im Stockton KGDM Su 9:36am
We 7:15am Fr 1:15pm
COLORADO
Col’oSpr. KVOR Su 10:30am
We 5:30pm Sa 4:30pm
Denver KFELSu 7:0Optn
Grand J’n KFXJ Su 1:15pm
Greeley KFKA Mo 7:15pm
Lamar KIDW Su 7:15pin
We 2:40pm Fr 2:40pm
Yuma KGEK Su 12:45pm We 12:45pm Fr 12:45pm
CONNECTICUT
Bridgeport WICC Su 10:00am
DELAWARE
Wilm’ton WDELSu 7:00pm
Th 8:30pm
Wilm’ton WILMMo 8:45am
FLORIDA
Miami	WIOD Su 12:15pm
Miami	WQAM Su 5:15pm
Orlando WDBO Su 12:45pm
Pensacola WCOASu 1:00pm
We 7:00pm
GEORGIA
Athens	WTFI Su 9:45am
Atlanta	WGST Su 5:45pm
Augusta WRDW Su 3:00pm
Th 7:45pm
Columbus WRBLSu 9:30am
LaGrange WKEU Sti 3:00pm
We 3:00pm Frl0:0Oam
Rome WFDV Su 12:30pm
We 8:45pm Fr 8:45pin
Savannah WTOCSu 1:15pm
Thomasv. WQDX We 9:15nm We 7:30pm
HAWAII
Honolulu KGMB We 12:05pm
Fr 7:15pm
IDAHO
Boise KIDO Su 10:30am
We 8:45pm
Idaho Falls KID Mo 8:45pm Tu 8:45pm We 8:45pm Th 8:45pm Fr 8:45pm
Sa 8:45pm
Nampa KFXD Su 11:00am Pocatello KSE1 Su 2:00pm Su 9:00pm
Twin Fa Is KTFI Su 10:45am Su 4:45pm
ILLINOIS
Decatur	WJ BL Su 10:00ara
Ato 7:30pm
Harrisb’g WEBQ Su 6:00pm
Mo 10:30pm Fr 10:00pm
LaSalle WJBCSu 2:15pm
Roekford WROK Su 10:00am
Su 10:00pm We 10:00pm
Sp ’gtield WCBS Su 12:30pm
Sa 11:15am
INDIANA
Ind’apolisWKBF Su 10:00am
Th 1:30pm
Muncie WLBC Su 1:30pm
Fr 7:30pm
IOWA
Decorah KGCAMo 9:00am
We 9:00am Sa 9:00am
DesAIoines WHO Su 9:15am
Waterloo WMT Su 6:45pm
KANSAS
Coffeyville KGGF Su 1:45pm Th 8:00pm
LOUISIANA
Shrevep’t KWEA Su 10:15am
MAINE
Bangor WLBZ Su 9:45am
MARYLAND
Baltimore WBAL Su 4:15pm
Cumberl’d WTBOSu 2:00pm
We 2:00pm Fr 2:00pm
Hagerst’n WJEJ Su 10:15am
MASSACHUSETTS
Babson P. WBSO Su 12:30pm
Boston WN AC Su 10:00am
Sp’gfield WMAS Su 10:00am
Worcester WORC Su 10:30am
MICHIGAN
Calumet WHDF Tu 6:15pm
Detroit W.JRSu 9:45am
Ironwood WJMSSu 5:00pm
We 7:00pm Fr 7:15pm
Jackson WIBM Su 3:00prn
KulamazooWKZO Su 4:00prn We 2:45pm
MINNESOTA F’gusFallsKGDE Su 10:00am Min'polis WRILM Tu 8:00pm Moorhead KGEK Su 7:30pm We 5:15pm Fr 5:J3prn St. Paul WRIIM Su 12:30pm
Th 1:00pm
MISSISSIPPI
Hattiesb’gWPFB Su 1:30pm We 7:45pm
Lnurel W AML Su 12:45pm Meridian WCOC Su 10:00am
We 6:45pm Miss. City WGCM Su 9:45:im We 8:45pm
MISSOURI
Columbia KFRU Su 4:30pm
We 7:15am
Kans.C’y KWKCSu 2:00pm
Tu 7:00am
MONTANA
Billings KGHL Su 12:30pm
NEBRASKA
Kearney KGFW Su 10:00am
Lincoln	KFAB Su 9:30am
Lincoln	KFOR Su 10:15am
Scottsbl’f KGKY Su 10:15am
Wo 5: i5pm Fr 5:45pm
NEVADA Reno KOH Su 10:30am
NEW JERSEY AtlanticC’y WPG Su 10:00am
NEW MEXICO
Albuq’que KOB Su 5:45pm
Roswell KGFLSu 5:15pm We 4:30pm Fr 4:30pm
(Continued on page 143)
&Ze WATCHTOWER
Published Semi-Monthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N. Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherfcrd President W. E. Van Amburoh Secretary "And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” ~ Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Mater of heaven, and earth and tho Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and tho Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man wilfully disobeyed God's law nnd was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and tho man Jesus suffered death in order to produce tho ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH'S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of tho world; that tho anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare nis purposes toward mankind ns expressed in the Bible, and to bear tho fruits of tho kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been, placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and Messings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great net is the destruction of Satan’s organization and tho establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under tho kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall be restored and live on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his Beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of tho Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subsceh’tion Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaxeocs Fonr.icx, §1.50; Cheat Bmtaix, Arstwalasu, axo South Airica. 7s. American remittances should be made by Express or Pcsd.-il Money Order, or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be mado direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to tho Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Fofxign Offices
JirC'sh .......... Gt Craven Terrace, London, V,’. 2, F.ngland Canadian..........40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Australasian . . 7 Beresford Road, Strathf.ehl, N. 8. V.’., Australia South African .... Borton House, Capo Town, South Africa lleaso address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
AII sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watch Io it er free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. Wo are glad to thus aid the needy, but tlio written application once each year is required by tho postal regulations. Xotice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Cbanse of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires. Entered as Second Class Hail 'latter at Brooklyn, U. T., Postoyice.
Act of March S, JS79.
“WORLD RECOVERY?”
The Watchtower is pleased to announce that a new booklet is now oil the press and will shortly be distributed to tlie nations of the world, extending further the witness that must be given to all the peoples. This booklet, World Recovery? contains several lectures Brother Rutherford has given over hundreds of radio stations. It is beautifully illustrated, and its cover is very attractive. The 5c contributed for each copy of this booklet will be used in further publishing the message.
“THE NATIONS' HOPE” TESTIMONY PERIOD
A period of nine days has been specially de: iguated as ' ‘ The Nations’ Hope” Testimony Period. This begins with June 30 and concludes with July 8. During this period of nine days Jehovah’s witnesses will have the privilege of distributing a new booklet, World Recovery? All people of good will are invited to join with Jehovah’s witnesses in the proclamation of this good news of the kingdom. To have a part in the giving of this witness is a blessed privilege.
PUBLIC LECTURES BY TRANSCRIPTION
Jehovah’s blessing has bean markedly upon the use of the portable transcription machine. Jie has plainly manifested that this machine meets the need of the hour, when the enemy, under Gog, is seeking to curtail the me of the radio by God’s anointed and when the people’s ears me eager to hear, not man’s message, but God’s. The transcription machine has increased the power of Jehovah’s witnesses afield to preach His truth manyfold, so that the desire for the literature is stimulated and study classes of many interested hearers are being formed. Besides more than 450 such machines in the United States alone, great numbers are now being effectively used in countries near and afar. l?or more information, write the Society.
TRANSCRIPTION MACHINES
The Society has made arrangements to construct and assemble portable transcription machines at our own factory at 117 Adams Street. These machines will be somewhat different in construction from those previously furnished. They will be spring-wound, and operated from a 6-volt wet-cell battery. Kvery machine will be furnished complete with tho battery nnd a battery charger, so that it can be kept up to its full strength. We are pleased to announce that this machine can be o.Teied at ?100, complete, to brethren in the United States.
Vol. LV	May 15, 1934	No. 10
HIS COVENANTS
PART 4
“Gather my saints together unto me; those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice. And the heavens shall declare his righteousness: for God is judge himself.”—Ps. 50: 5, 6.
JEHOVAH GOD is the Giver of life, and his provisions for men to obtain life are by and through the merit of Jesus Christ’s sacrifice. “For the wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.” (Rom. 6:23) No one gets life by reason of being in a covenant. A man must first be justified and counted righteous before he could be brought into the new covenant. He is by reason of faith in the shed blood of Christ Jesus counted thereafter as having the right to life. But once being taken into the new covenant means that he must keep the terms of that covenant in order to live and escape eternal death. The Israelites were under the law covenant when Jehovah said to them: “Ye shall therefore keep my statutes, and my judgments; which if a man do, he shall live in them: I am the Lord.” (Lev. 18:5) That scripture does not saj’ and docs not mean that the Jews would obtain life by reason of being in the covenant, but it means that the breaking of the law covenant meant a cessation of the life they had at that time. They must live in the covenant. Relative to the same matter it is written: “For as many as are of the works of the law, are under the curse: for it is written, Cursed is every one that con-tinueth not in all things which are written in the book of the law to do them. But that no man is justified by the law in the sight of God, it is evident: for, The just shall live by faith. And the law is not of faith: but, The man that doeth them shall live in them.” (Gal. 3:10-12) During the thousand-year reign of Christ he will regenerate the obedient ones of mankind, not by or according to the terms of the new covenant, but by reason of their obedience to the laws of his kingdom. Those who have been produced by the new covenant as a people for Jehovah’s name, and who continue faithful unto death, will then sit with Christ Jesus in that work of regeneration. (Rev. 2:10; Matt. 19:28) The new covenant is specifically for the purpose of dealing with the justified and spirit-begotten ones that those who continue faithful to the terms of the covenant may be produced and prepared as witnesses to the name of Jehovah and bear testimony to his name. When those in the covenant have
147
been brought to the unity of the faith in Christ Jesus, “unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ,” it is then that the new covenant is inaugurated toward them and they are made official witnesses of Jehovah; and their work as such witnesses must be done before Armageddon.
UNTO ZION
2	The apostle Paul was addressing those in Christ Jesus in the new covenant when he wrote: “But ye are come unto mount Sion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels. ” (Heb. 12:22) He did not say, Ye are come to Egypt, or to any part of Satan’s organization, but, “Ye arc come unto mount Sion,” which is God’s organization, and means the establishment of the kingdom of God. The building up of Zion, the capital organization of Jehovah, began when the words of Jehovah were fulfilled, to wit, “Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion.” (Ps. 2: 6) “The Lord shall send the rod of thy strength out of Zion: rule thou in the midst of thine enemies.” (Ps. 110:2) The Lord Jesus Christ, the Messenger of the covenant, then straightway came to the temple; and this ‘coming unto Zion’ is completed with the bringing of the remnant into the opened temple of God.
3	The “city of the living God” is the heavenly Jerusalem, which has now ‘descended out of heaven’ (Rev. 21:1,2) to take charge of the world by its rightful ruler Christ Jesus and to vindicate the name of Jehovah. A company of angels attended upon the occasion of this ‘coming’ and participated in the inauguration ceremonies. According to other renderings of the text these are “myriads of angels, a full assembly” (Ding.); “myriads of messengers in high festival.” (Hath.) It is at the coming of the Lord to the temple for judgment that his angels accompany him and when he gathers unto himself those who are in the covenant, and who up to that time had demonstrated their faithfulness. (Matt. 25:31) “Now we beseech you, brethren, by the coming [to the temple] of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto him.” There were angels participating
148
WATCHTOWER.
Bkookiax, N.Y.
in the inauguration of the old law covenant; as it is written: “It was ordained by angels in the hand of a mediator [Moses].” (Gal. 3:19) The angels delivered God’s message with authority from him, and God did not permit any disobedience to the message which he caused these angels to transmit. (Heb. 2:2) The words spoken by the angels were spoken to the Israelites assembled before Mount Sinai at the inauguration of the law eovenant and who wore already in the covenant which had been made with them in Egypt, and which people were designated by the Scriptures as “the church” (that is, a selected or gathered-ont people), because they were a people gathered out for .Jehovah’s name. “This is that Moses which said unto the children of Israel, A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; him shall yu hear. This is he, that was in the church in the wilderness, with the angel which spake to him in the mount Sina, and with our fathers; who received the lively oracles to give unto us.”—Acts 7: 37, 38.
* At the inauguration of the new covenant, says the scripture, “ye arc come unto . . . [the; church of the firstborn, which are written in heaven.” (lie!). 12:22,23) Truly the names of these are enrolled in heaven since Zion L-.s brought forth her children, and their citizenship is in heaven. The faithful saints who long ego died in faith have first been resurrected and gathered to Zion, and those remaining on earth are now ‘caught up with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air’. (1 thess. 4:17) (See The, Watchtoiccr, January 15, 1934.)
5	Further the scripture identifies the time of the inauguration of the new covenant, when he says: “And to God [Jehovah] the Judge of all.” (Heb. 12:23) Jehovah is the Judge over all, and his judgment first begins at the house of God when Christ Jesus, the duly appointed Judge, there appears and begins judgment for the purpose of purifying the sons of Levi. (Mal. 3:3; 1 Pct. 4:17; Jas. 4:12) That judgment determines who shall be approved and anointed to offer unto God an offering in righteousness. (Heb. 13:15) The church of the firstborn in this text, which are gathered unto God, does not include the ‘great company’ class, but the limitation is to those only who form the royal house of Jehovah and toward whom the covenant is inaugurated.
6	Then says the scripture: ‘ ‘ And to the spirits of just men made perfect.” Who are “the spirits of just men made perfect”? In the Greek word-for-word rendering of this text the word “men” does not appear, but it reads: “And to spirits of the righteous made perfect.” (Diag.) “And unto the spirits of righteous ones made perfect”; in the margin, “perfected righteous ones.” (Roth.) The word “perfected” modifies “righteous ones”, and not “spirits”. The ones to whom this part of the text applies are not creatures with a spirit organism, but it applies to the faithful men on earth. In this same chapter
Jehovah, “The Judge,” is mentioned as the “Father of spirits”. (Heb. 12: 9) “For they [fathers of our flesh] verily for a few days chastened us after their own pleasure; but he [Jehovah, the Father of spirits] for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness.” (Heb. 12:10) Thus the apostle shows to whom the words “spirits of just men” refer.
’Concerning the rebellion of Korah it is written: “And they [Moses and Aaron] fell upon their facts, and said, O God, the God of the spirits of all flesh, shall one man sin, and wilt thou be wroth with all the cone-rogation?” (Num. 16: 22) Those who have been begotten of the spirit have Jehovah for their spiritual Father, and this is true even while those creatures have an organism of flesh. The expression in the text “spirits of the righteous made perfect” therefore properly applies to the present-day remnant of spiritual Israel who now arc “spiritually minded”. (Rom. 8:G) Many who are begotten of the spirit do not prove faithful and are therefore not ‘perfected in the spirit’, whereas the remnant found faithful at the temple judgment and made members of the ‘elect servant’ class arc perfected. They were, righteous at the time, begotten of the holy spirit, and counted as God’s sons, and now as such righteous ones they are perfected. They have eomc faithfully through a discipline administered by their “Father of spirits”, Jehovah, that they might be made partakers of his holiness.—Heb. 12:6-10.
8	The spirit-begotten ones arc the ones justified by the blood of Christ Jesus, and in addition thereto the, remnant are brought under the robe of righteousness. (Isa. 61:10) They are ‘arrayed in fine linen, which is the righteousness [righteous acts] of the saints’. (Rev. 19:8) The ones here described, therefore, are the ‘saints gathered unto the Lord’ and who have come to unity of the faith and knowledge, “unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ.” (Eph. 4:13,14; Ps. 50:5) It is therefore seen that the words of description appearing in this text, to wit, ‘the spirits of the righteous ones made perfect, or perfected,’ identify the remnant gathered to the temple unto the Lord. These are the ones toward whom the new covenant is inaugurated or dedicated.
9	This scripture having identified the remnant as the ones toward whom the new covenant is inaugurated, the very next words of the text mention the mediator, to wit: “And to Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaketh better things than that of Abel.” (Heb. 12: 24) Jesus was made the mediator while on earth ISOO years previous to the inauguration of the covenant ; but now having come to the temple, and gathered unto himself the faithful, he inaugurates the covenant in heaven toward those who have been found faithful up to this point and who have been made to “sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus” with him. Because of his faithfulness in maintaining his
May 15, 1934
WATCHTOWER
149
integrity toward Jehovah Abel was murdered. Though entirely innocent when killed at the instance of Satan, the blood of Abel was merely the blood of an imperfect man. The blood of Jesus, the mediator of the covenant, as stated in the foregoing text, “speak-eth better things than that of Abel.” This blood of sprinkling, or the blood of the new covenant, is the blood of the Perfect One, the Faithful and True Witness of Jehovah, and hence has redemptive value ami validates the covenant, giving security of its benefits to those who have been brought into the covenant. These are the things which the blood of Jesus “speak-clh”, imports or signifies, and which, to be sure, arc ‘‘better things than that of Abel”.
10	At the inauguration of the law covenant at Sinai there was a great convulsion and shaking of the earth. Later Jehovah said through his prophet: ‘‘For thus saith the Lord of hosts, Yet once, it is a little while, and I will shake the brawns, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land.” (Hag. 2: (>) The apostle refers to this latter prophecy of Jlmigai and to the prophecy recorded by Moses, the shaking of Mount Sinai, when he wrote: ‘‘For ye are not come unto the mount Liat might be tombed, and that burmd with fire, nor unto blackness, and darkne->s, and tempest, and Lie sound of a trumpet, and the voice of words; which voice they that heard, entreated that the word should not be spoken to them any more: . . . See that ye refuse not him that speaketh. For if they escaped not who refii'-ed him that spake on earth, much more shall not we escape if we turn away from him that speaketh from heaven: whose voice then shook the earth; but now he hath promised, saying, Yet once more I shake- not the earth only, but also heaven.” —Heb. 12:18,19,23,2b.	'
11	While other Scriptural texts show that at Armageddon there will be great physical disturbances, these words of the apostle Paul recorded in Hebrews concerning the inauguration of the new covenant do not appear to apply at all to literal shaking or violent movements to and fro of natural objects. What came to pass at Mount Sinai was typical, and foreshadowed-a shaking which is a searching judgment, process upon those who have covenanted to do God's will and which takes place at the time Christ Jesus sits in judgment as a refiner, and at which time there is a great shakeup amongst the creatures who have made a consecration to do God’s will. In this shaking some are cast away, while others are retained. Just such a shaking process began about 1918 and has progressed from and after that date, which marks the coming of the Lord to the temple and the beginning of judgment and the progress of his judgment. At the time of this shaking the lawless ones are gathered out and east away, which casting-away work is done, by- the Lord acting by and through his angels. “The Son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shrill gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity; and shall cast them into a
furnace df fire: there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.”—Matt. 13:41,42.
12	The shaking that took place at Mount Sinai at the inauguration of the law covenant foreshadowed the shaking, the sifting and refining that take place at the time the new covenant is inaugurated by the Greater Moses. The apostle then continues to compare the responsibility of those in the new covenant with those in the law covenant. The Jews refused to hear and obey the words spoken by Moses, ami tiny did not escape thereafter, says the apostle: “Much more shall not we escape if we turn away from him that speaketh from heaven.” Now Christ Jesus, the Greater Moses, speaks from heaven from the temple, and those in the covenant who do not obey him shall certainly not escape punishment.—Acts 3:23.
,J The apostle in this connection quotes the prophecy of JIaggai (2:fi,7) and thereby definitely fixes the lime of the inauguration of the new covenant, to v.it, when the ‘Desired One’ comes to the temple for judgment. Then follows the shaking amongst tho-e who v.ere once in line for the kingdom. This latter shaking is for the express purpose of removing e\<-ry one in line for the kingdom who is not proved faithful. Concerning this the apostle says: “And this woid, Yet once mote, signiiieth the removing of tho.e things that are shaken, us of things that are made, that thorn things which cannot be shaken may remain.” (Heb. 12:27) Thus he declares that ‘those which cannot be shaken’ are the faithful ones whom God has perfected and whom he has taken out ami placed in i-mmni-dntl, and who continue as his witnesses, and who participate in the vindication of his name. Such are the om-s in line lor the kingdom, and it is to these that the kingdom interests are committed by the Lord.—Malt. 21:47.
11 The kingdom cannot be shaken or moved, and those who ultimately inherit with Christ Jesus the kingdom cannot be shaken out. It is the kingdom that will vindicate Jehovah’s name; hence all who are of the kingdom must stand firm and steadfast, and concerning this the apostle says: “Wherefore we receiving a kingdom which cannot be moved |a kingdom not to be shaken, Huth.], let us have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear.” (Heb. 12:28) That kingdom lias now-come and the interests on earth thereof have beta committed to the ‘wise and faithful servant’ class. Hence The apostle, addressing those toward whom the new- covenant is now inaugurated, and to whom thoe kingdom interests are committed, says: “Let us have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear.” Those who do thus have the King for their friend, and, having the King for their friend, they must have grace and gracious voids upon their lips, serving God with pureness of heart. “He that loveth with a pure heart, and hath grace on his lips, will have the king as his friend.” (1’iov. 22:11, Lccser) Such faithful ones serve God “with reverence and godly fear” for the reason that “our
150
Tfle WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
God is a consuming fire” (Ileb. 12:29) ; and it appears from other scriptures that at the time there are those in line for the kingdom but who refuse to hear and obey the Greater Moses, Christ Jesus, the Priest, Prophet, and Mediator of the new covenant, and toward these God is a consuming fire. Jehovah, having separated his own and selected them as a people for his name, will sustain those who continue to faithfully maintain their integrity toward him; and hence they have occasion to fear God, but they have no occasion to fear what man or the Devil and his angels may do to them. They know that they have not the strength or sufficiency of themselves, but that their strength and protection come from the Lord. “Not that we are sufficient of ourselves to think any thing, as of ourselves; but our sufficiency is of God.” (2 Cor. 3:5) By Jehovah’s grace, as his witnesses they can do all things for which they are anointed and commissioned.
WHO ARE MINISTERS
15 Not every one who is begotten of the holy spirit is a minister of the new covenant, but only those who are brought to the point of maturity in Christ, which constitutes them elders in fact, not by the election of men, but by the spirit of the Lord, Telling the Corinthians that only by the grace of God could ho (Paul) do the things which had been committed to him, the apostle says: “God who also hath made us able ministers [servants, Diag.] of the new [covenant] ; not of the letter, but of the spirit: for the letter killcth, but the spirit giveth life.” (2 Cor. 3: G) In the first verse of that epistle to the Corinthians Paul seems to limit the word “us”, as used therein and in this text, to himself and Timothy, who were then doing a ministering work unto their Corinthian brethren. There were difficulties amongst the company of the Corinthians because some had been followinghumanleaders, and hence disturbance followed. Not until these brethren in the church who sought to lead should become elders in fact, that is, come to unity in the spirit, could they become the able ministers of the new covenant.
10 Such has ever been the condition in the church. Wherever those in the church follow human leaders and ignore the Word of the Lord trouble is certain to result. The time is now come when the sanctuary of the Lord has been cleansed, and those who are in fact in the sanctuary are at unity and hence are able ministers of the new covenant. Why, then, do disturbances continue to arise among the members who associate themselves together in these companies? Manifestly because in such companies there are those meeting together who are not in the temple and have not come unto the unity of the faith and knowledge in Christ Jesus and who therefore are not anointed to do the work of the Lord. Such continue to manifest the spirit of selfishness and lawlessness, insisting on doing things their own way and ignoring organization directions; and hence disturbances follow. Thojc who are
in the temple and appreciating their great favor from the Lord see that the enemy is fighting desperately against the remnant and that all in the temple must stand shoulder to shoulder for the kingdom message and novel’ be terrified by opposition that arises and that is brought against them by the enemy. “Only let the lives you live be worthy of the [gospel] of the Christ, in order that, whether I come and see you or, being absent, only hear of you, I may know that you are standing fast in one spirit and with one mind, fighting shoulder to shoulder for the faith of the [gospel]. Never for a moment quail before your antagonists. Your fearlessness will be to them a sure token of impending destruction, but to you it will be a sure token of your salvation, a token coming from God.”—Phil. 1: 27, 28, Weymouth.
17 At this stage of the church anyone meeting with a company of the Lord’s people who refuses to abide by organization instructions, and who insists on being lawless and following his own selfish way, furnishes the proof that he is not in the temple and therefore not an able minister of the new covenant. The proper course for the remnant under such circumstances is to avoid all controversies and continue to do faithfully what they are commissioned to do. It is better to suffer wrong in silence and to go straight forward in the work which the faithful arc commissioned to do than to try to justify oneself or to defend oneself. (1 Cor. 6:7) Every one in the temple will have confidence in every other member of the temple companj' and will be diligent to put aside all selfishness and do the work committed to them with gladness of heart. At the same time they will avoid those who attempt to cause divisions.—Horn. 1G: 17,18.
18 As it is written by the apostle: ‘We are made able ministers of the new covenant, not of the letter, but of the spirit, which quickencth.’ (Margin) Merely written letters on books or laws or rules written down cannot of themselves move one to a course resulting in the approval of God, which quickencth to life. It is the power of the holy spirit of God within one that can and does carry one along the way toward life. Let those of the temple now fully realize and appreciate the fact that they have been brought into the temple, anointed and instructed there, in order that they might serve as Jehovah’s witnesses and thus minister unto the things for which they have been chosen and anointed. Individuals are clear out of sight so far as the temple company is concerned. All there are one body, instructed by the great Teachers lor one and the same purpose and sent forth to participate in the work of the vindication of Jehovah’s name.
REFLECTING HIS GLORY
18 When Moses came down from Mount Sinai, having received the law and commandments from God, “the skin of his face shone.” To avoid the Jews’ seeing his shining countenance Moses pvt a veil on his face, and when Moses went before the Lord to speak
May 15, 1934
fflie WAT C HT0WER-
151
with him he took the veil off. (Ex. 34:27-35) The outcome of the law covenant with its statutes resulted in condemning the nation of Israel because of their rebelliousness, hence ministered unto them death. With this in mind the apostle Paul wrote: ‘’But if the ministration of death, written and engraven in stones, was glorious, so that the children of Israel could not stedfastly behold the face of Moses for the glory of his countenance; which glory was to be done away; how shall not the ministration of the spirit be rather glorious ! For if the ministration of condemnation be glory, much more doth the ministration of righteousness exceed in glory. For even that which was made glorious had no glory in this respect, by reason of the dory that exccliclh. For if that which is done away was glorious, much more that which remaineth is glorious.”—2 Cur. 3:7-11.
20	The shining of Closes’ face was a reflection of the glory of Jehovah, and Closes served as a mirror to reflect that glory. The administration of the new covenant by Christ Jesus the Mediator, who is the Greater Moses, is far more glorious than that which was manifested at the inauguration of the law covenant. The glory of the Eord Jehovah shines into The face of Christ Jesus, his great High Priest and Mediator, and is mirrored there to those in the covenant and in the temple. (2 Cor. 4:4-6, ll'dh.) At the inauguration of the law covenant the glory of God shone upon the face of Moses; hence the glory was not that of the Israelites, but .Moses was rejecting the glory of God. At the inauguration of the new covenant at .Mount Zion Jehovah there appears in his glory. Christ Jcsib mirrors the glory of Jehovah to those of Zion. (Ps. 102: 16) Had the law covenant produced ‘the people for Jehovah’s name’, such a people would have continued to be used to reilect the glory of Jehovah which shone in the face of the mediator, Moses. That covenant, having failed, was cast away, and now the new covenant does produce the “people for his name”, “a holy nation,” which people are used to reflect the glory of the Lord ; and that glory which shines in the face of the Lord Jesus is greater than that which was made to shine in the face of Moses. “For if that which passeth away [the law covenant| was with glory, much more th.it which remaineth is in glory.”— 2 Cor. 3:11, ll.V.
21	At the time Paul wrote the epistle to the Corinthians the glory there mentioned was still in the future, and this is shown by the words of the apostle, when he says: “Seeing then that we have such hope, we use great plainness of speech.” (2 Cor. 3:12) That glory was not seen in Paul’s day, but is seen at the inauguration of the new covenant. Had lie seen it he would not have talked about hoping for it. “Fer what a man secth, why doth he yet hope for? But if we hope for that we see not, then do we with patiencewait for it.” (Pom. .8:24,25) During the period of waiting for the appearing of such glory the holy spirit was the advocate, comforter and helper' of the conse
crated, which Paul knew. Having such hope, the apostle says, “we use great boldness of speech.” (R.F.) Having hope, he was not ashamed, because “hope maketh not ashamed”. (Rom. 5:5) If Paul used plainness or boldness of speech then, how much more now should the anointed of the Lord speak with boldness in this day of judgment.
22	The apostle did not speak in veiled language; hence he employed this illustration, to wit: “And not as Moses, which put a vail over his face, that the children of Israel could not stedfastly look to the end of that which is abolished.” (2 Cor. 3:13) The awestriking glory which Jehovah caused to appear upon the face of Moses frightened the Jews, because they win- looking at Mo ws and not by faith at the Lmd God. To obscure the shining in the face of Moses input on a veil. The Jews gloried in a man, one of their own blood relation; hence they did not see that the glory of Moses as a mediator and inauguralor of the law covenant was temporary, which ‘ lory ended when the covenant ended. The purpose of the gloiy upon the face of Moses was to foretell in a miniature way The coming glory of the greater mediator, Christ Jesus, and the inaugiirator of the better covenant: but the Jews did not look in that direction, or to that “end”, and hence they rejected Christ Jesus wh<n he came, and do still reject him. Therefore says the apostle concerning the Jews: “But their minds weie blinded [hardened, /».!'.] ; for until this day remaimth the same vail untaken away in the reading of the old testament; which vail is done away in Christ. ” (2 Cor. 3:14) That blindness was upon the greater part of natural Israel and rendered it impossible for the Israelites to discern the meaning of the testimony of Moses and of the prophecies which follow.
“ The veil over the shining face of Moses corre-spondinglv shows that Christ Jesus, Jehovah's great Priest, veils the truth from the eyes of those that oppose God s Wind at the present time. When Isaiah had a vision of 1he temple the Lord said to him: “Go and tell this people, Hear ye indeed, but understand not; and see ye indeed, but perceive not. Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eves; lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and convert, and be healed.” (Isa. 6:!), 1(1) This scripture shows a blindness of those who hear with their natural ears and see with their natural eyes-but do not perceive or understand. With the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple the significance of the typical picture was unveiled by the power of the holy spirit to those in Christ, and who are faithfully serving Jehovah, but the holy spirit does not reveal the meaning thereof to those who are unfaithful. Therefore says the apostle: “But even unto this d-y, when Moses is read, the vail is upon their heart.” (2 Cor. 3: 15) This is actually true today with -in-Iudiag the “man of sin” company, who are not tn the secret place of the Most High, and to such the Greater Moses
152
WATCH T0WER.
Bkooklyn, N. Y.
docs not reveal the secret things of God’s Word. The trouble with such opposers is that, even though they once had the truth, they have not the love of the truth, but, being selfish, they are blinded.
24	When Moses went before the Lord to speak to him “he took the vail off”. (Ex. 34:34,35) The apostle Paul, quoting from the above prophecy, says: “Nevertheless, when it [lie, Kolh.] shall turn to the Lord, the vail shall be taken away.” (2 Cor. 3: 16) The apostle’s statement here proves that when there is a turning away from a man and a turning to Jehovah God, and fully trusting him and the Lord Jesus, the “vail” is taken away from the eyes of such as have the spirit of the Lord, and these have an understanding. The one turning to the Lord, therefore, is given a vision of his reflected glory, which glory is reflected in the face of Christ Jesus and shines into the heart and mind of those fully devoted to the Lord. Christ Jesus is “the brightness of his glory”. But where those who have covenanted to do the will of God continue to look to a man and his supposed glorious attainments and dote upon his teachings, they are blind to the truth; and this is clearly shown by the foregoing statement of the apostle.
25	Today those who continue to insist that Pastor Russell taught all the truth that is to be learned by the saints on earth are in the dark, and they will continue in the dark. They fail to discern the Lord at his temple, and scoff at the statement that he is at the temple. Their continued blindness to the understanding of the prophecies of the Bible is proof thereof. When the natural Jews today read that which was written by Moses, the matter is entirely dark to them. Likewise with those who are once spiritual Israelites, and who have continued to look at a man and not to the Lord, the understanding of the Scriptures is impossible to them. Those who turn to the Lord and trust in him, for them the veil is removed and they see what the Lord reveals to those in the temple.
LIBERTY
“ Jehovah is the supreme power, that is, the Most High. The Lord Jesus Christ is the higher power next to Jehovah and is the “quickening spirit”. (1 Cor. 15:45) Moses was a type of Christ Jesus and was flesh, or human, foreshadowing the spirit creature, Christ Jesus. Continuing his argument the apostle says: “Now the Lord [Jehovah] is that spirit [The Spirit, Zf.l'.]: and where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.” (2 Cor. 3:17) Some spirit-begotten ones have foolishly seized upon this scripture text and hold to it as an authority or excuse for their lawlessness in God’s organization, contending that where the spirit of the Lord is each one is at liberty to do as he may please and is under no obligation to follow the rules of God’s organization, and hence they do not follow the direction in God’s organization. Such application of the text is wholly wrong. One in Christ Jesus is not licensed to do anything he wants to, but
must be obedient to the Lord and his organization. Liberty does not mean license. Where there is truly the spiritually minded condition existing among those who are begotten of the spirit these are free from the bondage such as the Jews were in. The spirit of the Lord is upon and among his anointed ones, who are in the temple or seciet place of the Most High, but that is not the condition of the “great multitude”, who are prisoners to Satan’s organization. It could not be said that they are free. Such condition of bondage refers to those in the ranks of the nominal church systems and outside of it who are spirit-begotten but who are held in bondage by the fear of man. There are many who claim to be in present truth who are in fact under bondage to fear of Satan’s organization. That condition does not, however, apply’ to those who are in the temple; says the apostle, “But Jerusalem [God’s organization] which is above is free, which is the mother of us all.” (Gal. 4:26) Therefore those in the secret place of the Most High, anointed and in the temple, are not in bondage to any worldly power as though such worldly powers were the “higher powers”. But those who are looking upon the rulers of this world as the “higher powers” are certainly in bondage. The faithful, however, being Jehovah’s witnesses and appreciating the truth and that this is the. day of judgment, these have boldness in declaring the truth, and this is proof of their love for Jehovah and of their freedom or liberty in Christ. —1 John 4: 17, IS.
27	Such faithful ones refuse to recognize the rulers of this world as the “higher powers”. They refuse to compromise with the powers of Satan’s organization, and refuse to ask them for or to accept permits from Satan's organization to preach the gospel of God’s kingdom. They obey God, and not man, because they are free from bondage of man and man-made organizations ruled by Satan. It is therefore only where the spirit of the Lord is that there is such liberty; and such is the meaning of the apostle’s words in the foregoing text. All those in Christ and in the covenant, taken out as a people for the name of Jehovah, are, however, bound to be fully and wholly obedient to the great Prophet, Christ Jesus; and since the instruction to the remnant proceeds from the Lord at the temple, all of the temple company must be wholly obedient to the organization instructions proceeding from the Lord.—Acts 3: 23.
23	Christ Jesus is the head of the house of sons, and those who are in his house, that is to say, in the royal house of God in the timple, are wholly free from Satan’s organization. The words of Jesus addressed to those who thought they were God’s servants are: “If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed; and ye shall know the truth, and the-truth shall make you free. If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed.” (John S: 31, 32, 36) The same rule applies at the present time. One mint know the truth and must be in Christ Jesus and faith
May 15, 1934
Tae WATCHTOWER.
153
fully obey the Lord in'-order to be entirely free from Satan’s organization. But that has no reference whatsoever to liberty to exercise one’s own selfish desires or will and go contrary to God’s organization instructions. Those who insist on following their own selfish desires and ways and on ignoring the instructions that proceed from the temple put themselves outside of the pale of God’s favor. Let no one think, because he is in the truth, he is at liberty to do as he pleases. lie must do as it pleases the Lord, and the will of the Lord is expressed in his Word; and the Lord is dealing through his organization, and has one way of doing his work, and not many.
VISION
18 The apostle, then addressing his words specifically to those who have the spirit of the Lord, such as himself and such as are today in the temple and faithfully serving Jehovah, says: “But we all, with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the spirit of the Lord.” (2 Cor. 3:18) In the typical picture it was Moses’ face that was veiled, and not the face of the Israelites. In the antitype it is the Greater Moses, Christ Jesus, whose face shines, and that shining is the reflecting of Jehovah’s glory. Therefore when the face of the spiritual Israelite is turned to the Lord, and hence away from man, the veil is taken away and the vision of the unveiled face is had by those who are with Christ in full unity. This explains why those at the temple have a clear vision of the Lord’s purpose and his glory at this time and others who think they are in Christ have no vision at all. Another rendering of this text is: “But we all beholding the glory of the Lord in a face unveiled, are transformed into the same likeness, from glory to glory, as from the Lord, the Spirit.” (2 Cor. 3:18, Diag.) The Lord Jesus does not veil his glory from us (with all who are in the temple), because we have faith and have the spirit of the Lord. All such are spiritually minded and have a vision, while others arc blinded. The faithful in the temple look into the unveiled face of the Lord Jesus Christ as though looking into a mirror, and they see there the glory of Jehovah upon Christ Jesus, and such glory is caught up by those in the temple and reflected. The glory here mentioned is not any part of us, nor is that glory of us. The greater mediator and inaugurator of the new covenant is the one that is reflecting the glory of Jehovah, because he is now at the temple, ‘in his glory, and all his holy angels with him.’ (Matt. 25: 31) Jehovah gives his glory to Christ Jesus, and to his temple company, and to none other. (Isa. 42:8) Christ Jesus reflects the glory of Jehovah, and those in the temple, beholding this glory, reflect the glory of the Lord Jesus to others, that they may see who are the true witnesses of Jehovah.
33 Such faithful ones “are changed into the same image ”, ‘ ‘transformed into the same likeness. ’ ’ (Diag.)
The remnant brought into the temple at the inauguration of the new covenant arc ‘ ‘ caught up . . . in the elouds, to meet the Lord in the air”. (1 Thess. 4:17; see The Watchtower, January 15, 1934) From out of the temple they discern the Lord’s glory and receive instruction from him, which they receive in the secret place and which instruction changes their entire course of deportment and action. They are cleansed of things which are not of the Lord, such as the fear of man, the worship of man, the submission to worldly powers contrary to God’s will, the conforming of themselves to man’s teachings, and the following after man, and from anything else or all things else that mark one as conforming to the formalism of Babylon. The temple company must be conformed or transformed to the image of Christ Jesus. “For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brethren. Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called : and whom he called, them he also justified: and whom he justified, them he also glorified.”—Hom. 8: 29, 30.
31	Those who are brought into the temple and toward whom the new covenant is inaugurated see and appreciate the truth that Christ Jesus is “the faithful and true witness” of Jehovah God, full of integrity toward God, and wholly devoted to the vindication of his name; and they appreciate now that they must be like the Lord in this respect. Therefore they must be faithful witnesses of Jehovah, because they have been with Jesus and learned of him and must do as he does, and they must be bold in bearing the testimony to the name, of Jehovah. Concerning this same matter it is written: “Now when they saw the boldness of Peter and John . . . they took knowledge of them, that they had been with Jesus,” and hence were bold and fearless witnesses to the name of Jehovah. (Acts 4:13) Thus their course of action is changed from what it was during the Elijah period of the church and they become like the Lord, as bold and fearless witnesses. This does not mean to be rude witnesses, but to calmly and fearlessly tell the trulli.
32	The foregoing scripture, which says, “from glory to glory,” does not mean that those of the remnant or temple company are changed from the glory of the law covenant to the glory of the new covenant, but that they are changed into the likeness of Christ Jesus as faithful witnesses to the name of Jehovah. During the Elijah period of the church the faithful ones in a measure reflected the glory of the Lord, but, being transferred from the Elijah to the Elisha period of the Lord’s work, they have greater honor and glory of service, because the Elisha work is an unselfish devotion to the honor of Jehovah’s name. It is in this day that it becomes more apparent to the Jonadab class as to who are the true witnesses of Jehovah giving honor to his name even as Jesus did when he was on earth. Concerning his faithful followers Jesus said: “And the glory which thou gavest me I have
134
FCiq WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
t’ivcn them; that they may be one, even as we are one.” (John 17:22) The faithful ones reflect 1he glory of the Lord that even those outside may determine who are really unselfishly devoted to Jehovah.
3' Such transformation conforms one to the likeness of Christ Jesus, "even as of the Lord, the Spirit.” (2 Cor. 3:18, inaryin) Christ Jesus has appeared at the temple and gathered Jehovah’s saints unto himself, and now apply the words of the apostle: ‘‘When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory.” (Col. 3:4) Here Christ Jesus instructs the temple company, and sends them forth to ri-iieet his glory. (Matt. 10:27) The angels of 1he Lord have gathered out the lawless ones, and the Lord has clothed the faithful ones with the robe of rightoou«m->s, and sends them forth as his witnesses to shine by rctleeling his -.dory; and now arc fulfilled his words: ‘‘Then rhull the righteous : hine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Fath' r. Who hath errs to hear, let him hear.” (Matt. 13:43) Only Jehovah's witnesses, made part of tlie elect servant da.is, are given sueh glory. (Isa. 42: 8; 43:7) As the faithful witne“:es of Jehovah them maintain their integrity toward him, and because they do so the reproaches which fell upon Christ Jesus fall upon them and they are opposed and persecuted. (P.om. 15:3) The facts show that such are exactly the present-day conditions and experiences of Jehovah's witness's who are boldly declaring the name of Jehovah. ‘‘If ye be repronehul for the name of Christ, happy are ye; for the spirit of glory and of God resteth upon you: on their part he is evil spoken of, but on your part he is glorified.”—1 1’et. 4:14.
34 It is now the glorious privilege of the faithful to be witnesses to the n;ii:ic of .Jehovah, when his great Judge is at the temple judging the house of God and separating the people as sheep and goats are separated. The true followers of Christ Jesus are "not ashamed to be Jehovah’s witnesses, but .rejoice that they may have a part in delivering the testimony to the vindica
tion of his name. (1 Pet. 4:16) They declare the righteousness of God.
(To be continued)
QUESTION'S FOR STUDY
f 1. Explain whether one gets life by teas-"ti of Using in a covenant with Jehovah. What, then, is the upphcaiion of Leviticus 18:5? On v.lmt terms will !.miik:n<! rain life during the millennial icign of Christ? U hat is the purpose of the new covenant.' When does it become op.ua-tive towaid those why are in the covenant, and with v.hat result io them?
1) 2, 2. When and how does Hebrews 12:22 hate fulfilment? (.'ompnie tins will the time and manner ot lulfilment of 2 IT e- -.ihmmiis 2:1.
(1 4, 5. Who mi “ye” and the “church of tlm firstboin’’ (verse 23), ami how does this ‘coming’ tid'e place.’ l'o::it out the “ignitivanee of the expression ‘‘ami to God the Jmlge of all”.
c 6-8. 1’iove the identity of ‘‘the spirits of just men made per feet”.
T 9. What is the rekiimm-hip here of the futthcr expression 'a) “.''ml to Join the mediator of the new cm.caul.”I (b; ‘‘To the blood of sprinkling, that Hpenketli better things tl.-:n that ol Ab -I”?
f 10-1.'!. Point out wbat was ion-shadowed or foicml l in tint which i.i reeoul.’d at (a) JInggai 2: G and Hebieis 12: 24. (b; Hebirws 12:25. (c) Hebrews 12:27.
Ji” 11. V/liat is the ‘ • kingdom v.lmdi cannot be mow I”? By whom recoiled? and how’ and uhen?	>
f 17-18. Who are nmc-teis of the new covenant ’ ,'ciouiit, for the .'ipiii-tle’s exp,e;-ion “able mini.Ueis”, .'.ml lor his distinguishing betv,.en the “letter” of tie- oiuniint and the “spirit” tb.eieot. M.o'.v that his counsel v..is iecorded for ami applies at the pie ent time.
11), 2'1. Explain the “glorv” spoken of bv the apostle in 2 Cotinthians 3: 7-11.	’	’
K 21. Point out the “hope”, referred to in ver-e 12, us calling for “great plainness of speech”, and show the p11s-eat application of this bvtipluie.
1; 22-25. Explain the illustration used by the apostle :is te-corded in verses 13-15. How and when docs this, together with verse Hi, find application or fultilmcnt ?
U 2(1-28. Show whither vei.se 17 1ms been coriectly undeistood and applied by the sp.itit begotten onet of this day, and whether their ii.’nse of m iioti 1ms been in harmony therewith and with .Ic.-us’ words of John 8: ill, 32, Illi.
1i 2l)-:'.:>. Explain the apostle’s words (verse Ij.i (a) “with onen face beholding as in a glass the glorv of the bud”, (b) “Chi'into the himie froi.i <4 Lory to i;loiy. (<•) “L\cn as by the spiut of the Lord.”
3-1. What is row the girtit }>ri\which Jchu\uh provi-lcs for the faithful, and how will they refund thereto.1
SATAN AND EGYPT AND ASSYRIA
C n 1I1E ruling factors of ancient Egvpt comprised g the king and princes, the religious professors, the militarists and the building' engineers. Of the long ago it is written, in the sacred Scriptuns: ‘‘The princes also of Pharaoh [the king] saw [Abit.-ham’s wife Sarah], and commended her belote Ph--rtioh.” (Gen. 12:15) This statement shows that the king had his politicians looking alter his personal interests. Concerning Abraham’s great-m'-iiidson Jn-vph, who was in Egypt later on and was held in prison, it is v.iitten: “The Icing sent and loosed him: even the rid'r of the people [of Egypt!, and let him co free. He mmle him lord of hi.; house, and ruler ci
all his substance; to bind his princes at his pleasure, and teach his senators wisdom.”—Ps. 105: 20-22.
Special provision was made in Egypt ter th" nwn-gfrs of religion. Tina historic record gif .-s an in-tanci* ot this, saying: "Only the land of the priests bomdit he not; for the priests had a portion assigned them of Pharaoh, and did eat their portion vnirh PhaiaMi gave them; v.lmiei’ore they „old not their land-.’’ (Gen. 47: 22) In the Devil’s organization lie bad si-i n to it that the religionists were particularly taken enio of and provided for. The Devil has always kept religion prominent, end to the fore.
Concerning the military forces it is written ti.-.t
May 15, 1034
T6e WATCHTOWER
155
Pharaoh had a great host of chariots, and horses to draw those chariots, and horsemen. (Ex. 15:4; 14: 7,9) The Lord’s prophet (Jer. 46:4,8,9) says: “Harness the horses; and get up, ye horsemen, and stand forth with your helmets; furbish the spears, and put on the brigandi.nes. Egypt riseth up like a flood [of the Nile river], . . . Come up, ye horses; and rage, ye chariots; and let the mighty men come forth ; the Ethiopians and the Libyans, that handle the shield; and the Lydians, that handle and bend the bow.” The Ethiopians and Libyans and Lydians were the allies of Egypt, and their place of residence was on the border of Egypt,
As proof that the Egyptians were great builders and engineers, it is written: “Therefore they did set over them taskmasters, to afilict them with their burdens. And they built for Pharaoh treasure cities, I’ithom and Raamscs.” (Ex. 1:11) It is in the land of Egypt that great pyramids and temples have been builded, and without a doubt they were built at the instance of Satan. These combined ruling factors of Egypt were haughty, domineering, blood-guilty, oppressive, presumptuous and blasphemous.—Job 21:14,15; Isa. 19:11.
The proof is conclusive that Egypt was Satan’s organization and that the dominating clement in the visible part of that organization was the commercial power, which created and operated the military for its selfish purposes and caused the politicians to do the bidding of that element. The religious element of the nation was that of the Devil, and wielded an uncanny influence over the other ruling factors. Here again the manifest purpose was to turn the people away from God and to corrupt them and keep them in subjection to the Devil, who was particularly represented in Egypt by Pharaoh the king. To further strengthen the proof, God in his Word definitely says that Egypt is the Dragon or Devil organization, created and organized by Satan, who claims the earth and everything therein for his own selfish purposes: “Thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I am against thee, Pharaoh [the Devil] king of Egypt, the great dragon that lieth in the midst of his rivers, which hath said, Sly river is mine own, and I have made it for myself’’ [let Jehovah keep his hands off].—Ezek. 29: 3.
The common people of Egypt were kept in subjection to the rulers, even as Satan keeps the peoples of earth in subjection to himself by and through the rulers. The common people were not so harsh to the Israelites in bondage as were the rulers. It is even so today; the common people are not harsh against God’s people, as are the ruling factors. The financial lords today claim the natural resources of the earth which God meant for the people. They also advance the opinion that they properly rule and control the people, and that by divine right. Egypt was a house of bondage to God’s people, Israel; and so the Devil’s ganization is holding the peoples of earth in bondage.
Assyria, the next ancient world power, was also an
organization of the Devil. Three elements or governing factors, to wit, religious, commercial and political, appeared therein, but that which is made the foremost is a political religion, or a political rule, or a form of religion that is used by the politicians. By that is meant that the politicians who controlled the people accepted the religion as a matter of expediency.
The prophetic books of Jonah and Nahum are devoted exclusively to Assyria and Nineveh, its capital city, and strikingly foretell a state of the Devil’s organization in which a political class will be in the saddle and adopt and follow a false religion because it is thought expedient in carrying out the political purposes. In this the political factor is strongly and consistently supported by the commercial power, the “giants’’, which together with the politicians are made the principal ones of the tlock of the religious system. The prophetic record concerning the Assyrian world power seems to clearly foretell a condition of the Devil’s organization existing during the period of preparation for and immediately before the great conflict between Satan’s organization and God’s organization. Otherwise stated, it foretold a condition existing on earth when approaching the lime of the establishment of God’s kingdom, which time is the present time.
Nimrod, the notorious “mighty hunter’’ of old, was Satan’s chief man on earth, lie had built Babylon and three other cities in the land of Shi mar, and became a great campaigner against the peacefully-disposed Shemites who lived in Mesopotamia. Asshur was one of the sons of Shem, and evidently he and his offspring settled that part of the valley of Mesopotamia that lies north of Babylon. Nineveh was the capital city of Assyria and, according to the Common or Authorized Version of the Bible, it was built by Asshur. (See Genesis 10:11.) The accuracy of that translation is disputed by many who claim that it was Nimrod who built Nineveh, the capital city. There is much force to their contention. Genesis, chapter ten, verse ten, tells of the beginning of Nimrod’s exploits. Fiom verses six to twenty the record pertains to the sons of Ham, of which Nimrod was the most prominent. It docs not seem reasonable that in the very midst of the description of that family it would break off the continuity of the description by interjecting the statement concerning the sons of Shem, who are mentioned in the same chapter, beginning with the twenty-second verse.
One well-recognized authority on translation (Hislop) contends with much force that the proper translation should read thus: “And he [Nimrod], being strengthened [after be had built Babylon, and Ereeh, and Aecad, and Calneh, in the land of Shinar; and had become a ‘mighty’ man in the earth] went forth out of that land [Shinar], and builded Nineveh, and the city Rehoboth, and Calah.” The marginal rendering of the Common or Authorized Version supports that conclusion, and it reads: “And he [Nimrod]
156
Tfle WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
went cut, into Assyria.” The weight of authority, therefore, is that Nimrod extended his domain and increased his might in the earth by invading Assyria and bringing Assyria into subjection to him, and that he built Nineveh as its capital city.
One of the prophets of the Lord calls the land of Assyria the land of Nimrod. (Mie. 5:6) Being the capital city, Nineveh was the official residence of the ruler who is called ‘‘the king of Nineveh”. (Jonah 3:6) It was the royal city of the second world power, and Babylon became the capital city of the third world power. Thee diets show that Assyria, and its chief city, Nineveh, was an organization of Satan 1 he Devil.
Nineveh was a city or organization of great importance, and is called ‘‘Nineveh, that great city”; and, again, the prophet says, “Now Nineveh was an exceeding great city of three days’ journey.” (Jonah 1:2; 3:3) The Hebrew day’s journey being approximately twenty miles would therefore malic the city approximat“ly sixty miles in circumference. The prophet says that there were more than sixscore thousand persons (120,(,'00) that could not di.vern between the rigiit hand and the left hand. This manifestly refers to infants, and would warrant the conclusion that the total population of the city was between six hundred thousand and a million.
A lion is u.->ed in the Script ores to symbolize a ruler. (Gen. -'.9:9,10) Fierce lions would therefore symbolize harsh, cruel, and oppressive rulers. Such rulers or political instruments operate selfishly at the behest of the mighty commercial power, and their evil deeds arc screened by the hypocritical religionists. Describing the capital city of Nineveh and its rulers, the prophet says: ‘‘Where is the den of the lions, and the fecding-plaeo, of the young lions, where the lion and the lioness walked, the lion's whelp, and none made them afraid? The lion did tear in pieces enough for his whelps, and strangled for his lionesses, and filled his caws with prey, and his dens with ravin.” —Nah. 2:11,12, lt.V.
In prophetic phrase is lu re described a company of cruel political rulers, who exploited the people to feed themselves and their allies in the Devil’s organization. Manifestly this record of the prophet is made that the predominating element of that part of Satan’s organization could be disposed. God then expressly declared that he is against that organization. This is the best proof that the organization mentioned there is that of Satan the Devil.—Nah. 2:13.
The king boasted of his political power and that he had a tremendous political organization: ‘‘For he saith, Are not my princes altogether [all of them] kings [politicians]'?” (Isa. 10:8) Nineveh was permeated with and debauched by the Devil religion. Here is proof that the symbolic “whore” mentioned in the Scriptures is the Devil’s organization, and particularly the religious part thereof, which the Devil uses to seduce and turn the people away from Jehovah and to cause both rulers and people to
walk on in darkness and evil: “Because of the multitude of the whoredoms of the wellfavourcd harlot [Nineveh], the mistress of witchcrafts, that sellcth nations through her whoredoms, and families through her witchcrafts.”—Nah. 3:4.
The Devil, by appealing to the superstitions of the political and commercial giants and rulers of the land, seduces them and causes the nation to be under his (Satan’s) control. At the present day there is much evidence showing that both politicians and big financiers consult spirit mediums and thus receive information from the Devil. While the politicians in Nineveh were in the van of (lie organization, the commercial factor was exercising its part. The organization of Assyria, and particularly the capital city, Nineveh, was noted for its commercial wealth; as the prophet says: “Take ye the spoil of silver, take the spoil of gold; for there is none end of the store and glory out of all the pleasant furniture.” (Nah. 2: 9) “Thou [Nineveh] hast multiplied thy merchants above the stars ot heaven: the cankerworm spoiieih, and ilu’h away.” (?<ah. 3:16) As an example, consider Ike present commercial-military powers of the world and see how well the prophet long' ago described them.
Assyria, and its capital city, was a great military power and was strongly fortified. Says the prophet, (Nah. 3:17;: “Thy crowmd [rulers or officers of authority] are as the locusts and thy captains [field marshals or military commanders] as the great gras-hoppers, which camp in the hedges in the cold day [the latter sitting around ready to act at the bidding of their owners].”
The Assyrian army which encamped before Jerusalem approximated two hundred thousand warriors. There were probably many more than that, but the record is that one hundred and eighty-five thousand of them were killed by the Lord Jehovah God in one night. The king of Assyria defied Jehovah God, and endeavored to turn even God’s consecrated people away from him anil cause them to give allegiance to the Devil. (Isa. 36:13-20) And thus is proved Assyria’s military strength and her being used by the Devil.
Assyria, and particularly Nineveh, her capital city, Satan's organization, and which was ruled by the politicians, profiteers, militarists and religionists, was a bloody organization proving upon others, lying to deceive, exploiting and robbing the people. “Woe to the bloody city!” cries out the prophet (Nah. 3:1, 2 '•, “it is all full of lies and robbery; the prey departmh not; the noise of a whip, and the noise of the rattle g of tire wheels, and of the prancing hor-es, and < f the jumping chariots.”
It was the rulers of Nineveh who brought about the Samr.rikins, that company of rfliijioj.s hybrids who were colonized in Palestine, and who mingled their paganism, the Devil religion, with a pretended an I superstitious worship of Jehovah. The Lord pmud.v names the Samaritans as “adversaries'’ of hn people,
May 15, 1931
Me WATCHTOWER.
157
who wanted to join with those who were God’s people and to call themselves by the name of the Lord and at the same time practiced the Devil’s religion in the name of Jehovah. As it is written (Ezra 4:1-3): “Then [the Samaritans] came to Zernbbabcl [the Jewish governor], and to the chief of the fathers, and said unto them, Let us build [the temple to Jehovah God] with you; for we seek your God, as ye do; and we do sacrifice unto him, since the days of Esar-haddon king of Assur [Assyria], which brought us up hither.” “When God’s chosen people refused to join with them, these same hypocritical religionists became the avowed enemies of the Israelites and persecuted them. (Ezra 4:4-7) The Assyrian rulers had carried these aliens into Samaria to repoptilate that land, and 1o establish there the Devil religion in order to corrupt their neighbors the Jews.—2 Ki. 17: 21-29.
The three great earthly organizations, namely, Babylon, Egypt, and Assyria, were all Satan’s organizations which show his wicked organization from different viewpoints. Babylon is the mother, and Jehovah God in his Word represents her as “the great whore” and “the mother of harlots”. (Rev. 17:1-5) The Devil’s organization is that which gives birth to all the other organizations that have opposed and still
oppose Jehovah God and bring reproach upon his name and persecute liis anointed ones. It is the Devil religion that has corrupted the political rulers and the commercial giants of the world and turned them against Jehovah. God’s Word indicates that when the time comes the political and financial powers will awake and, learning a measure of the truth, will hate the old “whore” and make her and everything that is visible of that wicked organization desolate.—Rev. 17:1-17; Isa. 10:5, 6.
Assyria therefore more particularly represents the Devil’s organization at a time when political rulers dominate the nations and work together with and under the direction of their commercial allies and > up-port and uphold a fal->e religion, and shows that they will so continue until the crash comes. Egypt, being the Devil’s organization, particularly magnifle-, the commercial part, which produces and maintains the military power, as predominating, while at 1 he same time the politicians and the religionists work together to carry out its policies. Babylon stands as the “mother” of the whole wicked system, and specifically and primarily represents the Devil’s organization; and all who become a part of her pioperly take her name and arc designated as Babylon.
THE REAL SACRIFICIAL LAMB
AT THE time that the Jews or nation of Israel were brought forth out of the house of their bondage in the land of Egypt, a male lamb and its shed blood featured in the proceedings. All that was a prophetic picture, indicative of good things to come.—Ileb. 10:1.
Jehovah God’s beloved Son Jesus was the reality foreshadowed by the passover lamb of Israel. In the picture the blood of the lamb was important because of what it represented. The blood of the beloved Son of Go'l, sacrificially poured out, is of very great importance to all men. Clergymen who ignore or minimize the importance of the blood of Jesus as the great ransom price for man do violence to the Word of God and aid Satan tc turn the people from the only name and way that lead to everlasting life.
Jehovah’s law required the Israelites to make preparation for the passover. (Ex. 12:1-28) The head of each household pictured Jehovah himself. Four days before the sacrificing took place the land) must be selected. Four literal days before the death of Jesus he offered himself to the nation of Israel. Jesus died about 4,IGO years after the sin and fall of Adam, lienee four days of one thousand years each prior to Jesus’ death Jehovah selected Jesus to be the Redeemer of man. Therefore the four days in the picture were both literally and symbolically fulfilled in Christ Jesus.
The passover lamb must be a male and without blemish. The One whom the lamb foreshadowed must
be a male without blemish. Why must this victim for sacrifice be a perfect man'/ Because the perfect man, Adam, had violated God’s law in the garden of Eden, and for that reason his life was taken away. The law of God required a life for a life; therefore the One who must be substituted in death for Adam must be a perfect man. This is the reason why the animal used to represent the Redeemer must he without blemish. The redeemer of Adam and his offspring, therefore, must be a perfect man, nothing more and nothing less.
In all the earth there was no perfect man. All were condemned because of the imperfection resulting from the sin of Adam. Thore was none good. (Ps. 14:3) No man was qualified to ransom his ft 1-low man. (Ps. 49:7) These scriptures show man’s extremity. God had made the earth for man to live upon. (Isa. 45:12,18) Dian’s desire was and ever has been to have life everlasting. God had promised to bless all the families of the earth, which blessing means an opportunity for life. God had promised to redeim man from death. What, then, could be done ’
Jehovah sent his beloved Son, the Logos, to earth. Was it necessary for the Logos to die in order to become a man? No. If is right to life and his existence were transferred from the spirit plane to the human nature. Jesus was begotten as a babe in the womb of Diary, and this was accomplished by God’s exercising his holy spirit or invisible power; and in due time
158
WATCHT0WEFL
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Jesus was born. Jehovah by direct operation of his power gave the babe Jesus life and the right to life, and for that reason he was born a perfect babe. The fact that Jesus was bom of an imperfect woman docs not mean that he was in the slightest imperfect. The right to existence and existence being given to him by Jehovah directly, and Jehovah being the only One from whom life emanates directly, it follows that this babe Jesus must be perfect in every respect. Jehovah could not make an imperfect thing, because “his work is perfect’’.—Dent. 32: 4.
The Scriptures identify the Logos and the beloved only-begotten Son of God as the beginning of creation; and then it is written: “The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us [men],” and he was “full of grace and truth”. (John 1:14) “When the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the law.” (Gal. 4:4) The fact that ho was born of an imperfect woman did not mean that he was imperfect, because his life proceeded from Jehovah, lie was born a human creature, that he might be the Savior of mankind. (Luke 2:11) Thus did Jehovah prepare Ono who possessed all the qualifications to fulfil that which the passover picture foreshadowed; to wit, One qualified to provide the price to redeem the human race.—Heb. 10: 5.
Subsequent authoritative testimony recorded in the Bible proves beyond a doubt that the passover lamb pictured the Son of God; and that Jesus, the beloved Son of God, was the reality. John the Baptist, as the forerunner of Jesus, announced his coming to those who would hear; as the Scriptures state: “The next day John secth Jesus coming unto him, and saith, Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world. This is he of whom I said, After me cometh a man which is preferred before me: for he was before me. And I saw, and bare record that this is the Son of God. Again the next daj- after John stood, and two of his disciples ; and looking upon Jesus as he walked, he saitii, Behold the Lamb of God!”— John 1: 29, 30, 34-36.
The Scriptures further identify Jesus as one without blemish, foreordained by Jehovah to be the Redeemer of mankind, and therefore foreshadowed by the passover lamb. The apostle Peter (1:1:18-20) writes: “Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation received by tradition from your fathers; but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot: who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world, but was manifest in these last times for you.”
The animal in the picture was harmless and without blemish. The reality was “holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners”. (Heb. 7:26) Thus the testimony conclusively shows that the lamb foreshadowed Christ Jesus the Son of God. Jesus began his ministry when he was thirty years of age. He being
perfect, because his life was received from Jehovah direct, and therefore being qualified to redeem man, his testimony is that he came for that purpose. “Even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many.”—Hiatt. 20:28.
Since the law of God required the Jews to observe the passover by killing the lamb on the fourteenth day of Nisan, and since Jesus was born under the law and is the real Lamb foreshadowed, it therefore was necessary for Jesus to be slain on the fourteenth day of Nisan. The beginning of the Jewish day is at six p.m. At the proper and appointed time Jesus with his disciples sat down to cat the passover lamb, as the law required. On that occasion Jesus said to his disciples: “With desire I have desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer.” (Luke 22:15) That was the last time the picture was ever properly repeated.
Later, and on the same day, Jesus' was killed. lie completely fulfilled the picture of the passover lamb at that time. That which the passover lamb foreshadowed no w became a reality in the death of the beloved Son of God. Jehovah does everything exactly on time. Jehovah did not take away the life of his beloved Son, but he permitted others to do it, and he saw’ to it that it took place exactly at the time to fulfil that which was foreshadowed by the passover lamb.
When the passover lamb used in the picture wras slaughtered it could not and did not utter a protest. Through his holy prophet (Isa. 53:7) God had described his beloved Son as a lamb, who without protest went to his death. “He was oppressed, and ho was afflicted; yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth.”
One of the titles given to the beloved Son of God is “The Lamb”. By this he is further identified as the One foreshadowed by the passover lamb. Of him it is written: “The Lamb slain from the foundation of the world.” (Rev. 13: 8) He is also in the same connection identified as the Mighty One of the tribe of Judah, about whom God caused Jacob to prophesy. (Gen. 49:10) He is showm to be the One foreshadowed by David, and the mighty Executive Officer of Jehovah who received honor as the “Faithful” One of his Father’s organization.
It is written: “Behold, the Lion of the tribe of Juda, the Root of David, hath prevailed to open the book, and to loose the seven seals thereof. And I [John] beheld, and, lo, in the midst of the throne and of the four beasts, and in the midst of the elders, stood a Lamb, as it had been slain. . . . Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honour, and glory, and blessing.” (Rev. 5:5,6,12) The apostle Paul, as the inspired witness of Jehovah, writing concerning Christ
May 15, 1934
STze WATCHTOWER.
159
Jesus and bis sacrifice, identifies him as the One foreshadowed by the passover lamb, saying: “For even Christ our passover is sacrificed for us.”—1 Cor. 5: 7.
Keep always in mind that life is what Adam lost and life is what man desires, and that the only way to life God has foreshadowed in the sacrifice of the passover lamb, which lamb represented his beloved Son. This explains why the Logos was made a man and called Jesus, lie “was made in the likeness of men: and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross’’. (Phil. 2:7,8) The disability of the human race could be taken away only by the value of a perfect human life sacrificed. The human family is likened unto sheep that have gone astray, because born in sin and shapen in iniquity. (1’s. 51:5) God provided his beloved Son, foreshadowed by the lamb, to take awry the gn at disability upon the human race by reason of sin.—Isa. 53:6.
When he was <m earth Jesus spoke of the human race as she and himself ns the Shepherd, and plainly pointed out that through his sacrifice is God's way that leads to life. “Then said Jesus unto them again, Verily, verily, I say unto you, 1 am the door of the sheep. 1 am the door: by me if any man enter in, he shall he saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. The Ihief comelh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: f am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for the shetp.’’—Jolin 10:7,9-11.
The Son of God was sent to earth to provide the redemptive price for mankind. lie was not compelled to come to earth and die, but he came to do his Father’s will; and for this reason his Father loved him. Jesus said: “As the Father knoweth me, even so know I the Father: and 1 lay down my life for the sheep. Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again. No man taketh it from mo, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and 1 have power to take it again. This commandment have 1 received of my Father.’’—John 10:15,17, IS.
The Israelites were required to roast the lamb whole, without breaking a bone, and then to eat the flesh, together with unleavened bread. What was thus shown and foreshadowed in the picture, God, through his prophet (Ps. 34:20), also foretold. When Jesus was slain as the reality foreshadowed by the lamb, not a bone of his body was broken. “But when they eame to Jesus, and saw that he was dead already, they brake not his legs: for these things were done that the scripture should be fulfilled, A bone of him shall not be broken.”—John 19:33,36.
The bread which the Jews were required to eat with the roast lamb must be without leaven. Leaven is impure and therefore a symbol of sin. The unleavened bread foreshadowed the purity of Jesus. The Imad also was a picture representing the humanity of Je
sus, given for the life of the world. Giving testimony concerning himself Jesus said: “Your fathers did cat manna in the wilderness, and are dead. This is the bread which cometh down from heaven, that a man may eat thereof, and not die. I am the living bread which eame down from heaven: if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give fur the life of the world. Whoso eateth my flesh, and drink-eth my blood, hath eternal life; and I will raise him up at the last day. For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed.”—John 6:49-51, 54, 55.
The life is in the blood. The blood of the iamb poured out showed its death. The blood of J<mis poured out showed the pouring out of his life as a man. Prophetically it was written of him: “He hi’h poured out his soul unto death.” (Isa. 53:12) This testimony shows that aside from Jesus’ work as vindicator of Jehovah’s name a very neces.ary point of the divine provision for the blessing of mankind was and is the sacrifice of God’s beloved Son; that he made a picture of this in advance by the sacrifice of the passover lamb, which, under the* law, must be repeated each year until the coming of Jesus; that he sent his beloved Son into the world to die and pio-vide the ransom price for mankind ; that the* shedding of the lamb’s blood foreshadowed the shedding of the blood of Christ Jesus, which was shed for us; and that God made this provision for the human race because of his love for mankind.
Therefore it is written: “For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever belicveth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the world through him might be saved.” (John 3:16,17) In the face of this overwhelming Scriptural testimony, how can any sane man say that the blood of Jesus is of no value in providing the way to life for humanity Can anyone who honestly thinks lip is a preacher, and who pretends to preach the Bible, claim that the blood of Jesus was not essential to give life to the peoples of the earth?
The term “redeem” literally means to loose with something; it means a purchase price provided which is of suflicient value to purchase the thing desired to be purchased. The precious lifeblood of Jesus poured out in death on the tree on Calvary provided the prir-e for the redemption of the human race. 11 is perfect life exactly corresponded with the perfect life that Adam.enjoyed when in Eden, and therefore sati-lied the requirements of the divine law. It provided the price for the buying of life for the human race. “For ye are bought with a price: therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which are God s. ” (1 Cor. 6:20) This corresponds with the further testimony, which reads: “Ye were . . . redeennd . . . with the precivus blood of Christ.”—1 INt. 1:18,19.
ICO
<FTie WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Asain, it is written of Jesus: “For thou wast slain, and hast n d>'<:ined us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation.” (Rev. 5: 9) By the grace of God he tasted death for every man. (lleb. 2:9) It was the perfect man Jesus’ pouring out his lifeblood that provided the price for
the redemption of mankind, which, after all, mankind must in God’s due time have an opportunity to know. “How then shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard?” (Rom. 10:14) So writes the apostle Paul.
LETTERS
JEHOVAH PREPARING HIS PEOPLE
Be\r Brother KrTitEi:H)Ri>:
1 ui.sli to npurt lor October on the weekly meeting held at Bethel every Momluj evening. The average attendance for the month was 32.
We have now concluded our study of Vindication Three and all are grateful to Jehovah for the understanding of prophecy revealed in the temple of Ezekiel's vision.
Tho Bethel family desire to express their thankfulness to Jehovah for the new book Pri vacation, just received. Although an oilportunity has not yet been atloidcd to study this provision of the Lord, yet in it we find another evidence of the loving-kindness of Jehovah, who is preparing his people for the battle of Atmageddou, just ahead.
All the family luul a good time during Kingdom Proclamation Period, tie note how the people of good will tire being prepared to take their stand and the enemy is becoming more Vieiouu in his desperate efforts to overthrow the truth, but, thank find, he will not sui-eoed.
With best wishes and love in the Lord from all,
Your fellow witnesses in Jehovah’s service,
Blthel Family, Htratl‘liM, Australia.
SINGING PRAISES OF JEHOVAH
Deck Brethren in Zion:
At the close of another year I just feel compelled to express my gratitude to someone for the beautiful way our heavenly Father lias cared for us and is feeding us; and vve have great peace.
The book Preparation was a crowning feature to prepare us at the close of the fiscal year.
Now the 1934 Year Hook, to show us the great progress of the work and the experiences the brethren arc having in other countries, and we can rejoice to be of those of the organization that suffer at the hands of the enemy but go on singing the praises of Jehovah.
1 wish to acknowledge the gift of those precious books with many other favors from our Father’s hand. Also tho kind provision for the pioneers made by you to credit us with a certain amount; and 1 was one benefited, making it easier going.
The credit slips I have greatly appieciated, and hope by tho Lord’s grace to be entitled to a jellow slip, ns the Lord has provided, each month.
Y'our in Uis service,
Mina Kinleii, Pioneer.
SERVICE APPOINTMENTS
T. E. BANKS
J. C. RAINBOW
Oxskfl, Miss...........June	2
MHMmb. M<><..............”	3
N.'ilHiez, Mb*...........”	4
l.miri‘1, Mi-*...........”	5
N.’Vlbi), Mi-n...........”	GS
Laurence, Miss...........”	9
Mnntgotnery, Ala.........”	10
Camp Hili, Ala...........”	12
Stroud, Ala..............June 13
Bosfl<‘mer, Ala................."	11
Tuscaloosa. Ala.................”	15
Birmingham, Ala.........” 1G. 17
Ja-pcr, Ala.....................”	19
t'hultutiooga, T>lhn.....” 21,22
Knoxville, Teun.................”	30
J ohm-on City, Tenn.	July 1
Internal’! Minn. June 1
Federal Dam. Minn.......”	2
Grand Rapids Minn. °	• 3
Hibbing, Minn. .........”	5
Kinney, Minn.........”	6
■Virginia. Minn.........”	7
Two Harbor*. Minn.	”	8
Duluth, Minn............”	9,10
Prm tor, Minn...........”	12.	13
East Lake. Minn.........”	II
Aitkin, Minn............”	15
Mdara. Minn. ....... June	16
Princeton, Minn.......’’	17
Cambi idgc, Minn.......”	19
Pine City, Minn........”	2»>
Hinckley, Minn.........”	21
Clowrton, Mum.........’’	22
Grantsburg. Ub ........”	23.2 1
St. Croix Falls, Wi*.	26
Lindstrom, Mmn.........”	27
St. Paul, Minn.........”	28. 29
Min’apoliH, Minn. June 30,	July 1
G. H. DRAPER
W. J. THORN
Loveland, Colo.......June
Chovenne, Wyo........’’
Laramic. Wyu..........”
Slater, Wyo...........”
Torrington. Wyo.......”
I t. Laramie. Wyo.....”
Casper, Wyo...........”
Sheridan. Wyo.........”
Billings, Mont........”
Miles City, Moot......”
1. 2 3.4 G, 7
K
0
10
12, 13
14. 15
16, 17
19
Loesch. Mont...........June	20
Mont..........”	22
Scob-w, Mont.............”	23
Outlook, Mont............n	21
Reserve, *Mont...........”	26
I’.onetrail, N. Dak....”	27
Minot. N. Dak............”	28
Mohall, N. Dak...........”	29
Brisbane, N. Dak.........”	30
Ft. Yates, N. Dak......July	1
Mohawk. N. Y.........June 2, 3
Richmondville, N. Y. ”	5
N. Blenheim. N.Y.......”	6
Johnstou n. N. Y......”	7, 8
Gloversville, N.Y......”	9
Amsterdam, N.Y.........”	10,11
Schenectady. N.Y.......”	13,14
Albany. N.Y............”	15,16
Stottville, N.Y........”	17, 18
Troy. N. Y............J	line 20. 21
Glens Falls. N.Y....” 22.23
Granville, N.Y. ........”	21
Ticonderoga, N. Y.......”	26
Lewiston. Vt............”	27
S. Royalton, Vt.........”	2s
Barre. Vt...............”	29
Montpelier, Vt..........”	30
Morrisville, Vt.......July	1
A. H. MACMILLAN
New Smyrna, Ela, ..		..May	30
Jackson vj Up,	Ela. ...	..June	2, 3
A lb.my, Ga.		.... ”	5, <;
Atlanta, Ga.	..........	>»	7. S
Chattanooga,	Teno.		9, 10
Nashville. Tenn.....June 12,13
Louisville, Ky...........”	15
Indianapolis. Ind........”	20.21
Columbus, Ohio ........n	23.24
Crooksville, Ohio .......”	25, 26
S.
Statesville, N. C...June
Winston-Sah'iu, N. C. ” Rural Hall. N. C......”
High Point, N. (’.....”
Greensboro. N. C......”
Graham,	N. C........”
Santord,	N. C........”
Manly, N.P...........”
Maxton.	N. C........”
Chapel Hill, N C......”
Durham,	N. C........”
H. TOUTJIAN
1
2,3 n
6. 7
8, 10 12
15
16
17
Raleigh. N.C..........June	19
Stem,' N. C.............”	2«)
Louisburg, N. (’.........”	21
Pleasant Hill, N.	C....”	22
Enhold. N. C............”	2 i
Scotland Neck, N.	C.	” 24.23
Taiburo. N. C...........”	27
Ilockv Mount, N.	C...”	2^
Wilson. N. <’..........’*	2o
Farmville, N. C......... ”
Vanceboro, N. C........Lily	1
G, Y. M’CORMICK
Aberdeen, Wash.....June 2,3
Tacoma, Wash.........”	5, 6
Puyallup, Wash.........”	7
Enumclaw. Wash.........”	8
Seattle, Wash..........”	9,10
Bremerton, Wash. _____*’	12,13
Everet t, Wa»h.........”	14,15
Mt. Vernon, Wash.......”	16
Oak Harbor, Wash......*•	17
Concrete. Wn-h.......June 19
Bellingham. Wash.....”	20.21
Blame. Wash..........”	22
Everett, Wash........”	23
Wenatchee. Wash......”	24. 25
Entiat, Wash.........”	27
Cln'lan, Wash........”	28
Ellensburg. -Wash. ...	”	29
Yakima. Wash. June .30, July 1
J. C. WATT
Richmond. Ind........June	-
Greensburg. Ind........”	3
Sunman, Ind............”	5
Vevay. In 1............”	6
Madi-on. I nd.........”	7, 8
I’rothersviH'-, Ind.	”	.9
Belford, Ind...........»	10,11
Bloninington, Ind......”	13
Br-nL lu-l.............”	14
Tern1 Haute, Ind.......”	15
Jasonville. Ind.......June	1G.	17
Dugger, Ind.................. 19
Linton, Ind.............”	2«)
Vincennes, Ind.........’’	21.22
Washington. Ind.........”	2’3-’l
Evansville, Ind........*’	29	27
Cannelton, Ind..........”	2
Leopold, Ind...........”
Palmy rn, In<l. ........”	3a
Salem, Ind............July	1
STie WzXTCHTOWER.
Published Semi-Monthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N. Y., U. S.A. OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford President W. E. Van Ambut.ch Secretary "And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.” -haiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man wilfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce tho ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him. with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH'S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is tho Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful follotvers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are Iris witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of tho peoples of earth ean como only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ which has now begun; that tho Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in tho earth, and that under the kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall be restored and live on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
z f 'HIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling | the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his Beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of tho Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, 31.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa. 7s. American remittances should be made by Express or Postal Money Order, or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should bo mado direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
Brifisb ...............34	Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England
Canadian ....... 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Australasian . . I Beresford lioad, Strathfleld, N. S. W„ Australia South African . . . . Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa Please address the Society in every case.
{Translations of this journal appear in several languages.')
AH sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to tho publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but the written application once each year is required by the postal regulations. Xotiee to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Chance of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before tho subscription expires. Entered as Second Class Hail Matter at Brooklyn, If. Y., Postofficc.
Act of March 3, 1819.
CONVENTION
Jehovah’s witnesses will assemble in convention at Toronto, Canada, July 5-8 inclusive. Speakers will be present Loth from the States and from provinces of Canada. The forenoon of each day will be devoted to lield service, with meetings for the interested in the afternoon and evening. Those contemplating attending the convention and who desire accommodations will please address Convention Committee, 40 Irwin Ave., Toronto 5, Out.
One feature of the convention will be a public address delivered by the president of the Society on Sunday afternoon the Sth.	------------
FACTORY AND OFFICE CLOSED FOR FIELD SERVICE
Each year tho Society closes the factory, office and Bethel hopie for a period of two weeks to give the brethren here an opportunity to get away from their regular routine and engage in tho field service. This year the factory and home will be closed July 21 and will not open again until Monday, August 6. Luring this time no mail will be attended to, and no shipments made. All readers of The Ifatchtoicer should please take note and order sufficient literature to carry them through this two-week period as well as the two weeks following. It will greatly facilitate matters if not too much correspondence is received immediately after the reopening of the factory, except, of course, regular service reports and any rush orders or
other urgent matters. Considerable mail accumulates in the office because of responses to radio lectures, and we hope this ean be given immediate attention without being delayed by mail that could have waited.
“BEYOND THE GRAVE” AND “HIS WORKS”
Jehovah now blesses his faithful witnesses and all people of good will with two new potent instruments for use in his service, to wit, two new booklets entitled Beyond the Grave and Mis Works, respectively. The cover design of each is attractive and invites the beholder to a perusal of the contents of the booklet; there are also fitting illustrations within. All, Jehovah’s witnesses and Jonadabs alike, who desire to put these excellent messages in the hands of the people may now obtain a supply and liegin the distribution thereof immediately. The usual contribution of 5e a copy will be accepted therefor.
“THE NATION'S’ HOPE” TESTIMONY PERIOD
A period of nine days has been specially designated as “The Nations’ Hope’’ Testimony Period. This begins with June 30 and concludes with July 8, During this period of nine days Jehovah’s witnesses will have the privilege of distributing a new booklet, Wmld Recovery! All people of good will uro invited to join with Jehovah’s witnesses in the proclamation of this good news of the kingdom. To have a part in the giving of this witness is a blessed privilege.
Vol. LV	June 1, 1934	No. 11
HIS COVENANTS
PART 5
“Gather my saints together unto me; those that have made a covenant with me l>y sacrifice. And the heavens shall declare his righteousness: for God is judge himself.”—Ps. 50: 5, 6.
JEHOVAH does not gather his saints unto himself merely for the pleasure of having them with him, but. he gathers them that they might do service concerning his name. Those gathered into the temple, and toward whom the new covenant is inaugurated, have become a part of “the heavens’’; hence says the Lord's prophet: “And the heavens shall declare his righteousness: for God is judge himself.’’ (Ps. 50:6) This prophecy is specifically applicable at this time to those at the temple with the Lord Jesus.
2	The Lord made the apostle Paul an able minister of the new covenant, and likewise all who are brought to maturity in Christ and into the temple are made ministers of the new covenant. This is particularly true at the inauguration of the new covenant; hence says the apostle: “Therefore, seeing we have this ministry, as we have received mercy, we faint not.” (2 Cor. 4:1) Those receiving this ministry, appreciating the fact that it proceeds from the Lord and that their strength is in the Lord, faint not. During 1hc Elijah period of the church there was much preaching of man’s doctrines or teachings, for instance, “Pastor Russell’s teachings examined” being the title of many discourses. During the Elisha period of the church we have learned from the Lord that it is our privilege to declare the glorious name of Jehovah. Having received this commission and ministry, like the apostle, we have “obtained mercy of the Lord to be faithful”. (1 Cor. 7:25) No more shall we exalt the name of man, including ourselves, nor should wc attempt to exalt ourselves before others. “For we preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord; and ourselves your servants [as able ministers of the new covenant; made such by the grace of the Lord] for Jesus’ sake [the Mediator’s sake]. For God. who commanded the light to shine out of darkness [out of the secret place, that is, the temple, dark to all on the outside (Matt. 10:27)], hath shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus.”—2 Cor. 4: 5. 6.
3	Now as the faithful temple company look at the face of Christ Jesus, the Greater Moses and the inaugurator of the new covenant, they sec that the face of the great Mediator is not veiled, but the light from that unveiled face shines into their hearts and there creates the proper motive for serving God, and they do serve him unselfishly. It gives to such faithful ones a light of knowledge and understanding of the purpose of Jehovah, revealing to them the glory of the Lord. But the faithful remnant do not lake this honor or glory to themselves, realizing that it is from the Lord. In humility and gladness of heart they walk on in the presence of the Lord. Such ministry of the new covenant is a great honor conferred upon them, and an invaluable treasure. “But we have this treasure [ministry] in earthen vessels [human organisms |, that the excellency of the power may be of God, ami not of us.” (2 Cor. 4: 7) In the performance of such ministry or commission all the faithful remnant delight to “declare his righteousness; for God is judge himself”. This they do while they are on the earth. There will be no occasion for such ministry after Armageddon; and this is further proof that the new covenant is made and inaugurated and accomplishes its purpose prior to Armageddon.
THE REMNANT SAVED
* Israel after the flesh turned away from God, committed sins'against him and against their covenant with him. In this Israel foreshadowed “Christendom”, including all the consecrated who continue to wear the “filthy garments” of “Christendom”. They claim to be for Jehovah, but they are not, even as the Israelites of old claimed to be for God but were not. As God was angry with natural Israel, so he was angry with the professed spiritual Israel at the coming of the Lord to the temple, and this included all under the terms of the new covenant and who had not been bold in declaring the message of God‘s kingdom and those who had conferred great honor upon men. (Luke 16:15) The remnant of fleshly Israel was saved, and likewise a remnant of spiritual Israel is saved when the Lord appears at the temple for judgment and inauguration of the new covenant toward
161
ttz WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, X. Y.
the remnant. “And now therefore thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel, concerning this city, whereof ye say, It shall be delivered [/7.F., It is given] into the hand of the king of Babylon, by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence; Behold, I will gather them [the remnant of spiritual Israel] out of all countries whither I have driven them in mine anger, and in my fury, and in great wrath; and I will bring them again unto this place [in A.D. 1919], and I will cause them to dwell safely: and they shall be my people, and I will be their God; and I will give them one heart, and one way [thus bring them unto unity in Christ], that they may fear me for ever, for the good of them, and of their children after them [that is, those prefigured by the Moabit ish woman Ruth]: and I will make an everlasting covenant [the new covenant, made with Jesus as Mediator for the remnant of natural Israel that became spiritual, and inaugurated toward the remnant of spiritual Israel today] with them, that I will not turn away from them to do them good; but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. Yea, I will rejoice over them to do them good, and I will plant them in this land assuredly 'margin, in truth] with my whole heart, and with my whole soul.’’—Jer. 3'2: 36-41.
5 Tn gathering unto himself the remnant and those with whom he, was angry and turning his atiger away from them in 1919. Jehovah there began the fulfilment of the prophecy of Psalm 50: 5. All of the professed ones to that time had made a covenant with God by sacrifice, which is a condition precedent to entering into the new covenant. They.had sacrificed their right to live on earth as human creatures at the time they were begotten of God, but, they not having been bold in proclaiming the message of the truth, God was angry with them, and now upon the Lord’s coining to his temple he turns away his anger from them as stated by the. prophet Isaiah. (Sec Isaiah 12:1.) Neither natural Israel nor the world of mankind in general sacrifice their right to human life, and therefore they do not enter into a covenant by sacrifice and are not the ones who are at the time brought into the new covenant and with whom the new covenant is made or toward whom it is inaugurated.
0 In 1914 God placed the rightful ruler of the world upon his throne, and at that time “Christendom”, or modern Babylon, had fallen from heavenly favor, concerning which Jeremiah prophesied at chapter 50: 2, 3. There began the “day7 of Jehovah”, during the early7 part of which spiritual Israel was in distress. Concerning this Jehovah caused his prophet to write: “In those days, and in that time, saith the Lord, the children of [spiritual] Israel shall come, they and the children of Judah [those in line for the kingdom, the royal house] together, going and weeping: they7 shall go [after their distress of 1918], and seek the Lord their God. They shall ask the way to Zion [They shall inquire concerning Zion, ZZ.IL] with their faces thith
erward [now that the rebuilding of the temple had begun], saying, Come, and let us [in unity7 in Christ] join ourselves [Come ye, and join yourselves, Ji.V.] to the Lord in a perpetual covenant [R.T’., everlasting covenant] that shall not be forgotten.”—Jer. 50: 4. 5.
TThis scripture, expressed the desire of the fully consecrated to be faithful to the new covenant as th«? people taken out from amongst the nations for Jehovah’s name. By coming to the Lord and inquiring concerning Zion, the organization of Jehovah, those in line for the kingdom thus pledge themselves to be faithful. The new covenant is inaugurated toward them and also they are taken into the kingdom covenant, being made a part of God’s capital organizatio i and anointed and commissioned to do a specific work in his name. Concerning this the prophecy7 is written : “Turn, 0 backsliding children, saith the Lord; for I am married unto you; and I will take you one of a city, and two of a family, and I will bring you to Zion.”—Jer. 3:14.
8 During the World War, and particularly the years 1917 and 191S, spiritual Israel was in a wilderness condition. Fiery trials came upon those who were consecrated to the Lord, and a separating work followed. Passing through that affliction those who were found faithful to the Lord up to that time were taken into the bonds of the new covenant. “And I will cause you [spiritual Israel] to pass under the rod |the Kingly authority of Christ Jesus sent out from Zion to rule and now at the temple for the purging of the sons of Levi], and 1 will bring you into the bond of the covenant [that is to say, new covenant] : and I will purge out from among you the rebels, ami them that transgress against me: I will bring them forth out of the country where they sojourn, and they shall not enter into the land of Israel; and ye shall know that I am the Lord.” (Ezek. 20:37,3^1 This separating work began and continued until the cleansing of the sanctuary was accomplished.
“Those brought into the temple and toward whom the new covenant was inaugurated have been anointed; which means that they are commissioned to do a specific service to the name Jehovah; as it is written: “The spirit of the Lord God is upon me; because the Lord hath anointed me to preach.” (Isa. 61:1) Concerning this anointed company Jehovah through his prophet further says: “But yc shall be named the priests of Jehovah; men [such as the Jonadabs] shall call you the ministers of our God: ye shall eat the wealth of the nations, and in their glory shall ye boa-t yourselves.” (Isa. 61:6, A.Zi’.F.) Prior to that time, and particularly during the humiliating conditions that existed from 1917 to 1919, God's people on c.nth suffered much shame; but, his anger being turned away from them now, he says: “For your shame ye shall have double [a double portion of the spirit or divine favor, such as received by Elisha], and confusion they shall rejoice in their portion; th
Jine 1, 3931
Tile WATCHTOWER
165
fore in their land they shall possess the double [in this happy condition a double portion of the spirit]; everlasting joy [the joy of the Lord, they having entered into this joy at the invitation of Christ Jesus; which happy condition is referred to a;; ‘their land’] shall be unto them. For I the Lord love judgment [which began to be executed at the tmnple at Lie judging beginning at the house of the Lord], I hate robbery lor burnt offering; and I will direct their work in truth, and I will make [inaugurate) an everlasting covenant with them. And their seed [the true Judeans] shall be known among the [nations, A.R.V.; among tv horn they shall be witnesses for Jehovah), and their offspring among 11m people: all that see them [that is, discern them 1o be Jehovah’s servants] shall acknowledge them, that they are the seed [Jehovah’s true people taken out for his name] which the Lord hath blessed.” (Isa. 61: 1, 6-9) The physical facts, or things which have come to pass upon Jehovah’s true people, since 1919 fully corroborate the conclusion above expressed concerning the sciipture. Those trk<i< into the covenant have entered into the joy of the Lord and are now greatly rejoicing that they are privileged to bear testimony to his holy name; and others who are. not of 1hc royal house sec that these earnest and faithful ones are Jehovah’s witnesses, and recognize, them as the blessed seed of Jehovah.
‘"After being brought into the temple, and lienee following the inauguration of the new covenant, Jehovah’s faithful remnant enter into peace; therefore the inauguration of the new covenant includes with them a “covenant of peace”. Tim new covenant has been in force and effect throughout the period of sacrifice, but, it now being inaugurated at the building up of Zion, the “covenant of my peace” began. The nations of the earth are greatly shaken and are disintegrating at the present time, and the high places in the earthly governments are being shaken down, and are in great distress; but peace is with them that are of Jehovah’s organization, (lod’s peace remains with his faithful ones; as it is written: “For the mountains | kingdoms of earth] shall depart, and the hills [the high powers thereof] be removed; but my kindness shall not depart from thee [those of Zion, God’s capital organization], neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, saith the Lord that hath mercy on thee.” (Isa. 54:10) Those toward whom the new covenant has been inaugurated, and who are therefore in the temple, are the people of God, and the great antitypieal David is their Head, King or I’uler: “And I the Lord will be their God, and my servant David a prince among them; I the Lord have spoken it. And I will make with them a covenant of peace, and will cause the evil beasts to cease out of the land; and they shall dwell safely in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods.” (Ezck. 34:24,25) While the covenant of pcaee is not the new covenant.
it is a covenant of peace which Jehovah gives to those toward whom the new covenant has been inaugurated.
“Those who are born of God's woman, that is to say, his organization, and who are now in the temple arc being taught of God, and great is their peace; as it is written: “And all thy children shall be taught of I he Lord; and great shall be the peace of thy children.(Isa._54:13) The enemy will continue to assault the faithful witnesses of Jehovah, but such assaults will not cause the faithful to fear cither man or devil, nor will the faithful fail to boldly declare God’s message of truth. They will obey God and not man. Their faith and confidence is in Jehovah and they know that their strength comes from him; Leive they are at great peace, because they know that God’s promises are sure and that the enemy shall not prevail against them. Jehovah has said concerning these faithful ones: “No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper; and every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou shalt condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord, and their righteousness which is of me, saith the Lord.”—Isa. 5-1: 17, R.V.
TEMPLE OPEN
12 The law covenant had the ark of the covenant, and j<lie new covenant has a correspondingly greater one. (Ileb. 9:1-5,23,24) This is another proof that the new covenant applies specifically to spiritual Israel. The coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple in 1918 marks the opening of the temple in heaven, and then follows the inauguration of the new cove-nro'. ('one-ruing this it is written: “And there was \ • .cd the temple of God that is in heaven: and tlc-re was seen in his temple the ark of his covenant; and there folkmed lightnings, and voices, and thunders, ami an earthquake, and great hail.’’ (I’cv. 11:19, R.V.') The presence of the ‘art; in the temple of hvav-?n’, as stated in this scripture, denotes Jehovah \s pres-■nee there as represented by the Lord Jesus Chris', the great Mediator and Judge and Inaugurate!’ of the covenant, who has come to the temple. At the inauguration of The law covenant at Sinai there was a great shaking of the earth and “there were thunders ami lightnings”. (Ex. 19:16-19; 20:18) So likewise at the opening of the temple in heaven marking th-inauguration of the new covenant “there followed lightnings, and voices, and thunders, and an earthquake, and great hail”. This symbolic language tells of what came to pass, particularly with rcfer-nce to God's people.—Book Oue, pages 228, 229.
* At the time of the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple for judgment, and the inauguration of the new covenant, there was a company of his faithful followers who were foreshadowed or pictured by the faithful Mordecai. Others came to a knov.b ilge of the truth and were brought into the covenant aft; r 1919, but these latter ones clearly seem to be foreshadowed by the “eunuchs” and “strangers” mentioned by tne
1G6
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
prophet Isaiah who were brought into the house of the Lord. Among natural Israelites there were eunuchs, and sucli must have been foreigners and strangers, for the reason that the Hebrew law prohibited the making of an Israelite a eunuch and one in that condition could not be taken into God’s typical organization. Manifestly the foreigners were made eunuchs in order that they might not contaminate the natural stock of Israel. But those eunuchs among The Israelites, who were diligent in trying to keep the law covenant, received the favor of the Lord, and concerning which it is written: “For thus saith the Lord unto the eunuchs [who must have been foreigners] that keep my sabbaths [of the law covenant and typical of the new covenant], and choose the things that please me, and take hold of my covenant [hold fast by my covenant, Zf.V.]; even unto them will I give in mine house [Jehovah’s royal organization], and within my walls, a place and a name [a new name] better than of sons and of daughters [which these sons and daughters could have had if faithful] : I will give them an everlasting name [new name], that shall not be cut off.” (Isa. 56:4,5) The “everlasting name that shall not he cut off”, here mentioned, clearly refers to the new name which Jehovah God gives to those toward whom the new covenant is inaugurated and who are made members of the royal house and who become Jehovah’s witnesses, commissioned by him to bear testimony to his name.
” The same rule’s being made to apply to strangers shows that with Jehovah there is no respect of.persons who manifest their love and obedience to him. “Also the sons of the stranger [Also the strangers, ZLV.J, that join themselves to the Lord, to serve him, and to love the name of the Lord, to be his servants, every one that keepcth the sabbath from polluting it, and taketh hold of my covenant;, even them will 1 bring to my holy mountain [Zion, God’s holy organization], and make them joyful in my house of prayer [God’s temple]; their burnt offerings and their sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine altar: for mine bouse shall be called an house of prayer for all people.” (Isa. 56:6,7) The latter words of this verse, “for all people,” manifestly include the class pictured by Ruth, who was a stranger and who was brought into the house of natural Israel. “The Lord God, which gathcreth the outcasts of Israel [meaning the remnant that God approved in 1918], saith, Yet will I gather others [the Ruth class and also the Esther class, who came in after 1918] to him [that is, the “faithfrd and wise servant” class, so designated by the Lord, and which was foreshadowed by Mordecai and Naomi], beside those [that is, beside the original remnant, foreshadowed by Mordecai and Naomi] that are gathered unto him.” (Isa. 56:8) Ruth was a Moabitess, and hence was a stranger to Israel and to its laws; but when Ruth volunteered to go to Bethlehem with the returning childless Naomi, and that with
no prospect of earthly marriage in sight for her, and nothing upon which to base a hope of marriage and the bringing forth of children, Ruth then and there made herself the equivalent of a eunuch, and hence she well pictured both the eunuch and the stranger mentioned in the foregoing prophecy of Isaiah.
15	Those toward whom the new covenant was inaugurated at the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple, end who were therefore brought into the temple and anointed, were made able ministers of the covenant to minister to those who should afterwards be brought into the covenant, such as Ruth and Esther, that is, the class foreshadowed by Ruth and Esther. The facts now well known show that a great many came to a knowledge of the truth, made a consecration, and have become Jehovah’s witnesses since 1922, and these facts corroborate the foregoing conclusion upon this scripture. We must bear in mind also that the “great multitude” is composed of that class of persons who have entered into a covenant, by sacrifice but who have not been entirely faithful to that covenant by sacrifice and lienee never responded to the call for the kingdom; but these (the great multitude of prisoners) are embraced in the new covenant and under its terms. (Zech. 9:12) Such arc designated in the Scriptures as “prisoners”, and the ‘able ministers of the new covenant’ must also minister unto the “prisoner” class, or “great multitude”. This is one of the works that the faithful remnant are now performing on earth.—Isa. 42: 6. 7; 49:8, 9.
10	Those pictured by Ruth and Esther, and who are brought in after 1918, also become able ministers of the new covenant and participate in this ministry, as hereinbefore mentioned. Before one could become an able minister of the new covenant he must be brought to maturity in Christ and be an elder in fact and minister to others who are spirit-begotten and who arc of the Jonadab company; and this is further proof that the new covenant is limited to the spiritual Israel class.
KETURAH
17	Abraham had six sons by Keturah. What did Keturah foreshadow, and what relationship had she and her sons to the covenant of Jehovah? It has been said that those six sons born to Abraham by Keturah represented typically the many peoples of the world which will ultimately gain restitution blessings of life under the reign of Christ, and hence Keturah was a type of the new covenant, which covenant product's the children of restitution. That conclusion is not supported by the Scriptures, for at least two good and sufficient reasons, to wit: (1) The new covenant has no reference to the world of mankind in general, because it is the means employed by Jehovah to take out from the nations a people for his name, which people, proving faithful, arc to be associated with Christ Jesus in the vindication of Jehovah’s name; and all such are children of Jehovah; (2) Those who
June 1, 1934
Me WATCHTOWER
167
obtain the earthly blessings of human life will be the children of Christ, and not the children of Jehovah. This is definitely proved by the fact that the faiihful men of old who will become the governors visible in the earth will be the children of the Christ and under his direct supervision. (Ps. 45:16; Isa. 9:6) To be sure, all life proceeds from .Jehovah Cod; but Jehovah has clothed Christ Jesus with the power and authority to give life to the earthly class and he is designated in the Scriptures as “The everlasting Father”. Keturah’s children were not by Isaac, .who was a type of Christ Jesus, but by Abraham, who pictured Jehovah God himself. For this reason it is seen that the six sons of Keturah could not represent the earthly or human class.
THE FACTS
18	The patriarch Abraham had one wife, named Sarah, and two concubines, the first of these being Hagar and the second Keturah. For a long time Sarah was barren, and Abraham took Sarah's servant Hagar as a substitute for Sarah, and by her Ishmael was born. Later in Abraham’s old age Sarah, his true wife, conceited and gave birth to a son for Abraham, whom Abraham named Isaac. When Sarah was 127 years old she died. Three years after her death Isaac married Rebecca. After the marriage of Isaac and Rebecca, then Abraham married and had six sons: “Then again Abraham took a wife, and her name was Keturah.” (Gen. 25:1) At the time these sons were born to Abraham and Keturah Abraham was a very old man. These facts are important to consider in determining what the sons of Keturah represented.
10	If the sons of Abraham by Keturah did not picture the earthly class to be blessed with life during the reign of Christ, what did they picture? An abstract answer to The question is first given, and then follows the Scriptural argument in support thereof. The answer that is reasonable and supported by the Scriptures is this: The six children of Abraham by Keturah picture those who were brought into the new covenant after the birth of the kingdom, “the man child.” and who are designated as ‘other children’ of Zion that arc born after the birth of the “man child”. Concerning this the prophecy was written: “Before she travailed, she brought forth; before her pain came, she was delivered of a man child. Who hath heard such a thing? who hath seen such things’ Shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day ? or shall a nation bo born at once? for as soon as Zion travailed, she brought forth her children.” (Isa. 66:7,8) The “man child” was born of God’s organization or woman in 1914. (Rev. 12:1-5) (See Light, Book One, page 235.) Iler ‘other children’, particularly the remnant, arc born of Zion later and after the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple and the beginning of the building up of Zion, which occurred in 1918.
HIS ORGAXIZATIOX
20	Jehovah has one universal organization, which organization was represented by Sarah, the true wife of Abraham; and this is definitely fixed by the prophecy. (Isa. 54:1-5) The marital relationship between Abraham and Sarah pictured the relationship between Jehovah and his “woman”, which woman gives birth to his children of the capital organization or kingdom, and which is called Zion.—Isa. 54:13.
21	Abraham had one true wife and two concubines. The one concubine, Hagar, represented the nation of Israel after the flesh, which did not bring forth a people for the name of Jehovah. This is definitely settled by the inspired testimony of the apostle Paul as set forth in Galatians. The sons of God which are later brought forth, and which do constitute a people for the name of Jehovah, are illustrated by the six sons of Abraham by Keturah. The scripture does not say that Sarah and-Hagar were types of the two covenants, as we have often stated, but docs say that Hagar and her son represented the covenant at Sinai and that Sarah and her son represented that which, is born of God’s organization or Jerusalem, which is above. The apostle says that this is an allegory, that is to say, that which is represented here by these two women and their offspring. An allegory is not a type, but it is a means employed to represent or picture some real thing. The apostle says: “For it is written that Abraham had two sons, one by the bondmaid, and one by the free woman; but he that was of the bondmaid after the flesh had been born, whereas he that, was of the free woman through means of a promise. Which tilings indeed may bear another meaning; for the same are two covenants, one indeed from Mount Sinai into bondage bringing forth, the which is Hngir, and the Hagar is Mount Sinai in Arabia; sheansweretn however unto the present Jerusalem, for she is in bondage with her children; but the Jerusalem above is free, the which is our mother.”—Gal. 4:22-26, Hoth.
22	Immediately following the above the apostle quotes from the prophecy of Isaiah 54:1, showing that Sarah represented God's organization called Jerusalem and pictured by his “woman”. Abraham's relationship to his wife and to his two concubines illustrates God's relationship to his covenants, which covenants are a means employed to accomplish his purpose of getting a name for himself. Sarah and her son together illustrate or picture the unconditional covenant that Jehovah made that he would produce “the seed”. This seed of promise is foreshadowed, be Kaae. which seed is Christ Jesus. Hagar and h< r son allegorically represented or pictured the law covenant, which God attached to his original promise, the purpose of which was to furnish natural Israel an opportunity to produce a people for his name, but whi m covenant failed by reason of the fact that Israel was made up of imperfect human creatures. This failure of the covenant is illustrated in the fact that Hagar’s
1G8
£Fiie WATCHTOWER
Bkooki.yx. N. Y.
son was “born of the flesh”. What the law covenant failed in the new covenant furnishes, to wit, a people for his name.
23	The ‘Abrahamic covenant’ was in fact an unconditional declaration of Jehovah’s purpose to produce a seed, and by using Abraham and Sarah his wife God pictured how he would bring forth a seed, which seed was pictured or illustrated by Isaac. God permitted Sarah to be barren for a long while and until his due time to bring forth the typical seed of promise. During that period of time Hagar was substituted for Sarah or attached to the Abrahamic household that she might give birth to an heir to Abraham. The son of Hagar was not the heir of promise, and manifestly the chief purpose of this arrangement was to demonstrate that the ‘promised seed’ could be produced only by the miraculous power of Jehovah. In due time Sarah gave birth to the typical seed, and this was the result of the exercise of Jehovah’s miraculous power. The birth of that son was a confirmation of the covenant. Isaac was a type of .Jesus Christ, the Son of Jehovah God; and at the time of the baptism of Jesus, and when the holy spirit in the form of a dove descended from heaven and lighted upon Jesus, and the voice from heaven was heard to say, “This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased,” there the Abra-hamie covenant brought forth the real, true seed of promise. (Matt. 3:16,17) Isaac alone was the type of Christ Jesus, who is the promised seed; as it is written: “In Isaac shall thy seed be called.”—Gen. 21:12; Rom. 9:7.
24	The covenant of Jehovah with Abraham was later confirmed unto Isaac, then unto Jacob, and then unto the twelve tribes of Israel (Judah), and particularly in the law covenant. “He hath remembered his covenant for ever, the word which he commanded to a thousand generations: which covenant he made with Abraham, and his oath unto Isaac; and confirmed the same unto Jacob for a law, and to Israel for an everlasting covenant.” (I’s. 105: 8-10) “God remembered his covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob.” (Ex. 2:24) Jehovah carried out the provisions of the Abrahamic covenant toward Abraham’s fleshly descendants by delivering them from Egypt by moans of Moses and the law covenant, and by then thrusting out the heathen before them in the land of Canaan. “And he (Jehovah] said, Behold, I make a covenant: before all thy people I will do marvels, such as have not been done in all the earth, nor in any nation [nor in behalf of any nation] : and all the people among which thou art shall see the work of the Lord: for it is a terrible thing that I will do with thee. Observe thou that which I command thee this day [the day of the inauguration of the law covenant at Sinai] : behold, I drive out before thee the Amorite, and the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzitc. and the Hivite, and the Jebusitc. And the Lord said unto Moses, Write thou these words: for after the
tenor of these words I have made a covenant with thee [Moses, typifying Christ Jesus] and with Israel [typifying spiritual Israel, including the remnant].” —Ex. 34:10,11, 27.
23	In harmony with the aforesaid type Jehovah confirmed the Abrahamic covenant with the true seed, that is, with Jesus Christ, by making with him the new covenant. Through Christ Jesus, the Mediator, Jehovah confirmed the Abrahamic covenant to the members of the body of Christ Jesus, that is to say, with spiritual Israel, in the same way, to wit, by a new covenant, which sets forth specifically Jehovah’s purpose concerning this seed of Abraham. The new covenant is therefore ancillary to or clasped to the Abrahamic covenant, just as the back of the priest's ephod was clasped to the front part thereof. This further confirms the conclusion that the new covenant is a means cmplojcd by Jehovah to bring forth a people for his name, which people shall be associated with and by adoption become a part of the seed of Abraham and participate in the vindication of Jehovah's name.
2”	Sarah had one son, and afterwards she died. That does not signify the end of the Abrahamic covenant, nor the end of Jehovah’s organization; because these do not end. From the time of her death Sarah ;s merely out of the picture, as, of course, after her deal!i she could bring forth no more children. Sarah died thirty-seven years after the birth of Isaac and three years before the marriage of Isaac to Rebecca; for Isaac was forty years old when he married. (Gen. 25:20) Then after Isaac’s marriage to Rebecca, ami more than three years after Sarah’s death, Abraham took a wife, and her name was Keturah. (Gen. 24: C7; 25:1) After Sarah's death Keturah substituted for Sarah in bringing forth more children unto Abraham, just as Ruth the Moabitish woman substituted for the aged Jewess Naomi in the birth of a seed. Keturah, therefore, would picture God’s organization, but not the new covenant. She and her sons together, however, did picture God’s organization giving birth to other sons after the birth of the man child.
27	Abraham being an old man, and also Sarah being too old to bear children, Jehovah performed a miracle toward them, causing the conception and the birth of the son Isaac. It follows, therefore, that the six sons of Abraham by Keturah, born more than forty years after the birth of Isaac, were also sons brought forth by the miraculous power of Jehovah. Concerning the miraculous birth of Isaac: “ (As it is written, 1 have made thee a father of many nations,) before him whom he believed, even God, who quickencth the dead [Abraham’s power to fecundate Sarah was dead, and God miraculously quickened that power], and calleth those things [Abraham being included] which be not [even as Abraham was once not a father of a multitude] as though they were [hence God changed the name of Abram to Abraham, meaning ‘father of a
June 1, 1934
GTe WATCHTOWER.
169
great multitude’, and this he did two years before the birth of Isaac]. Who against hope believed in hope, that he might become the father of many nations, according to that which was spoken, So shall thy seed be. He staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief; but was strong in faith, giving glory to God; and being fuliy persuaded that, what he had promised, he was able also to perform.” (Rom. 4: 17,18,20,21) “Therefore sprang there even of one, and him as good as dead, so many as the stars of the sky in multitude, and as the sand which is by the sea shore innumerable.”—TIeb. 11:12.
2S	Abraham was a hundred years old when Isaac was born, and his body then was as good as dead so far as children were concerned, as it is written in Romans four; therefore, forty years later his body was equally dead, if not more so, and for that reason Jehovah must and did exercise his miraculous power that Abraham might have the six sons by Keturah. (Gen. 25:1, 2; 1 Uhron. 1: 32) It was by the miraculous power of Jehovah that Jesus Christ was conceived in the womb of the virgin and later born. Thirty years thereafter by the miraculous power of Jehovah Jesus Christ was brought forth as the antitypical Isaac, the “seed of promise”. (Matt. 3.16,17) Approximately 1900 years later, to wit, 1914, the “man child”, which means God’s kingdom under Ctirist, was born of God’s woman or organization, and this also by the miraculous power of Jehovah. By the like exercise of miraculous power of Jehovah, Zion, sjmbolized by God’s “woman”, brought forth other children, in 1918 and following. Keturah, therefore, seems to dearly picture Zion in bringing forth these other children after the birth of the man child.—Isa. 66:7-9.
29	The six sons of Keturah were not the sons of Isaac, but were the sons of Abraham; therefore Keturah's sons could not picture those who get life on earth and who are here called a restitution class, because those who shall be given human perfection will be the sons of the antitypical Isaac. The conclusion, therefore, must be that the sons of Abraham by Keturah pictured the sons of Jehovah God born by and to his organization Zion separate and distinct from Christ Jesus. Those who wore taken out from the nations as a people for God’s name are not the children of Christ, but they are the brethren of Christ and the sons of God. (ITcb. 2:11) The relationship of Abraham to Keturah and her sons, therefore, clearly pictures the relation of God to the ‘other sons’ of Zion.
30	Christ Jesus alone is the great Messenger of the new covenant. After the birth of the “man child”, which birth tool: place in 1914, and later, to wit, 1918, Christ Jesus, the Messenger of the new covenant, comes to the temple for judgment. (Mal. 3:1) There Jehovah by Christ Jesus, the great Messenger of the covenant, builded up Zion, bringing forth first the faithful saints who had long ago died in faith, and then later the faithful remnant on earth are brought
into Zion and become the children of God; and this latter gathering is pictured by Keturah’s giving birth to six sons who are the sons of Abraham, typifying the sons of God. Christ Jesus ALONE is the “seed of Abraham” according to the unconditional covenant. “Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made. He. saith not, And to seeds, as of many; but as of one, And to thy seed, which is Christ.”— Gal. 3:16.
BY ADOPTION
31	It is true that the apostle, in this same chapter, says: “For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. And if ye be Christ’s, then are ye Abraham’s seed, and heirs according to the promise.” (Gal. 3:27,29) But the question is, How do they get into Christ? Clearly by adoption. Adoption means to bring another son into the family. The body members of Christ picture a part of the seed of Abraham by virtue of being brought into Christ Jesus and received and adopted into the house of God, of which Christ Jesus is the Chief and Head. They do not get into Christ’s body by reason of anything they do. The apostle’s argument in his epistle to the Galatians is that in the fullness of time God sent forth Jesus “to redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons. And because ye arc sons, God hath sent forth the spirit of [Christ] his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father. Wherefore thou art no more a servant, but a son; and if a son, then an heir of God through Christ”. (Gal. 4:4-7) Again says the apostle: “For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear; but ye have received the spirit of adoptioti, whereby we cry, Abba, Father.” (Rom. 8:15) Then the apostle clearly shows that the completion of bringing those into God’s family takes place at the building up of Zion. “And not only they, but ourselves also, which have the first-fruits of the spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body.” (Rom. 8: 23) It was the purpose of God from the beginning to bring these other sons into his family by adoption. “Having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will.”—Eph. 1: 5.
32	Jehovah said to Abraham: “In Isaac shall thy seed be called.” (Gen. 21:12) At the time of that declaration by Jehovah Hagar and her son were cast off. (Gal. 4:29,30) Some forty years thereafter the sons of Keturah were born. Isaac is the son of God according to the promise, and Isaac was a type of Christ Jesus, who is the seed of promise. Jesus, the antitypical Isaac, is One. and the six sons by Keturah make seven, which is a divinely complete number forming a royal family.
33	The sons of Keturah could not inherit with Isaac ‘all that Abraham had’, but Abraham gave those six sons gifts. (Gen. 25:5,6) Likewise the members of
170
Tfle WATCHTOWER.
Bkiokian, X. Y.
the body of Christ can inherit nothing of themselves, because Christ Jesus is the, One ‘whom he [Jehovah] hath made heir of all things’. (Iltb. 1:2) Christ .F-sus came into the inheritance of the kingdom three and one-half years before coming to the temple for judgment and the building up of Zion, and hence that length of time before the other children of Zion v.-ere born or brought into God’s capital organization. Jesus Christ is therefore essentially “The seed of Abraham”. (Acts 3: 25, 2G) By the mediatorship of Christ Jesus his brethren arc brought forth as a people taken out for Jehovah’s name, and these faithful brethren became joint heirs with Christ Jesus by adoption and their inheritance is conditioned upon certain specific things, to wit: “The spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God: and if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ; if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together.” (Rom. 8:16,17) Otherwise stated, all the body members are adopted into The royal house and become for ever members of that house upon condition of faithfulness unto God, which entails upon them the reproaches and sufferings that fell upon Christ Jesus.
34	The name “Keturah” is derived from the primitive root qalar, meaning “to smoke”, that is to say, turn into fragrance by fire. Most often the word is translated “to burn incense”, also, “to burn sacrifice”; hence the name Keturah means “incense” or “perfumed”. The beautiful poetic scripture concerning Christ Jesus coming as King and Judge to the temple says; ‘Who is this that cometh out of the wilderness like pillars of smoke, perfumed with myrrh and frankincense, with all powders of the merchant 1” (Song of Solomon 3:6) As the King rifles upon his palanquin or “litter” (A’.I'.) he is attended by sixty valiant warriors. (Song of Solomon 3:7,8) The sons of the royal house of God are joined or brought into the royal organization of Jesus Christ at the temple. The name Keturah, therefore, suggests that Zion’s other children, born tr brought forth into Zinn after the coming of the King and the birth of the kingdom, arc the ones who ‘offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of their lips, giving thanks to his name’, after the building up of Zion following 1918. (Ifeb. 13:15) From that time forward this sacrifice, being “continual”, is never stopped by the enemy as it was stopped in 1918, but for ever that capital organization continues to sing forth the praise of Jehovah. (Rev. 8:3) Those win faithfully obey Jehovah and Christ Jesus and perform faithfully their duties as ministers of the new covenant are “unto God a sweet savour of Christ”. (2 Cor. 2:15) The “man child” was born in 1911; in 1918, upon the coming to the temple, first are brought forth the faithful saints who died in faith and who must precede those on earth, and after that is brought into the temple the faithful remnant on earth. The bring
ing of these other saints into God’s royal family, therefore, was clearly foreshadowed by the six sons of Abraham by Keturah.
35	Upon all the Scriptural evidence set alongside the facts that have been brought to pass by Jehovah the conclusion is irresistible that the new covenant is net a covenant that has to do with restitution of natural Israel or of any people to human perfection; but that the new covenant is Jehovah’s instrument employed to take out from among the various nations a people for his name, and that those thus taken out and who prove faithful are adopted into the family of God ami thereby become members of his royal house, or royal saints. This conclusion is in no wise inimical to the truth that earthly or human blessings will come to the people in general during the reign of Christ, but rather gives assurance to the world of mankind that Jehovah will have an approved seed to do the regeneration or blessing work. The new covenant is dedicated ami is closely related to the covenant for the kingdom. It is the kingdom that will completely vindicate Jehovah’s name.
(To be continued)
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
1. From where, and for what purpose, docs Jehovah gather his saints together unto him?
t) 2, 3. How shall the “heavens’' deelrire his righteousnes-1 Account for the present greater appreciation of “tins ministry’' as of ‘declaring his righteousness’.
4. Compaie Israel and “Christendom” in regard to Jehovah’s ‘saving a remnant’ thereof. How, in each instance, was this •gathering’ and ‘saving’ accomplished I
*[ 5. When did fulfilment of Psalm 50: 5 begin, and how?
tj, 7. Apply Jerciuinli 50:4,5.
*i 8. When and how does Ezekiel 20:37, .".8 find fulfilment?
9-11. Point out facta proving fulfilment (a; of Isaiah 01: 1, <1-9. (b) Of Isaiah 51: 10. (c) Of I.-aiah 51: Id. 17.
12. Referring to Revelation 11: 19: When and how was “the temple ot God which is in heaven” opened? How was the “ark’’ therein seen? Briefly point out fultilment of whet “followed’’, as also foreshown at Sinai.
1.1.	How may vve identify the “eunuchs’’ icfcrred to m Isaiah 50: 4,5’ Show whether Jehovah's promise eom.”.n-ing them, there re-orded. has bad fulfilment.
S 14. Who are foreshadowed by the “stranger’’ mentioned in Isaiah 5u: G? Want is the significance or Jehovah's dud ing with the “stranger” in the manner described in \<-:.-es 0,7! Iihntify “all people”, here mentioned.
*[ 15, 10. Who arc the ministets of the new covenant, and of what does their ministry consist?
17.	State, with reasons, whether Keturah was a type of the new covenant and Abraham’s six sons by Keturah prnii.i.■ I those of the world who will ultimately gain-human l:i>, ami blessings.
18,	19. What other important facts must bo couside'ed in determining what or whom the sons of Kefutah lepresenr-ed? Briefly, whom did these sons picture? How is iliic conclusion supported by Isaiah GO: 7.8!
■) 20-22. Show that the Scriptures definitely’ settle the propl,, “c position of Sarah and Hagar.
23-25. In this connection pomt out and explain God’s de:,: :..; with Abraham and Sarah, and Hagar's relation tlienro. Also the significance here of the statement that “Go] r<-membeied his covenant with Abraham, with Isaac. :.n 1 with Jacob”, and of that recorded at Psalm 1<J5: 8-10. Also what was therein foreshown to he (a) the red itimi-ship of the new covenant to the Abrahanuc covenant end (ill the purpose ci the new.
2G-28. Explain tlm prophetic significance of the f':wt t ■ : Abraham’s son Isaac and also his sons by lii'imb > •• .■
O'UNE 1, 1934
3Te WATCHTOWER.
171
brought forth by miraculous exercise of Jehovah’s power. 5 29, 30. Whsit further proof of the proplietie position of the sons of Keturah is seen in the faet that they were sons of Abraham, not of Isaac?
1[ 31, 32. In view of Jehovah’s statement (Gen. 21: 12) “In Isaac shall thy seed be callccl’’, and that of the apostle Paul in Galatians 3: 16, explain the position of the body members of Christ in relation to the “seed of Abraham’’.
If 33, 34. If “Abraham gave all that he had unto Isaac’’ and ‘God hath appointed Christ Jesus heir of all things’, how is it that “we are . . . heirs of God”? Explain the prophetic significance of the name Keturah.
If 33 What, then, is the reasonable conclusion as to the nature, purpose, and outcome of the new covenant, and concerning its harmony with Jehovah’s further provision for earthly or human blessings for the world of mankind?
EARTH’S NEW RULERS: HOW CHOSEN
JOEL was one of the prophets of Jehovah God thousands of years ago. lie prophesied that the time would come when God would pour out his spirit upon all those who would call upon his name. The second chapter of his prophecy, verses twentyeight and twenty-nine, reads: “And it shall come to pass afterward, that I [Jehovah] will pour out my spirit upon all flesh [that is to say, all flesh in covenant relationship with me] ; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions: and also upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those days will I pour out my spirit.” This prophecy of Joel had its miniature or first fulfilment at the feast of Pentecost fifty days after the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. At the time of the ascension of Jesus into heaven he had assembled his disciples on the side of the Mount of Olives, which lies to the east of the city of Jerusalem. He there commanded them that they should not depart from Jerusalem until they had received the holy spirit, and promised them that then they should receive power and that they should become his witnesses unto the uttermost parts of the earth.—Acts 1: 4-8.
In obedience to this command (Acts 1:4-8) the disciples remained at Jerusalem. “And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with one accord in one place. And suddenly there came a sound from heaven, as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting. And there appeared unto them cloven tongues, like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them: and they were all filled with the holy [spirit], and began to speak with other tongues, as the spirit gave them utterance.” (Acts 2:1-4) Thus was made manifest the first fulfilment of the prophecy of Joel above quoted, as specifically stated by the apostle Peter, who said: “Ye men of Judaea, and all ye that dwell at Jerusalem, be this known unto you, and hearken to my words: . . . This is that which was spoken by the prophet Joel: And it shall come to pass in the last days, saith God, I will pour out of my spirit upon all fiesh: and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and your young men shall see visions, and your old mon shall drcam dreams: and on my servants and on my handmaidens I will pour out, in those days, of my spirit; and they shall prophesy. . . . And it
shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved.”—Acts 2:14-21.
The giving of the holy spirit to the disciples was an evidence that Jesus’ disciples had been taken into the covenant for the kingdom, the government which Jehovah has laid upon the shoulder of Christ Jesus, the Prince of Peace, and which Jehovah will use to vindicate his name and word and to bless all the families of the earth.
A city is a symbol of a government or empire. It is written concerning the empire or kingdom of God: “And the wall of the city had twelve foundations, amt in them the names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb.” (Rev. 21:14) The Lord Jesus Christ is the chief corner stone in that kingdom, and the apostles of the Lamb are the twelve foundations. “Wherefore also,” writes the apostle Peter (1:2:6), “it is contained in the scripture, Behold, I lay in Sion a chief coiner stone, elect, precious: and he that bclieveth on him shall not be confounded.”
Prior to his crucifixion the Lord Jesus had promised that he would confirm in heaven what those faithfid apostles did on earth. (Matt. 18:18) It was at Pentecost, and after receiving the holy spirit, that Peter testified concerning Jesus Christ, as follows: “This is the stone which was set at nought of you builders, which is become the head of the corner. Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved.”—Acts 4:11,12.
The Jews had thought to build an empire; and they looked forward to that empire which, under the .Messi;'!., Christ, would rule all nations of the earth. The clergy of that time especially thought that they weie the builders; but when the chief corner stone was laid they rejected him, even as the prophet Isaiah (53:3) had foretold they would do. (John 1:11,12) The fact that the Jews rejected the chief corner stone in no way hindered or delayed the progress of the building Now that the chief corner stone and foundation of the new and glorious empire was laid, its building Ir gan and progressed according to the will of God. The holy prophet had testified that on this chief corner stone should rest the new’ government which should bring deliverance to the people. He said: “For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given, and the government shall be upon his shoulder; and hi.; nr’.me
172
WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
shall be called Wonderful Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace. Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end, upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with judgment and with justice, from henceforth even for ever. The zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform this.”— Isa. 9: G, 7.
The apostles of Jesus Christ were also prophets because they, under inspiration from God, foretold things to come to pars in the distant future. A true prophet it one who gives testimony by divine authority. That Jesus (Jhr'ut and his apostles constitute respectively the chief corner stone and foundation of the great empire, and that others were added thereto, the apostle Paul, who also was a prophet, under inspiration testified: ‘‘Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow-citizens with the saints, and of the household of God; and are built upon the foundation <;f The apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone; in whom all the building, filly framed together, groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord: in whom ye also are budded together for an habitation of God through the spirit.”—Eph. 2:19-22.
The members of the empire arc not chosen by men nor by man-made organizations. It is Cod who has chosen them through his beloved Son Christ Jesus. Numerous scriptures so state. (Eph. 1:4; 2 Thess. 2:13 ; 2 Tim. 2 : ; Jas. 2 : 5 ; 1 Pet. 2:4) Those who are chosen to be of the roval line are called or invited by the Lord God, tlnough his beloved Son Christ Jesus. (1 Cor. 1:2; 7-15; Eph. 4:4; Col. 3:15; 1 Thess. 2:12) Cannot priest or clergyman of some church denomination call a sinner to become a part of the kingdom of God ami then choose him for that purpose? Neither a priest nor any other clergyman possesses any such power or authority. The Scriptures alone must be the guide as to how these are called and chosen. The only way for sinners to come to God is through Jesus Christ, as ho states: “I am the way, and the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me.” (John 14: G) The order pointed out by the Scriptures, of coming to God through Jesus Christ, is as follows: (first) knowledge, (then) faith, consecration to God, and justification.
Faith means to know the Word of God and then to rely upon it. Therefore knowledge must precede faith; as it is written (Hom. 10:17): ‘‘So then faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God.” From the Word of God man learns Unit he was botn a sinner, that there is no other name given under heaven whereby he can come again into harmony with God, except through Jesus Christ. He learns that Jesus died upon the cursed tree, and that whosoever believes upon him might not perish but have an opportunity for life everlasting. (John 3:16,17) Coming to a knowledge of this fact man is thereby drawn to Jesus, learns that Jesus is his Redeemer and that to
please God he must follow the direction that the Lord Jesus points out. The one thus seeking the Lord God must now exercise faith.; and the first thing of importance is to believe that, Jehovah exists, and that he rewards those who diligently seek him. (lleb. 11:6) To such Jesus says: ‘‘If any man will come after me. let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.”—hlatt. 16:24.
Self-denial means a willingness to completely surrender oneself unto God, agreeing to do the will of God, while trusting in the merit of Christ Jesus’ sacrifice. This is consecration. This is what Jesus did when he appeared at the Jordan river to be baptized, as it is prophetically written of him, saying: ’I con..! to do thy will, 0 my God.’ This is an agreement that thereafter the will of the man will be exercised in harmony with the will of God, and that he. will me his mind and ascertain God’s will and then do it.
Now the Lord Jesus presents the man who consecrates to Jehovah. It is Jehovah God who judieiaby determines whether or not the one thus presented :s right. Justification means being made right with God, and it therefore includes the judicial determinal ion by Jehovah that the one thus consecrating is right. The Scriptures therefore show three separate and d’s-tinct things involved in justification: (first) faith; (second) the blood of Jesus: (third) the judicial determination by Jehovah; as it is written: ‘'Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ” (Rom. 5: 1) ; ‘‘?>lueh more then, being now justified by his blw:l, we shall be saved from wrath through him” (Rom. 5: 9) ; ‘‘It is God that just.ilieth.”•—Rom. 8:33; 3:2(1.
Justification, between the time of Pentecost and the completion of the empire, is by faith and for the purpose of enabling the one thus justified to sacrifice all his earthly hopes and prospects, particularly his right to live on earth. The justification by Jehoeah there-fore constitutis one an acceptable part of the sacrifi
To beget means to begin; end the begetting or beginning of one as a new creature in Christ is to a hope of lite and to an inheritance incorruptible. This begetting of the spirit is a covenant that God makes with the one conscciatinv. God gives to such a one his Word of Truth; and then he causes his invisible power to so operate upon the one to whom tic gives this Word as to begin to carry on the transformation of the one thus begotten into the likeness of the Head, Christ Jesus, the chief corner stone laid in Zion, God’s organization.
It is written: ‘‘Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth, that we should be a kind of first-fruits of bis creatures.” (Jas. 1:18) Such begotten ones as God thereafter chooses and takes into tlie kingdom covenant are the ‘‘cleet according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through ‘s.nct'd'eali< n of the spirit, unto obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ; Grace unto }<m. and peace. he multiplied. Blessed be the God and Father of our
Juxe 1, 1934
WATCHTOWER.
173
Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mere}' hath begotten us again unto a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for you, who are kept by' the power of God through faith unto salvation, ready to be revealed in the last time.”— 1 Pet. 1: 2-5.
These are begotten to the spirit life. God has promised such the divine life if they are faithful to their
part of the covenant. God is always faithful to his. “According as his divine power hath given unto us all things that pertain unto life and godliness, through the knowledge of him that hath called us to glory and virtue: whereby’ are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises; that by' these ye might be partakers of the divine [growth], having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust.” So writes the apostle Peter in his second epistle, chapter one, verses three and four.
WAS JESUS PART GOD, PART MAN?
MANY have believed that Jesus, while on the earth, was still a spirit person, and that his flesh was merely a covering or house in which that spirit person resided; otherwise stated, that he was merely' an incarnated person and not wholly a man. The incarnation theory is that a spirit person inhabits for a time the human body, or a human body is created for the express purpose of that spirit person’s occupying it for a time. “The incarnation of Jesus” is Scripturally erroneous. Indeed, if he had been merely an incarnated person, he could never have redeemed mankind. It is not disputed that he could not have appeared as a human creature; but that he could and did appear as such is attested to in the instances of Genesis, chapters eighteen (verses 1, 2) and nineteen (verse 1).
Some insist that Jesus when on earth was both God and man in completeness. This theory is wrong, however. We should never formulate a theory concerning God’s arrangement in direct contradiction to his plain written Word. We should have faith in God and in his Word. Faith means to have a knowledge of his Word and then to rely upon that Word confidently. The Bible is the revealed Word of God, given to man for his instruction; and where plain statements of the Bible are given, we should take them at their face value. Following this course, we find that the arrangement of God everywhere appears harmonious and beautiful.
The great adversary, the Devil, takes advantage of an honest desire on the part of some and leads them into error. Every conscientious and reverential mind desires to honor God. For fear they might dishonor him, they are easily led into failure to give proper consideration to plain statements of the Bible. Some have been induced to believe that should they say that Jesus when on earth was a man and not God, such would be a dishonor' to God. We should not permit ourselves to be beguiled or misled by sophistry or theories, but should follow the plain teachings of the Bible and then reach a conclusion in the light of that revealed Word after a full examination.
The record concerning Jesus’ prehuman existence,
his being conceived and his birth, entirely’ disproves the theory that he was incarnated. The scriptures on these points plainly' show that he was conceived in the womb of a woman, Mary, by the holy spirit, the power dr energy of Jehovah; that thereafter he was born in the same general manner that other children are born of a woman (Luke 2:9-11); that he grew to manhood’s estate and increased in wisdom and stature and in favor with God and man. (Luke 2:40, 52) None of these things would have been necessary were he merely' an incarnated person, a spirit person inhabiting a body of flesh. lie worked at the carpenter’s trade until he was thirty' years of age, at which time he began his ministry. At that time he went to John to be baptized in the Jordan river. (Luke 3:21-23) Immediately following that he spent forty days and nights in the wilderness, fasting and studying Jehovah’s purposes. (Luke 4:1-14) If he were God incarnate, this experience in the wilderness would seem wholly' unnecessary’.
Jesus was not an angel or spirit person, because wo have the positive statement of the apo.dle Paul, in Hebrews, chapter two, verse nine, to the effect that “we see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels”. And again, in verse fourteen: “Forasmuch then as (be children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise partook of the same.” Furthermore, as the scripture in Second Corinthians, chapter eight, verse nine, say's, he was at one time rich in heavenly’ power and glory and became poor for the sake of mankind by taking upon himself the likeness of man. He was made in the nature and likeness of man, so it is stated in Philippians, chapter two, verse eight. In his letter to the Corinthians (1:15:21,47) the. apostle Paul, writing under inspiration, speaks of Jesus as the man; ho says: “For since by man came death, by’ man came also the resurrection of the dead. The first man is of the earth, earthy: the second man is the Lord from heaven. ” (See also 1 Timothy 2: 5, 6.)
Had Jesus been merely an incarnated person it would not have been necessary for him to be born as a babe and grow to manhood’s estate. While he was born of a woman, y’Ct he was without sin, because he
174
TKe WATCHTOWER.
Bp.ooKr.YN, N. Y.
was from his heavenly Father, Jehovah; for, as Hebrews, chapter seven, verse twenty-six, states, he was “holy, harmless, undefilcd, separate from sinners”. John’s first epistle, chapter three, verse five, says: “And he was manifested to take away our sins; and in him is no sin.” Other scriptures (1 Pet. 1:19; Heb. 9:14) declare that lie was without spot or blemish ; therefore perfect and holy.
In Isaiah’s prophecy, chapter one, verse eighteen, God says to us: “Come now, and let us reason together . . . ; Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.” Wc should reason upon God’s purposes as revealed in the Bible, because he invites us thus to do. When we see the reason why Jesus was made a man, why it was necessary for him to be a perfect man while on earth, then wc arc glad and give praise to God. Had he not become a man, there would have been no hope for any of the human race to get life through Christ Jesus; and the apostle Peter declares that there is no other name given under heaven whereby mankind can live.—Acts 4:12.
Aside from the doctrine of Jehovah God’s kingdom the great ransom sacrifice of Jesus is the most vital to man of the doctrinal strings upon the harp of God, because without it no real lasting joy could be had by mankind. In due time its benefits shall result to the entire human race; and all who appreciate it will sing aloud and rejoice with exceeding joy. They will have melody in their hearts and upon their lips because of this wonderful provision made by Jehovah for man’s benefit. For thousands of years divine wisdom has been working out his purpose concerning man; and the ransom sacrifice is a very important part of that purpose. Its importance cannot be overstated. It is the gateway that leads to life and happiness. It is the means of bringing back man into harmony with God. To appreciate this great doctrine we must understand it. Therefore iet us reason together in the light of the divine Word, that we may understand.
The most precious thing possessed by any creature is life, because without life everything else would be useless and could not be enjoyed. Even now we observe that a man with but a small spark of life clings to that with, desperation. It is only when a creature is perfect and enjoying complete life and the right to it that he can properly glorify Jehovah, his great Creator. God’s great arrangement must ultimately bring glory to his name.
Jehovah created Adam, the first man, in his own image and likeness. He created him perfect; for all the works of Jehovah are perfect. (Dent. 32:4) He gave to man life and the right to life. Life means any conscious existence. Right to life means the full authority to maintain existence. Adam and Eve in Eden were perfect in their bodies, without pain, without sorrow; and were beautiful creatures. They had not a scar nor a mark upon them anywhere. They enjoyed life and all the blessings incident to that life. Their
home was perfect; and even all the animals and birds of Eden were subject to them, and they had absolute dominion and control. God gave them all these privileges to enjoy eternally, upon one expressed condition, namely, that they be obedient to his law and thereby honor him. He informed man that a violation of this law would bring upon him loss of life, loss of the right to life, loss of all the blessings incident to it.
Satan induced mother Eve to believe that God was keeping back something from them, and, therefore deceiving Eve, induced her to violate the law. There was no real wrong in the fruit which Eve ate. The wrong was in disobeying the Lord. When Adam found that she had violated God’s law, knowing that she must die he preferred to be with her in death rather than to be separated from her; so he also became a party to the transgression by voluntarily and willingly violating the law of God. Jehovah, in the exercise of his perfect justice, sentenced man to death. This sentence deprived Adam and Eve of the right to life. They were driven out of Eden and in due time they lost life itself. For nine hundred and thirty years they were compelled to go about in the earth and earn their bread by digging in the soil and partaking of such food as they produced, which was imperfect and poisonous. In this manner they were put to death.
This sentence of death passed upon Adam had an indirect effect upon his offspring. Before he was driven from Eden he and Eve had not exercised the authority given to them by Jehovah to beget ami bring forth children on the earth. This they did exercise after being driven from Eden. They being now under the sentence of death and undergoing that death penalty, it was impossible for their children, born under such conditions, to come into existence perfect. It would follow, then, that when the children were born, while they would have a measure of life and the rights incident to that measure of life (and these we call “life rights” as distinguished from “right to life”), they would have no right to life; because Adam, having no right to life, could not bring childrim into the world who would have greater right than he had.
Hence none of Adam’s descendants could act as man’s ransomer, because none had perfect human life equivalent to that which Adam had in his perfection in Eden. For this reason God took action in mankind’s behalf. God is immortal and can never die; hence he himself could not come down to earth and die as a man in order to redeem the human race. In his love he sent his only begotten Son by transferring the perfect, sinless life of this beloved Son from the heavenly, spiritual plane of existence down to the earthly, human plane. Thus the mighty Son of God “was made flesh” “and was made in likeness of men”. He became “the man Christ Jesus”, and as such he ‘tasted death for every man’. In reward for Jesus’ faithfulness even to the death of the tree, God raised him from the dead and gave him immortality and the most exalted place in heaven next to himself.
HEARD FOR FIRST TIME IN GRENADA
Drat: Bkethken,
1 am pleased to inform you that Judge Rutherford’s voice was heard for the first time in Grenada, British West Indies, on the 25th instant, when he spoke at Los Angeles. Uis speech was picked up from station W2XAF, New York.
I had a set temporarily installed at my home and invited the brethren of the St. George’s company to listen. Nineteen heard, of which 14 were brethren. There was, besides, an audience of about 30 on the street listening intently.
We were expecting to get the discourse over W3XAU, but failed. This resulted in our not heaiing the lecture on "Woild Control”. When our hopes of hearing our dear brother were nearly broken a turn of the tuning knob further on brought us the words "Jehovah’s anointed”, and we were happy to know that we had at last begun to hear the voice we awaited so anxiously.
Radio fans said the night was a poor one. But, although there was occasional fading, Judge Ruthei ford’s voice was never completely lost at any time, Frequently he was so loud that persons some 200 feet away could hose heard distinctly.
The message was appreciated by all. The beautiful thoughts so nicely interwoven in the discourse ou "Requirements” reminded us of our privileges and responsibilities, and we were thankful and joyful. When the resolution of protest, against the action of the German government wtis put to the vote
we joined the speaker’s risible audience in voting "Aye”.
Four other receiving sets picked up the talk, as far as I have been able to collect information, but, like ourselves, got only the discourse on ••Requirements”. A large number faded because of efforts having been concentrated upon getting W3XAU. If we had had information that W2XAF would broadcast the message the audience here would have been much larger, in as much as this station is heard here with the minimum difficulty at that hour.
Regular listeners volunteered the information that Judge Rutherford •• certainly has a clear, tine voice”. Some are asking if he will run a series of lectures.
For your information I would like to say that ladio reception is verv good here on the wave-lengths and at the time indicated, Atlantic (Intercolonial) time: 25 meters, 5 p.ui. to 7 p.m.; 31 meters, 7 to 11 p.m.; 49 meters, 8:30 p.m. onward.
When the Lord is pleased to permit another lecture over the air, may Judge. Rutherford be successful in getting at least one of the stations which we can hear in the West Indies.
May the Lord bless ami protect out brother as Im has done in the past, and continue his guidance over the Society.
Yours in the joys of service,
A. A. Douglas, Dirt ctor, St. George’s Company of J. w.
(Continued from page 176)
NEW YORK
Auburn WMBOSu 0:30pm Sa 2:15pm
Bing’rntonWNBFSu 7:15pm Brooklyn WBBR Su 10:15am Su ’6:30pm Mo 10:30am Tu 10:30am Til 6:30pm We. 10:30am We 6:30pm Th 10:30am Th 6:3i>pm Frl0:30ani Fr 6:30pm Buffalo WGR Su 10:0ilam Buffalo WKBW We 10:00am Freeport WGBB Su 9:00am
Tu 7:00pm Th 7:00pm Hudson F. WGLC Su 10:45am Jamestown WOCL Su 7:00pm New York WMCA Su 10:45am t,-aranaeL. WNBZ Su IO; 15am
Tu 4:15pru Th 4:15pm fvracuse WSYR Su 10:30:im Tupper L. WIIDL Su 10:15am Th 11:30am
WIi. Pl’ns WFASSu 6:00pm
Mo 1:00pm Sa. 9:00am
NORTH CAROLINA
Asheville WWNCTli 5:30pm Charlotte WBT Su 10:30am Greensboro WHIG Su 9:45am Raleigh WPTFSu 9:15am
NORTH DAKOTA
Fargo WDAY Su 10:00am G’d Forks KFJ.M Su 5:00pni
We 5:00pm Fr 5:00pm
OHIO
Akron WADCSa 1:15pm
We 1:00pm
Cleveland WIIK Su 7:00pm
Tu 3:15ptn	■ Fr (5:30pm
Cleveland W.TAY Su 9:45am Columbus WAIU Su 10:00am
Th 7:30pm
Columbus WBNS Su 10:45am
Mo 3:00pm We 2:00pm
Fr 2:00pm
Dayton WSMKSu 1:30pm
MLOrab WHBDSu 4:30pm
We 4:30pm Fr 4:30pm
Toledo WSPDSu 9:30am Sa 8:30am
Youngst’nWKBN Su 10:00am Wo 4:00pm Zanesville WALK Su 10:00am We 4:15pm
OKLAHOMA
Elk Citv KASA Su 1:15pm Oki ’a City KOM A Su 1:45pm PoncaCity WBBZ Su 10-,00am Wo 9:00pm
Shawnee KGFF Mo 8:45pm We 8:45pm Fr 8:45pm
OREGON
Klamath]’. KFJI Mo 8:15pm Marshfield KOOS Mo 1:30pm Medford KNED Su 10:00am Th 4:00pm
PENNSYLVANIA
Erie WLBW Su 10:15am Glenside WIBGSu 1:15pm Johnstown WJAC Su 4:30pm Phil’a WCAT'Su 12:00 nn Philadelphia W1P Su 0:45pm
Fittsb'gh KQV Su 10:30am
We 1:45pm Fr 1:45pm
Pittsb 'gh WWSW We 5:15pm Reading WEED Su 3:45pm
Wc 3:45pm
Wash'ton WNBO Su 9:45am W’msport WEAK Su 9:15pm
Th 7:15pm
York WORK Su 3:00pm
PHILIPPINE ISLANDS
Manila KZEGSu 7:00pm Th 7:00pm
SOUTH CAROLINA
Charleston WCSC Su 1:00pm
We 7:00pm Fr 7:00pm
Columbia W1S Su 11:15am
Fr 6:45pm
Greenville WFBC Su 10:00am
Spart’b’g \\ SPA Su 6:30pm
SOUTH DAKOTA
Pierre KGFX Su 1:00pm Tu 4:00pm Th 4:00pm
Watertown KGCR Su 9:15am
We 8:45pm Fr 8:45pm
TENNESSEE
Bristol WOPI We 6:45pm
Sa 6:45pm
Cha 'nooga WDOD Su 1:15pm
Th 8:00am
Jackson WT.LS Su 1:30pm
We 5:3upm Fr 5:3opm
Knoxville WkOLSu 7:00pm
Memphis WMC Su 4:30pm
Memphis WREC Su 9:00am
TEXAS
Amarillo KGRSSu 9:00am
Austin KNOW Su 10:00am
Beaumont KFDMSu 10:00am
Tu 7:45pm
Borger KSRB Su 2:30pm We 4:15pm Fr 4:15pm
CorpusChr. KG FI Su 9:00am We 6:45pm Fr 6:45pm
Dallas KRLD Su 10:30am
Dublin KFPLTlr 8:00pm
Fr 8:45am
El Paso KTSM Su l:lJpm Ft. Worth KTATMo 5:15pm
Wo 5:15pm Fr 5:15pm
Gaheston KLUF Su 10:15:im
We 8:00pm
Houston KXYZ Su 10:00am
S. Angelo KGKLSu 1:45pm Th 8:15am
S. Antonio KTSA Su 10:45am
Wichita F. KGKOSu 12:30pm Th 8:45pm
UTAH
Ogden
Salt L. City
KLO Su 3:15pm
We 5:00pm
KSL Su 11:15am
VERMONT
Rutland WSYB Su 10:00am Th 5:30pm
VIRGINIA
Ch’lottesv. WEHC Su 10:45am
Danville WBTM Su 9:15pm Lyiichb’g WLVA Su 12: 15pm
Norfolk WTARSu 12:30pm 1’etersb’g WPHR Sir 6:15pm
We 10:00am
Rielimoud WKVA Su 12:15pm
Roanoke WDBJ Su J2:3i>pm We 5:00pm
WASHINGTON
Aberdeen KXHO Su 1:15pm Bell ham KVOS Su 10:00am Th 5:30pm
Seattle KJRSu 10:00am
Seattle KVLMu 9:00pm Tn 9:00pm We 9:00pm Th 9:00pm Fr 9:00pm Sa 9:00pm
Spokane KGA Su 6:00pm Tacoma KMO Su 10:30am
We 4:30pm Fr 4:30pm Tacoma KVI Su 2:45pm Walla Walla KUJ Su 7:45am
Su 1:30pm
Wenatchee KPQSu 1:00pm We 7:00am
Yakima KIT Su 10:0oam Th 7:00am
WEST VIRGINIA
Bluefield WH1S Su 9:00am
I’r 8;0(>am
Cba’ston WOBU Su 4:00pm
Fairmont WMMN Su 12:45pm Hunt'ton WSAZ Th 4:00pm Wheeling WWVA Su 10:00am
WISCONSIN
La Crosse WKBH Su 12:00 nn Madison Will \. S-i 10:00am Mani’woe WOMT Mo 7:00pm
Th 1:00pm
WYOMING
Casper KDFN Su 10:30am Th 8:15pm
175
WATCHTOWER.
RADIO SERVICE
The good news of the kingdom of Jehovah is broadcast each week or oftener by these and other stations at time shown.
[Curscnt local time is shown in each instance.]
AUSTRALASIA
NEW SOUTH WALES
Albury 2-AYTu 8:45pm
Broken Hill 2-XL Su 8:45pm
Goulburn 2-GN Su 7:30pm
Grafton 2-GFTu 7:30pm
Gunnedah 2-MO Su 7:05pm
I.ismore 2-XNWe 7:15pm
Newcastle 2-1ID Su 9:3()am
Su 7:15pm We 6:45pm
Sydney 2-UE Su 9:15am
W ’ga W ’ga 2-WG We 9:30am We 7:45pm
QUEENSLAND Brisbane	4-BC Su 10:15am
Mackay	4-MK Su 11:00am
Townsville 4-TO We 8:00pm
TASMANIA
Launceston 7-LA Fr 10:15pm
VICTORIA
Ballarat .3-BA Su 12:45pm
Bendigo 3-BO Tu 8:00pm
Hamilton 3-HASu 6:45pm
Horsham 3-1IS Su 7:00pm
Melbourne 3-AW Su 12:15pm
Mildura 3-MASu 7:15pm
Sale 3-TRSu 6:30pm
Swan Bill 3-SIlSu 7:15pm
Wangaratta 3-WR Su 8:15pm
WEST AUSTRALIA
Kalgoorlie 6-KGSu 7:40pm
Beith 6-MLSu 7:00pm
BELGIUM
Hainaut BONNE Sa 5:30pm (330 m) ESPERANCE
CANADA ALBERTA Calgary CFCN Su 5:45pm
NOVA SCOTIA
Sydney CJCB Su 9:00pm
ONTARIO
Hamilton CKOC Su 10:30am
Sy 1:30pm Su 8:15pm
CHINA
Shanghai XMHA Su 9:45am
CUBA
Havana CMK Su 11:30am also Spanish Su 9:00pm
Santa Cl ’a CMHI Su 12:15pm
ESTHONIA
Reval RADIO-Su 3:30pm (296.1 m) TALLINN
FRANCE
Beziers RADIO-Th 8:00pm (220.1 m) BEZIERS
Bordeaux RADIO-Mo 7:45pm
(237 m) SUD-OUEST
Fecamp RADIO-NOR-
(206 m) MANDIE
French Tu 8:00pm
Paris RADIO L L Fr S:15pm (370 in)
Paris RAJJIO- Sul2:00nn
(312.8 m) VITES
Th 7:30pm Sa 7:30pm
Toulouse RADIO-We 7:15pm (385.1 in) TOULOUSE
MEXICO
Mexico XECW
Spanish Th 10:00pm
UNITED STATES
ALABAMA
Birin’ham WAPI Su 10:15am
Biim 'ham WBRC Su 10:00am
We 4:36pm
M’tgomery WSFA Su 3:45pm
MuscleS. WNRASu 6:00pm
We 8:00pm Fr 8:00pm
ALASKA
AnchorageKFQD We 9:30pm
Ketchikan KG BU Mo 7:15pm
Th 7:15pm Sa 7:15pm
ARIZONA	
Bisbee KSUN Su We 4:00 pm Fr Jerome KCRJ Mo We 5:15pm Sa Spanish Th Prescott KP.TM Su We 5:45pm Fr Tucson KGAR Su We 5:45pm Fr Yuma KUMA Su Spanish Su	4:00pm 4:00pm 5:15pm 5:15pm 4:30pm 5:45pm 5:45pm 7:00pm 5:45pm 6:15pm 6:00pm
ARKANSAS	
Fay ’ville KUOA Su 12:45pm We 11:45am Fr 4:30pm
Hot Sp *gs KT IIS Su 3: 30pm LittloR’k KARKSu 9:00am Little It ’k KGHI Su 7:00pm We 5:45 pm Fr 5:45pm
Little R ’k KLRA Su 10:30am
Paragould KBTM Su 10:00am We 11:30am
Texarkana KCMC Su 6:45pm
CALIFORNIA
El Centro KXO Su 10:00am Eureka KIEM Su 10:30am Fresno	KM J Su 3:45pm
Hollywood KNX Su 9:15pm Long B ’ch KGER Su 10:45am Los Angeles KTMSu 9:30am
Su 8:00pm Th 8:00pm
Oakland KLS Su 11:15am We 2:45pm Fr 2:45pm
Oakland KROW Su 16:15am Su 6:15pm Mo 8:15pm ■We 8:15pm
Sa’mento KFBK Su 9:30am San Diego XEBC Su 11:45am
We 7:45pm
S.F’cisco KTABSu 9:30am Sa 8:30am Stockton KGDM Su 9:30am
We 7:15am Fr 1:15pm
COLORADO
Col ’o Spr. KVOR Su 10:30am
We 5:30pm Sa 4:30pm
Denver KFEL Su 7:00pm
Grand J’n KFX.J Su 1:15pm
Greeley KFKAMo 7:15pm
Lamar KIDW Su 7:15pm
We 2:40pm Fr 2:40pm
Yuma KGEK Mo 12:45pm
We 12:45pm Fr 12:45pm
CONNECTICUT
Bridgeport WICC Su 10:00am
DELAWARE
Wilm ’ton WDEL Su 6:15pm
FLORIDA
Miami WIOD Su 12:15pm
Miami WQAM Su 5:15pm
Orlando WDBO Su 12:45pm Pensacola WCOA Su 1:00pm We 7:00pm
GEORGIA
Athens	WTFI Su	9:45am
Atlanta	WEST Su	5:45pm
Atlanta	WJTL Su	2:15pm
Augusta	WRDW Su	3:00pm
Th 7:45pm
Columbus WRBLSu 9:30am
LaGrangeWKEU Su 3:00pm
We 3:00pm Fr 10:00am
Macon WMAZ Su 4:00pm
Romo WRGA Su 12:30pm
We 8:45pm Fr 8:45pm
Savannah WTOC Su 1:00pm
Thomasv. WQDX We 9:15am We 7:30pm
HAWAII
Honolulu KGMB We 12:05pm
Fr 7:15pm
IDAHO
Boise KIDO Su 10:30am
We 8:45pm
Idaho Falls KID Mo 8:15pm
Tu 8:45pm	We 8:45pm
Th 8:45pm	Fr 8:45pm
Sa 8:45pm
Nampa KFXD Su 11:00am
Pocatello KSEI Su 2:00pm
Su 9:00pm
Twin Falls KTFI Su 10:45am
Su 4:45pm
ILLINOIS
Decatur WJBL Su 10:00am
Mo 7:30pm
Harrisb’g WEBQSu 6:00pm
Mo 10:30pm Fr 10:00pm
LaSalle W.JBC Su 2:15pm
Rockford WROK Su 10:00am
Su 10:00pm We 10:30pm
Sp 'gHeld WCBS Su 12:30pm
Sa 11:15am
INDIANA
Ind ’apolisWKBF Su 10:00am
Th 1:00pm
Muncie WLBC Su 1:30pm
Fr 7:30pm
IOWA
Decorah KGCA Mo 9:00am We 9:00am Sa 10:15am
Des Moines WHO Su 10:15am
KANSAS
Coffeyville KGGF Su 1:45pm
Th 8:00pm
LOUISIANA
Shrevep’t KWEA Su 10:15am
MAINE
Bangor WLBZ Su 9:45am
MARYLAND
Baltimore WBAL Su 4:15pm
Cumberl’dWTBO Mo 1:15pm We 1:15pm Fr 1:15pm
Hagerst’n WJEJ Su 10:15am
MASSACHUSETTS
Babson P. WBSO Su 12:30pm Boston WNAC Su 10:00am Sp ’gfield WMAS Su 10:30am Worcester WORC Su 10:30am
MICHIGAN
Calumet WHDF Tu 6:15pm
Detroit W.IRSu 9:15am
Ironwood WJMSSu 5:00pm
We 7:00pm Fr 7:15pm
Jackson WIBMSu 6:30pm KalamazooWKZO Su 9:45am
We 2:00pm
MINNESOTA
F 'gusFalls KGDE Su 10:00am
Min’polis WRI IM Tu 8:00pm
Moorhead KGFKSu 7:30pm
We 5:15pm Fr 5:15pm
St. Paul WR11M Su 12:30pm Th 1:00pm
MISSISSIPPI
Hattiesb’gWl’FB Su 1:30pm We 7:45pm
Laurel WAML Su 12:45pm Meridian WCOC Su 10 :00am
We 6:45pm
Miss. City WGCM Su 9:45am We 8:45pm
MISSOURI
Columbia KERU Su 4:30pm We 7:15am
Kans.C’y KWKC Su 2:00pm Tu 7:00am
MONTANA
Billings KGEIL Su 12:30pm
Kalispell KGEZ Su 9:00am
NEBRASKA
Kearney KGFW Su 10:00am
Lincoln	KFAB Su 9:30am
Lincoln	KFOR Su 10:15am
Scottsbl’f KGKY Su 10:15am We 5:45pm Fr 5:45pm
NEVADA
Reno KOH Su 10:30am
NEW JERSEY AtlanticC’y WPG Su 10:00am Newark WNEW Su 10:00am
NEW MEXICO
Albuq’que KOB We 5:45pm
Roswell KG FL Su 5:15pm We 4:30pm Fr 4:30pm (Continued on page 175)
Watchtower,
Published Sfmi-Monhily By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N. Y., U. S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford President W. E. Van Ambuegh Secretary "And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.”' Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is tho only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to Ills eieatures; that tho Logos was the beginning of his creation and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth aud placed him upon it; that man wilfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptivo price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of the world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear tho fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and tho Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establisliment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of tho peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is tho destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in tho earth, and that under tho kingdom all thoso who will obey its righteous laws shall bo restored and live on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction
specifically designed to aid Jehovah's witnesses. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and supplies othei hter-atute to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his Beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful sind critical examination of its contents in the light of tho Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, ano South Africa, 7s. American remittances should be made by Express or Postal Money Order, or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be inado direct to the respective branch ogives. Remittances from countries other than thoso mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by international Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British .......... 31 Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England Canadian...........40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Australasian . . 7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia South African .... Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa
Please address the Society in every case.
{Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students ol tho Bible who by reason ot Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription price may have The IVntchtotvcr tree upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating tho reason for so requesting It. Wo are glad to thus aid tho needy, but the written application once each year is required by tho postal regulations. Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will bo sent only when requested. Chance ot nddrcs.i, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal bl ink (carrying notice of c-xnirntion) will bo sent with the journal one mouth before the subscription expires. Entered as Second Class Mail Matter at Brooklyn, N. Y., Bostoffice.
Act of March 3,
CONVENTION
Jehovah’s witnesses will assemble in convention at Toronto, Canada, July 5-8 inclusive. Speakers will be pi esent both from the States and from provinces of Canada. The forenoon of each day will be devoted to Held service, with meetings for the interested in the afternoon and evening. Those contemplating attending the convention and who desire accommodations will please address Convention Committee, 40 Irwin Ave., Toronto 5, Out.
One feature of the convention will be a public address delivered by the president of the Society on Sunday afternoon the 8th.	------------
FACTORY AND OFFICE CLOSED FOR FIELD SERVICE
Each year the Society closes the factory, office and Bethel home for a period of two weeks to give the brethren here an opportunity to get away from their regular routine and engage in the field service. This year the factory and home will be closed July 21 and will not open again until Monday, August (J. During this time no mail will be attended to. and no shipments made. All readeis of The Watchtower should please take note and order sufficient literature to cany them through this two-week period as well as the two weeks following. It will greatly facilitate matters if not too much eorresponden-e is received immediately after the reopening of the factory, except, of course, regular service icports and any rush oiders or
other urgent matters. Considerable mail accumulates ia tlio office because of responses to radio lectures, and we hope ibis can be given immediate attention without being delayed by mail that could have waited.
“BEYOND THE GRAVE” AND “HIS WORKS”
Jehovah now blesses his faithful witnesses and all people of good will with two new potent instruments for me in his service, to wit, two new booklets entitled />'< i/oml th. (Irate and fits Works, respectively. The cover design or .each is attractive and invites the beholder to a perusal of the contents of the booklet; there me also fitting illustrations within. Ail, Jehovah’s witnesses and Jonnilabs alike, who desiie to put these excellent messages in the hands of tlio people mav mi.v obtain a supply and begin the distiibution thereof immediately. The usual contribution of 5c a copy will be accepted thetetbr.
“THE NATIONS’ HOPE” TESTIMONY PERIOD
A period of nine days lias been specially designated as “The Nations’ Hope’’ Testimony Peiiod. This begins with June :1<) and concludes with July S. Duiing this period ot nine days Jehovah’s witnesses will iia\e the privilege of distributing a new booklet, World Recovery? All people of go"j will arc invited to join with Jehovah’s witnesses in the procliimatiun of this good news of the kingdom. To have a part in the giving of this witness is a blessed privilege.
HIS COVENANTS
PART G
“And you arc they who have continued with me in my trials. And 1 covenant for you, even as my Father has covenanted for me, a Kingdom.”—Luke 22:28,29, Diaglott.
JEHOVAH covenanted unto his beloved Son, Christ Jesus, a kingdom, which kingdom is the capital organization of Jehovah and of which, of course, Christ Jesus is the Head and Lord. In God's due time that kingdom, which is “the holy city” or heavenly organization, completely dedicated and devoted to Jehovah God, comes down from God out of heaven and takes charge of the affairs of the world. Jehovah authorizes Christ Jesus to covenant unto his faithful brethren for a part or place in that kingdom, that such faithful ones might be a part of his royal organization. It is the kingdom or holy organization that comp lately vindicates Jehovah’s name after first bearing testimony to his name. That covenant for the kingdom is separate and distinct from the new covenant, but is closely related thereto. One must be in the new covenant before he can be in the kingdom.
FORESHADOWED
’ King David was a type foreshadowing the King, Christ Jesus. Being a Jew, David was subject to the law covenant made in Egypt; but it was after he was thirty-seven years old that God made with David a covenant to establish his kingdom for ever. (2 Sam. 7: 1-29) Jesus Christ made announcement of the covenant. for the kingdom for the first time after he told his disciples of and concerning the making of the new covenant. At the same time of the making the announcement to them that God had covenanted with him for a kingdom, Jesus stated to his faithful disciples that he covenanted unto his faithful brethren that they should participate with him in that kingdom.
3	Forty years after the law covenant was made in Egypt and inaugurated at Mount Sinai God commanded Moses to make a covenant with Israel in the land of Moab. “These arc the words of the covenant, which the Lord commanded Moses to make with the children of Israel in the land of Moab, beside the covenant which he made with them in Horeb.” (Deut. 29:1) That covenant made in the land of Moab foreshadowed the covenant for the kingdom. The Moab covenant was a means or measure instituted to pre
pare the Israelites to enter into Canaan and to serve God there. It also pictured the purpose of Jehovah to do a preparatory work with his people on earth since 1918. Shortly before the making of the covenant at Moab Jehovah commanded Moses to prepare the Israelites eligible for war service. (Num. 2(5:1-4) At the same place was the camp of the Israelites when Balak, the king of Moab, hired Balaam to curse the Israelites. (Num. 22:1-24:25) From there the Israelites set out to execute Jehovah’s judgment against the Midianites for vexing God’s people. (Num. 25:15-18; 31:1-12) Natural Israel was at that time in Moab, in a land not assigned for its inheritance. Likewise the people of God taken out for his name, that is, spiritual Israelites, are in the world but not part of it at the time they are taken into the covenant, for the kingdom.
4	The time and circumstances surrounding the making of the eovenant in Moab foreshadowed the time and circumstances surrounding the men of spiritual Israel when taken into the covenant for The kingdom. This covenant also was looking to the vindication of Jehovah’s name. (Deut. 1:3; Num. 10:10) At the time of making of the covenant in Moab Jehovah had begun his rule amidst his enemies and was thus using his typical people. He was then “King in Jeshurun”, when these tribes of Israel were gathered together in the land of Moab. (Deut. 33:5) The lands east of the Jordan had then been brought under control by the defeat of the Amorites under their ruler Sihon and by the slaying of Og king of Eashan. (Deut. 2:24-27; 3:1-11; 4:47; 29:7,8; 31:4) The land of these enemies of Israel had then been possessed by the cattle-raising tribes of Israel. (Deut. 3:13-20; Josh. 1:12-1S) These surrounding conditions well find a parallel in what came to pass from 1914 to 1918 in this, that Christ Jesus was sent forth in 1914 to rule amidst his enemies, and he then made war against Satan and his angels and cast them out of heaven. (Ps. 110:2; Rev. 12:7-9) This corresponding condition is a strong argument that the remnant were taken into the covenant for the kingdom after 1918 and alter
180
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
the birth of the kingdom, and after Christ Jesus appeared to build up Zion.
WHO TAKEN IN
5	At the time of making the covenant in Moab Aaron was dead and there was none of the original company living who had left Egypt and who were past sixty years of age aside from Eleazar the high priest, Joshua and Caleb, the last at that time being seventy-nine years of age. (Dcut. 1:36-39; Ex. 6:23; Josh. 14:6-11) It follows then that most of those taken into the covenant in Moab were “young men’’, such as mentioned in a later prophecy. (Joel 2: 28) “Take the sum of all the congregation of the children of Israel, from twenty years old and upward, throughout their fathers’ house, all that arc able to go to war in Israel. Take the sum of the people, from twenty years old and upward; as the Lord commanded Moses, and the children of Israel, which went forth out of the land of Egypt. These were the numbered of the children of Israel, six hundred thousand and a thousand seven hundred and thirty. And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Unto these the land shall be divided for an inheritance, according to the number of names.” (Num. 26:2,4,51-53) Although Caleb was then seventy-nine years of age he was counted as a young man of forty years, and this manifestly because of his faithfulness to God. (Josh. 14:6-11) Caleb was a good representative there of that class of faithful ones who were also foreshadowed by Mordecai and Naomi, at the time of the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple for judgment. The zeal of Phinehas, the son of Eleazar the high priest, makes him a good picture of the. “young men” mentioned by the prophet Joel.—Num. 25:6-13.
“The older generation of the Israelites who had been rebellious, coinplaincrs, filled with fear to perform their duties and wanting to return to Egypt rather than give battle to the enemy, had been completely cleared out, and none of them went into Canaan. “These are they that were numbered by Moses and Eleazar the priest, who numbered the children of Israel in the plains of Moab, by Jordan near Jericho. But among these there was not a man of them whom Moses and Aaron the priest numbered, when they numbered the children of Israel in the wilderness of Sinai. For the Lord had said of them, They shall surely die in the wilderness. And there was not left a man of them, save Caleb, the son of Jcphunneh, and Joshua the son of Nun.”—Num. 26:63-65.
7	At the time Jesus announced the kingdom covenant to his faithful disciples Judas, who foreshadowed the rebellious coinplaincrs and fearful ones, had been ordered out and was then away. (Luke 22:28-30; John 13:21-30) At the temple the “old men” who are complainers, faultfinders, selfish ones and opposers, are not taken into the kingdom, but such are debarred from entering by the gates of the city. Since
October 15, 1932, the sanctuary has been cleansed. (Dan. 8:14; The Watchtower, July 15, 1933) When the Israelites left Sinai they were in line for the promised land, but only a few entered. During the Elijah work and up to the time of the coming of the Lord to the temple many spiritual Israelites were in line for the kingdom, but those who committed the “sin of Samaria”, who arc complainers and faultfinders and opposers, and who arc fearful of boldly proclaiming the message of God’s kingdom against the enemy are left out. Those taken into the covenant for the kingdom must have proved their faithfulness up to that point of lime.
TIME OF JUDGMENT
8	The coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple marks the time of his judgment. Before that time judgment must wait, because justice was one of Jehovah's 'sealed treasures’. At the making of the covenant in Moab the iniquity of the Amorites was full and the time for the execution of judgment upon them had come. (Gen. 15:16) So likewise when the Lord Jesus appeared at the temple for judgment the iniquity of “Christendom” was full, but first the judgment must begin at the house of God. (1 Bet. 4:17) Jehovah’s order of judgment stems’ to be clearly foreshadowed bj' the following: “And he said, The Lord came from [first] Sinai, and rose up from [second] Soir unto them; he shined forth from [third] mount. Paran, and he came with ten thousands of saints: from his right hand went a fiery law for them.” (Deut. 33: 2) Here Sinai, mentioned first, well pictures God's sanctuary. “The chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands upon thousands: the Lord is among them, as in Sinai, in the sanctuary.” (Ps. 68:17, R.V.) Scir, mentioned as second, pictures the “evil servant” class, the “man of sin”, “the son of perdition.” Mount Paran seems well to picture 1he “elective elder” class once in line for the kingdom, for it was at the wilderness of Paran that Jehovah cleared out the unfaithful elders. (Num. 12:16; 13:26-33; 14:1-39) Compare this with the words of Jude: “And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, saying, Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands of his saints, to execute judgment upon all; and to convince all that are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him. These are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts; and their mouth speaketh great swelling words, having men’s persons in admiration because of advantage.”—Jude 14-16.
9	At Moab Jehovah told Moses that among those with whom the covenant was being made there were many who were rot sincere and truly devoted to him. (Deut. 31:16-29) Likewise even after the taking of those into the temple and into the kingdom covenant there existed a need of cleansing and clearing out of
June 15, 1934
Tfie WATCHTOWER.
181
the insincere ones, including those who had selfishly sought and accepted the position of elective elders, and who insisted upon walking after their own selfish desires, and hence were not entirely devoted to God and to his kingdom. There must be no murmurers, complainers, op posers or selfish, rebellious ones who abide in the covenant for the kingdom. Those at the cleansed temple are at unity in Christ. It is the time of peace within the walls of that glorious palace, and all of this house must seek the good of all others therein. (Ps. 122: 7-9) Those in the covenant for the kingdom, and who are the ones taken out as a people for God’s name, must walk on, shoulder to shoulder, looking well to the interests of the kingdom, and continue singing the praises of Jehovah God.
THE SONG
10	Song.is evidence of joy. It was therefore appropriate, when Moses, as God’s instrument, announced to the Israelites in Moab the terms of the covenant there made, that he should compose and sing a song; which he did. The Israelites were about to engage in war and enter into the land of promise. That song sung upon the plains of Moab foretold a far more wonderful song to l>e sung at the induction of God’s chosen people into the covenant for the kingdom. That more wonderful song is now being sung. The words of the song of Moses proceeded from Jehovah God, and Moses, acting as the mouthpiece of Jehovah, spoke the words of this song, to wit: “Give ear, ye heavens, and I will speak; and let the earth hear the words of my mouth: My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distil as the dew; as the small rain upon the tender grass, and as the showers upon the herb.” (Dcut. 32:1, 2, H.V.) The song emphasized the great truth thereof, to wit, that the chief purpose of the covenant is the vindication of Jehovah’s name; that Jehovah’s name must be known and exalted in all the universe. Calling upon all spiritually-minded ones to give ear, the song ascribes all goodness and loving-kindness to Jehovah, and then says: “For I will proclaim the name of the Lord; ascribe ye greatness unto our God. The Hock, his work is perfect: for all his ways are judgment: a God of faithfulness and without iniquity, just and right is he.” (Deut. 32:3,4, H.V.) The song then tells in brief concerning the judgment of Jehovah and informs his covenant people how they have violated their covenant. “They have dealt corruptly with him, they are not his children, it is their blemish; they are a perverse and crooked generation. Do ye thus requite the Lord, 0 foolish people and unwise? Is not he thy f<rihW Aaxib bought thee? He hath made thee, and established thee.” (Deut. 32: 5,6, R.V.) Speaking of his justice and judgment Jehovah reminds his people that vengeance (that is, vindication of his name) belongs to him. “Vengeance is mine, and recompense, at the time when their foot shall slide: for the day of their calamity is at hand, and the things that are to come
upon them shall make haste. For Jehovah will judge his people.” (Deut. 32:35, 36, A.R.V.) The prophetic song then shows that Jehovah will execute this judgment by his glittering “sword”, that is, by him whom he has appointed as the Judge of all things and the Vindicator of his great and holy name: “If I whet my glittering sword, and mine hand take hold on judgment; I will render vengeance to mine adversaries, and will recompense them that hate me.”—Dcut,. 32:41. R.V.
11	This song of Moses corresponds exactly and runs parallel with ‘the song of Moses and the Lamb’, sung when Zion is builded up and when the remnant are taken into the covenant for the kingdom. The picture is that of the entire 144,000, which includes the remnant on earth, standing by the “sea of glass”, symbolic of the judgments of Jehovah, which judgments are now clearly made known to the remnant, as it is wtiten: “Thy righteousness is like the great mountains; thy judgments are a great deep: O Lord, thou preservest man and beast. How excellent is thy lovingkindncss, 0 God! therefore the children of men put their trust under the shadow of thy wings.”— Ps. 36:6,7.
” The song on the plains of Moab now finds a greater fulitlmcnt in the words of the Greater Moses, to wit: ‘"And they sing the song of Moses the servant of God. and the song of the Lamb, saying, Great and marvellous are thy works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou King of saints. Who shall not fear thee, 0 Lord, and glorify thy name? for thou only art holy: for all nations shall come and worship before thee; for thy judgments are made manifest.” (Rev. 15:3,4) This song is now sung by the 144,000 gathered with Christ Jesus into God's holy erganization, and it is as it were a new song, which only the 144,000 can learn and sing.—Rev. 14:1-4.
" The song of Moses was a testimony then against the unfaithful ones of Israel, and the song sung today by those under the Greater Moses must be sung in the errs of those who have proved unfaithful to their covenant to do the will of God and as a testimony against them. (Deut. 31:19-22) In due time judgment will be executed upon the unfaithful. (Deut. 32:27x28, 33) Judgment with Jehovah is not in vain or unimportant, but is sure and of the greatest importance. (Deut. 32:46,47) Jehovah had made pro-visin for and arrangement for judgment of natural Israel and now he has likewise made provision for the judgment of spiritual Israel, which judgment takes pihceaf rtie itempie. It is a time of joy, and therefore a time for isinging, because the spiritual Israelites taken out fo>r the name of Jehovah, to whom he has given hie name, making them his witnesses, are now entering into war and, proving faithful, shall soon enter into the everlasting ‘land of promise’. The Grwrer Moses, the King, is with them, and he is certain to lead the faithful ones to complete victory and
182
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, X. Y.
to the vindication of Jehovah’s name. It is the time of the joy of the Lord and the faithful have been invited to enter into his joy.
FAITHFULNESS
14 In every covenant in the making of which two or more parties are involved there must be a good and valuable consideration moving from one to the other. The faithful performance of the terms and provisions of the covenant constitutes a good and valuable consideration of one to the other. Jehovah by the terms of his covenant binds himself to keep and perform the same, and those on the other side of the covenant arc likewise bound to keep and perform the terms thereof. Jehovah is always faithful, and the other parties to the covenant must be faithful if they would please God and be used to accomplish his purposes. “Know therefore that the Lord thy God, he is God, the faithful God, which keepeth covenant and mercy with them that love him and keep his commandments, to a thousand generations.” (l)eut. 7:9) It is by the faithfulness to Jehovah and the faithfulness of those whom he takes into the covenant for the kingdom that his name will be vindicated. (Isa. 49: 7) Throughout the book of Deuteronomy the pervading counsel is faithful devotion to Jehovah. Those whom God approves, and who shall have a part in the vindication of his name, shall be “Holiness unto the Lord”. (Zech. 14: 20) The call to the kingdom was issued and many responded to that call, and those who proved faithful up to the time of the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple were chosen, and now the “called and chosen” who are taken into the covenant for the kingdom must prove faithful. (Rev. 17:14) Only those who are faithful unto death shall receive the crown of life. (Rev. 2:10) Those who were once in line for the kingdom and who arc not faithful fail. ‘They arc the very f toward generation, children in whom there is no faith.’—Dcut. 32:20.
’’Hoses was “faithful in all his house”, and his faithfulness was a testimony to those who followed. Christ Jesus is faithful over his royal house; and the condition named in the covenant for the kingdom is that all members thereof must be faithful. (Ilcb. 3:5,6) “Faithful is he that calleth you, who also will do it.” (1 Thess. 5: 24) “But the Lord is faithful, who shall stablish you, and keep you from evil.” —2 Thess. 3: 3.
16 Jehovah condescends to assure those who are in the covenant of his own faithfulness, and faithfulness is required of all those who arc taken into the covenant. Therefore those in the covenant for the kingdom arc admonished, “Be yc holy; for I am holy.” (1 Pet. 1:15,16; Lev. 11: 44) Those who are in the covenant for the kingdom are righteous or just by virtue of being in Christ and having received the robe of righteousness, and “the just shall live by his faith” and faithfulness.—Hab. 2:4.
” The covenant made in Egypt and confirmed at
Mount Sinai required of the Israelites faithfulness, and they pledged themselves faithfully to keep the terms of the covenant. The covenant made in Moab was enjoined upon Israel because Jehovah foreknew that there would be stubbornness, rebellion and lawlessness amongst the people of the nation of Israel after the death of Moses. (Dcut. 5:1-33; 31:16-30) The covenant in Moab, therefore, was of necessity for faithfulness on the part of the Israelites, which faithfulness would be shown by full obedience to God’s commandments. The Israelites had now become the chosen people of God, and they must prove faithful if they would have God's approval and his blessing. “And Moses, and the priests the Levites, spake unto all Israel, saying, Take heed, and hearken, 0 Israel; this day thou art become the people of the Lord thy God. Thou shalt therefore obey the voice of the Lord thy God, and do his commandments and his statutes, which I command thee this day.” (Dcut. 27:9,10) Compare this with the commandment of the Lord God to those who are taken into the temple, to wit: “And this shall come to pass, if yc will diligently obey the voice of the Lord your God.” (Zech. 6:15) It is these faithful ones that become pillars in the temple of God.
18	There is no mention made in the Scriptures of animal sacrifice and the sprinkling of blood at the making of the covenant in Moab, even though that was the day of the new moon. (2 Chron. 2:4) In the divine record of Leviticus and Numbers the priests, tabernacle and animal sacrifice are made foremost, but not so in the making of the covenant in Moab. This shows that faithfulness is the keynote to that covenant in Moab and that the sacrificial provisions, which prefigured the ransom sacrifice and the atonement work of Christ, would of themselves be insufficient and unavailing for those who were taken out as a people lor Jehovah’s name as against any Israelite’s going into captivity to Satan’s organization, and into death, unless those in the covenant were wholly and faithfully obedient to their vows. In other words, they must be faithful, above everything else. (Deut. 23:21-23) Jehovah had selected these Israelites as his people to go into Canaan, and now the allimportant thing to them was faithful obedience to the voice of Jehovah. (Deut. 6:1-3) Later Jehovah by his prophet said to that nation: “Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel: Put your burnt offerings unto your sacrifices, and cat flesh. For I spake not unto your fathers, nor commanded them in the day that I brought them out of the land of Egypt, concerning burnt offerings or sacrifices: but this thing commanded I them, saying, Obey my voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my people; and walk ye in all the ways that I have commanded you, that it may be well unto you.” (Jer. 7 : 21-23) This proves that those taken into the kingdom covenant must be obedient to the commandments of the Greater Moses and that obedience is better than sacrifice.
June 15, 193-1
*3Tze WATCHTOWER,
183
19	As further proof that the covenant made in Moab pictured the covenant for the kingdom, note the following: The kingdom is Jehovah God’s kingdom, which he prepares and gives to his beloved Son, Christ Jesus. The things pertaining to the kingdom are pictured by a great mountain of rock, and in the song written and sung by Moses in Moab at the command of Jehovah there for the first time in the Scriptures it is that Jehovah is called The Rock. He is The Rock, and al) his works are perfect. He is the “King of eternity’’. (Jer. 10:10, margin) He is the great Refuge and Protector of his people. (I)eut. 32:4,15, 18,30,31) Jehovah is definitely named in Deuteronomy as the King. “And he was king in Jcshurun, when the heads of the people and the tribes of Israel were gathered together.’’ (Deut. 33:5) This shows that the faithful remnant are brought into the covenant for the kingdom after the gathering of Jehovah’s saints to him at the temple.
20	In the book of Exodus Jehovah makes promise to the Israelites conditioned upon their faithfulness to their covenant made with him when he took them out of Egypt, and says: “Ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation.” (Ex. 19: G) But the instructions concerning the future king of Israel are definitely laid down in the book of Deuteronomy. (17:14-20; 28:36) The important conditions to be performed by those who become ultimately members of the royal house, Jehovah announced as these: “If ye will obey my voice.” Likewise those who shall be for ever in the royal house of Jehovah must now be wholly obedient unto the Greater Moses, and there is no alternative.—Acts 3:23.
LEVIRATE MARRIAGE
21	The law governing levirate marriage is set forth in the book of Deuteronomy in connection with the Moab covenant, and in no other place in the Scriptures. '(Dvut. 25:5-10) The one next report in the Bible of the actual application of the law of levirate marriage is that in connection with the royal tribe of Judah in behalf of the king who was to come through that tribe. (Gen. 38:1-30; Ruth, chapters one to four) It is manifest that the law of levirate marriage was a kingdom provision, with which law Jehovah’s remnant must comply in fulfilment of the prophetic picture God made by Naomi and Ruth in bringing forth fruit toward the kingdom and in harmony with the covenant for the kingdom.
HIS NAME
22	In the covenant at Moab Jehovah’s name takes the most prominent place. Before the making of the covenant in Moab the issue of the name and supremacy of Jehovah was not perceived; likewise before the building up of Zion and taking the remnant into the temple God’s selected people did not perceive the great issue of Jehovah’s name and supremacy. “Yet the Lord hath not given you an heart to perceive, and
eyes to see, and ears to hear, unto this day.” (Deut. 29:4) When the King had come to his throne, and the faithful remnant were gathered unto him at the temple, they perceived for the first time the great issue of Jehovah's name, and thereafter they are known as the Lord’s ‘willing ones in the day of his power’, and they delight to make known the name of Jehovah, “Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, in the beauties of holiness from the womb of the morning: thou hast the dew of thy youth.” (Ps. 110:3) The fear of that great and terrible name is necessary to continued faithfulness.—Deut. 28:58.
23	The song of judgment spoken by Moses on the occasion of making the covenant in Moab puts forward the name of Jehovah and shows that it must be published abroad by Jehovah’s faithful witnesses, and concerning these it is written: “For I will proclaim the name of Jehovah: ascribe ye greatness unto our God.” (Deut. 32:3, A.U.V.) Jehovah delivered his captive people in 1919 from Satan’s organization, and this was foreshadowed by the Moab covenant. God's covenant people had been scattered and ill-used, restrained and caused to cease from their work, and this was done at the hands of the enemy. Jehovah did not deliver them for the sake of the remnant, but for his own name's sake and to forestall the enemy's reproach against that holy name. In proof of this it is written: “I said, I would scatter them afar, I would make the remembrance of them to cease from among men; were it not that I feared the provocation of the enemy, lest their adversaries should judge amiss, lest they should say, Our hand is exalted, and Jehovah hath not done all this.”—Deut. 32:26.27, A.li.V.
.21 In making the covenant in Moab and before crossing the Jordan into Canaan Jehovah states his purpose to choose one place for his house or temple and to there put his name. In this Jehovah foreshadowed and foretold that, when Zion is budded up and the remnant gathered to the temple under Christ Jesus and when God puts his name, all sacrifice of praise and service must be done according to the rules of that organization and through his organization, and not according to every man's own whim or desire. “But unto the place which the Lord your God shad choose out of all your tribes to put his name there, even unto his habitation shall ye seek, and thither thou shalt come: and thither ye shall bring your burnt offerings, and your sacrifices, and your tithes, and heave offerings of your hand, and your vows, and your freewill offerings, and the firstlings of your herds and of your ilocks.” (Deut. 12; 5, 6) Jehovah’s work must be done according to the rules of his organization. “Ye shall not do after all the things that we do here this day, every man whatsoever is right in his own eyes.” (Deut. 12:8) Some .persons who have been brought into Zion and anointed have failed to see the necessity of being entirely obedient to the instructions coming to them through God's organization. They do not appreciate the fact that the Lord Jesus is the
184
THe WATCH TOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
head of Zion and that the instructions come from him. Those heady ones insist on doing ‘whatsoever is right in their own sight ’, and such is against the commandment of the Lord. (Dcut. 12:8) Jehovah’s name can he honored only by doing his will, and not by following the will of any man. (Dent. 26: 1,2; J’rov. 3: 5, 6) The vindication of Jehovah’s name is magnified as the most important matter, and the part that the remnant would have in the vindication of that holy name is suggested in the law of leviratc marriage, which was later illustrated and recorded in the book of Ruth, the meaning of which God makes known to his remnant after they are brought into the temple and into the covenant for the kingdom.
25	All who receive Jehovah’s approval as his chosen people must maintain their integrity toward him. This is the very thing the Devil said that man could not do; but the faithful will prove that they can do it. The song of Moses at Moab magnifies the greatness of Jehovah’s name. Therein Jehovah’s integrity, his blamelessness and iiis irreproachableness are declared: “lie is the Rock, his work [including the remnant taken out for his name] is perfect.” (Deut. 32:4) Any crookedness, lawlessness or corruption on the part of any of the professed people of God cannot be attributed to Jehovah, but it must be said of all such, “They have corrupted themselves; their spot (stain or blemish] is not the spot of his children | Jehovah's faithful ones] : they (the lawless ones, the elective elders who insist on doing their own selfish way, the ‘man of sin’, the ‘evil servant’ class] are a perverse and crook< d (therefore not Jehovah’s] generation.” — Deut. 32:5.
20	Jehovah will not tolerate lawlessness, faultfinding, or complaining on the part of those brought into the covenant for the kingdom. This was foreshadowed by the song concerning the Moab covenant, in which the Lord said concerning the lawless: “And he said, I will hide my face from them, I will sec what their end shall be: for they are a very froward generation, children in whom is no faith. They have moved me to jealousy with that which is not God; they have provoked me to anger with their vanities: and I will move them to jealousy with those which are not a people; I will provoke them to anger with a foolish nation.”—Deut. 32: 20, 21.
27	Those who will have a part in the vindication of Jehovah’s name must maintain their integrity toward him, and hence it is written: “Thou shalt be perfect with the Lord thy God.” (Deut. 18:13) Jehovah will not give victory to his chosen people because they deserve it, nor because of their inherent righteousness and of their self-development, but for the vindication of his expressed promise and his name.—Dcut. 9:4-6.
ONE JEHOVAH
28	Those taken into the covenant for the kingdom have now begun to appreciate the truth that there is but one Jehovah God; and many others claiming to 1 e
God’s children arc blind to this great truth. Jehovah’s supremacy is affirmed in the covenant at Moab, and it is to those in the covenant for the kingdom that this great truth is now magnified: “There is none like unto the God of Jeshurun, who rideth upon the heaven in thy help, and in his excellency on the sky. The eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath arc the everlasting arms: and he shall thrust out the enemy from liefore thee; and shall say, Destroy them.” (Deut. 33:26,27) Those who desire so to do may choose another for their god and take the consequences, but the faithful will be wholly devoted to Jehovah God. Jehovah now calls to the would-be gods of the enemy for a final show-down. This truth he caused Moses to speak, and now the time has come to settle the great issue and God’s chosen people must declare his purpose and his judgments.
29	There are not several Jehovahs, each having a different will and a different work. There is but one God. The remnant now see and appreciate their divinely-given privilege of proclaiming the name of the one and only true Jehovah God, and this they do with gnat gladness of heart. As it was said to natural Israel in Moab so now the Greater Moses, Christ Jesus, says to the spiritual Israelites gathered to the temple: “Hear, 0 Israel: The Lord our God is one Lord: and thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. And these words, which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart.” (Dcut. G: 4-6) The true and faithful saints worship the one and only true God, and this is the first commandment, that is, first in time, and first in importance, as Jesus declared. (Mark 12: 29, 30) This first commandment is made a part of the covenant for the kingdom. Jehovah alone must be worshiped, above all else. (Deut. G: 1-8) The people taken out from the nations for his name must be ‘holiness unto Jehovah’, meaning that they must be entirely devoted to Jehovah God, and that they shall not tempt Jehovah, nor shall they compromise with the enemy and his organization, because such will not be tolerated by Jehovah.—Dcut. 6:16; Matt. 4: 7.
30	The things enjoined upon natural Israel by the covenant at Moab arc now required of those in the covenant for the kingdom, to wit, Jehovah must be served with joy, and not with complaining, else a curse shall fall upon those failing to properly serve him. (Deut. 28:47) Sacrifices unto him must be unblemished ; hence there must be no compromise with or mixing of the things and practices of the Devil’s organization with the work of Jehovah, such as man worship, this being the “sin of Samaria”. Manifestly God’s purpose is that his people must knowingly, willingly and joyfully be entirely devoted to him. (Deut. 16:21,22) The service of Jehovah must be rendered at the place which he has chosen to put his name, which means in his organization, of which Christ Jesus is the head. (Deut. 16:10-17) Anyone who thinks he is in line for the kingdom and insists
June 15, 1934
WATCHTOWER.
185
cn going his own way and not observing and walking with God's organization is violating this rule of the kingdom.
81	Tithe, which is the tenth part, symbolically represents all one has and which must be given for the temple service and must be presented at the place of his name, that is to say, at his organization. (Deut. 26:1-19; 12:6; 14:22-29) ‘’Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and prove me now herewith, saith the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it.” (Hal. 3:10) There must be unity of worship and service at God’s temple, the place of his name, (l)eut. 12:5-18; 16:1-17) Those toward whom the new covenant is inaugurated were gathered into the temple and taken into the covenant for the kingdom and are at unity with Christ, and they must all continue in unity in faithfulness and service. Individual desires or opinions are not at all to be considered. They having become members of God’s organization, individuality of creatures ceases and any opinions held by them contrary to God’s expressed will are wrong. The first thing to be considered is what is the will of God, and all in the covenant for the kingdom must joyfully and harmoniously and obediently respond to his will. Those who take a different course, and hence a lawless course, are certain to be gathered out of the kingdom. Only those who maintain their integrity, continuing in unity and in faithfulness in Christ, will shine forth as the sun when the others are gathered out. (Matt. 13:41-43) Their all must be and will be wholly devoted to Jehovah.
HIS PROPHET
32	It was in Moab that Moses first divulged Jehovah’s promise to raise up a Prophet of whom Moses was merely a shadow or type, (Deut. 18:15-19) Not until the bringing of the remnant into the temple was the truth revealed to them that Christ Jesus alone is that great prophet, foretold by Moses. (The Watchtower, 1933. pages 147-153) The preeminence of Jehovah’s prophet is foretold in the words recorded in Deuteronomy in connection with the covenant made there. (Deut. 34:10-12) Therefore those to whom the Greater Moses is sent are in a position of far greater responsibility than the people of natural Israel were ever in. The remnant, now being informed of the great issue that is to be settled, and being in the covenant for the kingdom, see that there can be no compromise with any part of Satan’s organization, but that the remnant must be unreservedly and absolutely devoted to and obedient to Jehovah and his great Prophet. The Greater Moses prepared the way before Jehovah, then came straightway to the temple and gathered unto himself the saints of Jehovah, and then brought into the covenant for the kingdom those who had up to that point of time proved their faithfulness.
Thereafter the Greater Moses, Christ Jesus, as Jehovah’s instrument began to unfold to the remnant the meaning of prophecy, and it becomes a matter of choice for them to choose between Jehovah’s great Prophet and Servant or the Devil’s mouthpiece and representative. Many who think they represent God are in fact Satan’s dupes and instruments. As many of the natural Israelites became unfaithful, even so now there are those who are in line for the kingdom who become unfaithful, and these unfaithful ones fail to give heed to the Greater Prophet. Those in line for the kingdom who now fail or refuse to render wholehearted and loving obedience to Christ will come to a disastrous end.—Deut. 18:13-19; Acts 3: 19-23.
33	The death of Moses did not take away leadership from Israel, because Joshua succeeded him and led the Israelites into Canaan. Concerning the kingdom covenant foreshadowed by the covenant made at Moab, the invincible leadership by Jehovah’s great Prophet, Christ Jesus, is guaranteed to the remnant. These faithful ones are entirely and fully assured that if they abide in the temple and faithfully and joyfully obey God’s great Prophet, they shall be brought through with complete victory to the praise of Jehovah’s name. This victory is not by what they do, but it is the victory of Jehovah accomplished for them by Christ Jesus as his great instrument and for the honor and vindication of Jehovah’s great name.—1 Cor. 15:57.
34	Christ Jesus, the Greater Moses, is conducting judgment at the temple according to the will of God. Uis promise is that those taken into the covenant with him for the kingdom shall sit with him in the judgment of the twelve tribes of Israel. This must mean primarily all of those who go to make up the spiritual Israelites, that is to say, spirit-begotten ones, out of which the royal house is taken. From this promise of the Lord it is reasonably proper to conclude that the faithful resurrected saints, gathered unto Zion first, are having some part in the judgment, the details of which are not revealed to us. The question then is, Do those still remaining on earth, that is, the faithful remnant, have any part in this judgment ? and the scripture appropriate to this question is: ‘‘Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the hearts: and then shall every man have praise of God.” (1 Cor. 4:5) The Lord, the great Judge, has come, and he has caused the faithful who are taken into the covenant for the kingdom to sit with him in heavenly places, that is to say, in the temple. It is therefore the time for judgment, and it seems clear that the work of the remnant who are yet on earth in connection with the judgment is that of declaring the judgments of Jehovah already written, and thus they have a part in the judgment. The name of Jehovah now must be made known; his vengeance must be declared; but it is the faithful remnant, constituted his
183
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
witnesses, that are permitted to make proclamation of these truths. The remnant are not to pass upon the guilt or innocence of any individual, but they are to declare the law or rules of Jehovah’s judgment, •which apply to the obedient and to the disobedient. In this manner those in the covenant for the kingdom are now having a part in the judgment work according to the will of the Lord. Jehovah’s judgments are already written, and his saints gathered unto him are commissioned to declare, and must declare, his judgments. This they do with songs of praise, and Jehovah takes pleasure in their faithfulness in performing their duties in this respect. Concerning this it is written by God’s prophet: “For the Lord taketh pleasure in his people: he will beautify the meek with salvation. Let the saints be joyful in glory: let them sing aloud upon their beds. Let the high praises of God be in their mouth, and a two-edged sword in their hand; to execute vengeance upon the fnations], and punishments upon the people; to bind their kings with chains, and their nobles with fetters of iron; to execute upon them the judgment written: this honour have all his saints. Praise ye the Lord.’’ (Ps. 149:4-9) Jehovah discloses to his faithful ones his will concerning them.
(To be continued)
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
T 1. What is the kingdom licio referred to, and what is its purpose?
H 2-4. In relation to the covenant for the kingdom, explain the proplietie position (a) of David. (b) Of the covenant Moses made with the children of Israel in the laud of Moab.
H 5-7. Who of the children of Israel were taken into the covenant in Moab, and whom did they foreshadow J Who wore excluded from that covenant, and why! Whom did these, and Jmias, foreshadow!
H 8, 9. Point out the order of Jehovah’s judgment as pro
phetically indicated in the record at Deuteronomy 33:2, and compare with Jude 14-16. Explain what was foreshown in the ‘■imagination’’ and ‘‘rebellion’’ manifest in the Israelites even when at Moab.
$ 10-13. Show how fitting was the prophetic song spoken by Moses on the plains of Moab.
IT 14, 15. Show that the Scriptures emphasize the importance of faithfulness. Why is it of so great importance I
H 16, 1". Just what was required of those in the covenant made in Egypt and confirmed at Sinai? Of those in tire covenant made in Moab? Compare with the requirements of those in the covenant for the kingdom.
T 18-20. What is shown in the fact that animal sacrifice and the sprinkling of blood are made foremost in the divine record of Leviticus and Numbers but not so in making the covenant in Moab' Give further proof that the covenant made in Moab pietuicd the covenant for the kingdom.
H 21. State the law of lev irate marriage as given to Israel. Wliat was its purpose then, and its application as a prophetic picture!
V 22, 23. Explain Deuteronomy 29: 4 in its application at the time when spoken; also, together with Deuteronomy 32: 3, as a prophecy fulfilled. Apply Deuteronomy 32:26,27.
H 24. Point out the impoitance at the piescnt time of the rule expressed in Deuteronomy 12: 5-8.
? 25-27. Explain Deuteronomy 32:4,5, as fixing responsibility for crookedness, lawlessness or corruption on the part of any of the piofessed people of God. How will God deal , with the lawless? With the obedient? Why?
K 28-30. Point out tho importance to Israel of the statement made to them as reeoided at Deuteronomy 6: 4-G, and its great impoitaneo to spiritual Israel now. That also of Deuteronomy 33 : 26, 27.
31. Explain the symbolism of the “tithe”, and apply Malachi 3: It).
D 32. Where and on what occasion was it first made known that Jehovah would raise up a prophet greater than Mose;,! Point out the fulfilment of that promise. Compare the responsibility of natural Israel with that of those to whom the Greater Moses is sent. What of the faithfulness of natural Israel? Of those under leadership of the Greater Prophet?
U 33. What provision was made for leading the Israelites from Moab to Canaan? What was foreshadowed therein concerning the kingdom covenant?
K 34. Based upon scriptures hero considered, what is the reasonable conclusion as to the present position and privilege of the faithful resuriected saints and ot the faithful remnant on earth in connection with the judgment v,oik now in progress?
THE PATIENCE OF JOB
AFFLICTION and suffering which arc being endured by many who live upon earth today are closely related to the bitter experiences of Job, concerning which we read in the ancient Hebrew Scriptures.
For many long centuries Satan has been the god of ■this world. His chief purpose has been to blind men to the truth of God’s Word, lest any such should see God’s purpose and learn the true way to life. (2 Cor. 4:3-6) To accomplish this purpose he has used his entire organization; but the chief among the members thereof have been and are the religious leaders. These have been and are now supported by the principal of their flock, made up of the elite, the ultrarieh and the professional politicians. Such men have posed and still pose as the representatives of God, while willfully practicing fraud and deceit upon the people. The
clergy or preachers have assumed great piety and selfrighteousness. They have made the big property owners and the professional politicians the chief ones in their congregations. These proud and haughty ones have received special favor. They have been held before the ‘common herd’ as examples of God’s favor. The preachers have set them forth as examples to be followed, and by this means many of the poor and ignorant and superstitious ones have been brought into the religious organizations and induced to lay their small earnings at the feet of the hypocrites. When the rich and the selfish politicians have seen fit to make war on others, the preachers have harangued the common people and told them it is their duty to give their life and everything they have to support and maintain and fight for a selfish organization.
These religious frauds have not spoken to the poor
June 15, 1934
fffie WATCHTOWER
187
people about God’s gracious purpose of redemption and how he would bring life to the obedient ones by resurrection and the kingdom blessings. On the contrary, they extolled the virtues of men, called them men of character, and advised the poor in the church system to develop a character and grow like the great men and thereby work out their own salvation, and by this means to assure themselves a place in heaven or the unseen condition.
These false loaders and would-be comforters have urged upon the people the patriotic support of unrighteous rulers. They have told them that patriotism means the unqualified support of the men who are really their oppressors. By this means they have induced the poor to spill their own blood in defense of the Devil’s organization. The common people have been told by these three elements that unless they join themselves with the religious systems and support them earnestly the great God, for whom these claim to speak, will consign all who fail so to do to hell or torment eternal in duration.
To be sure, the great Jehovah God foreknew the cruel and wicked system that Satan would create and organize and carry on to deceive men and to turn them away from the true God. He foreknew that the most wicked instrument in that system would be the religious element that would assume to speak in the name of God. He foreknew that these would be and arc hypocrites, and would practice subtlety and hypocrisy. He knew that they would be aided and upheld and supported by the rich and professional politicians operating the governments, and that thereby the masses of people would be held under the supervision, power and control of Satan, the wicked one. God permitted the three men, who claimed to be Job’s comforters, to be used to foreshadow that wicked organization. God also foreknew that amongst all of those vile and subtle influences of Satan’s organization there would be a few men who would maintain their confidence in Him and would be faithful to him regardless of all persecution and suffering that might be heaped upon them. This class he would picture by Job.
God used Abraham and his descendants to make a picture concerning his purpose of vindicating his name by the “seed” of promise, through which seed also the blessings would come to mankind. Now he would use Job to make a picture showing the battle of mankind against the evil power and influence of Satan, and showing how in due time God would bring forth a class of men who would resist the Devil, trust absolutely in God, joyfully avail themselves of the good offices of the great Redeemer and the Almighty, and receive life everlasting. The picture made by Abraham and his descendants had to do more particularly with those who have faith like unto that of Abraham. The picture of Job is wider in scope, because it pertains to the entire human race and proves that God’s ultimate blessing to suffering humanity is life everlasting on earth through the great Redeemer and
minister of the kingdom favors. With this view’ of the picture in mind, consider now some parts of the argument indulged in by Job and the three frauds who claimed to speak in the name of God but who really spoke for the enemy.
Doubtless Satan reasoned that the long and hypocritical stare of the three pious frauds would produce such a torture upon Job, and so increase his sufferings, that Job would curse God. What could be more tantalizing to a suffering one than to be compelled to sit for days the object of the constant gaze of a self-righteous “bunch” of hypocrites? Satan was using this subtle method to overcome Job. Again he was doomed to defeat. The long silence was broken by Job’s pronouncing a curse upon the day of his birth, but not one word of reproach against God. He did not complain of what he had lost, but he appealed to God that his I;fc might end and that his sufferings might be done. “And Job spake, and said, Let the day perish wherein I was born, and the night in which it was said, There is a man child conceived. Let that day be darkness; let not God regard it from above, neither let the light shine upon it. Let darkness and the shadow of death stain it; let a cloud dwell upon it; let the blackness of the day terrify it.” (Job 3:2-5) Then Job adds that, had he never been born, now he would be quiet and free from suffering. “For now should I have lain still and been quiet, I should have slept: then had I been at rest.”—Job 3:13.
Fully realizing that God had given him life and that it was God’s entire right to take it away he only asked that his suffering might end in death. How well do these words of Job represent the condition and thoughts of many men w’ho have suffered affliction. Conscious of the fact that they have tried to do right, yet suffering great bodily pain and mental anguish, they have wondered why they were ever born, and they long to rest in death. Not knowing of God’s purpose of redemption and blessing, they have prayed that their sufferings might cease and that they might rest in the grave.
Then, in response to Job, Eliphaz the Tcmanite speaks. Esau, or Edom, from whom Eliphaz descended, always represented the Devil’s organization. Esau pictured the class that persecutes the true servants of God. Eliphaz now docs the same thing. Mark the hypocritical and subtle words that fall from his lips. “If we assay to commune with thee, wilt thou be grieved?” (Job 4:2) Was that professed friend there to comfort Job? Had he been, then he would have told Job that his affliction and suffering had come upon him by inheritance because of the sin of Adam. (Ps. 51: 5; Rom. 5:12) He would have told Job that his relief would come in God’s due time through the ministration of the great Redeemer whose lifeblood would provide the price to lift the curse from men. He made no mention of that to Job, but rather magnified his own importance and that of his two fellow frauds. Look now at the conditions that have long
188
THe WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N.Y.
existed, and that which has been taught to the people by the Devil’s organization, represented by the three professed friends of Job.
Do the leaders of that satanie organization, who claim to speak in the name of God, tell suffering humanity that such suffering is by reason of inherited sin committed by Adam, who yielded to the Devil? Do they tell them that God is the only true and mighty One, and that he has made provision through the death and resurrection of Jesus his beloved Son to redeem mankind from death and the grave? Do they tell the people that in due time God, through Christ, will give a fair trial for life to all mankind, and that the obedient ones shall then be restored to health, happiness and life everlasting on earth?
No! Far from that! The clergy even deny hereditary sin. They deny that the blood of Jesus is the great redemptive price for man. They vehemently deny the great truth of life on earth through resurrection and the kingdom. They go in the very opposite direction. They magnify their own saintliness and point with great pride to the very “saintly” preachers who have gone before them, and they bid suffering humanity to follow their example. The Devil well knows that honest men despise hypocrites or those who pose as holy within themselves, lie well knows that honest men turn away from the God whose professed representatives thus teach, and Satan’s hope has been to turn men away from God.
Eliphaz reminded Job that at one time he had instructed many and strengthened many feeble knees, and that now calamity had come upon Job and because of fear he quailed and cried. Then with the manifest purpose of reminding Job that his suffering was due to the direct judgment of God against him because of his own wickedness, he said to Job: “Remember, I pray thee, who ever perished, being innocent? or where were the righteous cut off? Even as I have seen, they that plow iniquity, and sow wickedness, reap the same. By the blast of God they perish, and by the breath of his nostrils are they consumed.”—Job 4:7-9.
That statement of Eliphaz was a lie. How many clergymen have boldly stated that the suffering of men. is directly the judgment of God upon them because of failure to pay their vows to him through the church systems! How many clergymen have even refused a decent burial of the dead, because neither the dead nop their living friends had supported their unrighteous organization! Satan, the father of such falsehoods, has put them forth through his agents for the purpose of inducing men to curse God. Many men have declared that if that is the kind of God we have, they want nothing to do with him. A few have rc-fused to believe in the words of the clergy, and have
yet held confidence in God and his mercy and loving-kindness.
Then Eliphaz magnified before Job his own greatness and wisdom, by declaring to Job that he had a vision from the Lord and from which he had received much knowledge in secret. At the time of that vision he heard a voice saying to him: “Shall mortal man be more just than God? shall a man be more pure than his 'Maker ? Behold, he put no trust in his servants; and his angels he charged with folly. How much less in them that dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust, which arc crushed before the moth?”—Job 4:17-19.
Eliphaz’ speech was that mortal man cannot be justified, and that only God afflicts man and there is no appeal. Manifestly Eliphaz’ statement, originating with Satan, was false and intended to turn Job against God. He then claims that God charges his angels with folly, the purpose of Eliphaz being to discredit God in the mind of Job. The leaders of “Christendom”, so called, have always falsely misrepresented God, and have told the suffering people that he is harsh and cruel and that those who die outside of their church systems are doomed to eternal torment without mercy, and that there is no appeal that can bo made by those who are outside of the church.
Then Eliphaz, seemingly in derision, says: “Call now, if there be any that will answer thee; and to which of the saints wilt thou turn? For wrath kill-cth the foolish man, and envy slayeth the silly one. I have seen the foolish taking root: but suddenly 1 cursed his habitation. His children arc far from safety, and they arc crushed in the gate, neither is there any to deliver them.” (Job 5:1-4) That was not much comfort to Job.
Then, that this hypocritical comforter might stress his own greatness and high standing with God, and with mockery in his words, he says: “Yet man is born unto trouble, as the sparks tly upward. I would seek unto God, and unto God would I commit my cause; which doeth great things and unsearchable; marvellous things without number.”—Job 5:7-9.
Job recognized and acknowledged the greatness of God, but he received torment instead of consolation from the words of Eliphaz. In agony Job cried out: “Oh that I might have my request; and that God would grant me the thing that I long for! Even that it would please God to destroy me; that lie would let loose his hand, and cut me off! Then should I yet have comfort; yea, I would harden myself in sorrow: let him not spare; for I have not concealed the words of the Holy One.” (Job 6:8-10) Yet Job cursed not Jehovah God. With true patience, or steadfastness in that which is right, he maintained his integrity toward God.
ALL the paths of Jehovah are mercy and truth veto such as keep his covenant and J:ts testimonies. The secret of Jehovah is with them that fear him; and he Kill show them his covenant.—david.
CORRUPTING OF CHRISTIANITY
ROME was in ancient times a great world power of which Satan was then (even as he still is) the god. (2 Cor. 4:3,4) It was in the fourth century that this great world power adopted the Christian religion as the religion of the state or government. Thereby the Devil succeeded in having the people call themselves by the name of God and of his Christ and at the same time constantly bring reproach upon the name of the Lord, and in fact represent the Devil. To show how stealthily and fraudulently the Devil overreached the people and turned their minds from the true God the following is quoted from the history entitled "Old Itoman World":
"In the second century there are no greater names than Polycarp, Ignatius, Justin Martyr, Clement, Meli to and Apollonius, quiet bishops or intrepid martyrs, who addressed their Hocks in upper chambers, and who held no worldly rank, famous only for their sanctity or simplicity of character, and only mentioned for their sufferings and faith. We read of martyrs, some of whom wrote valuable treatises and apologies; but among them we find no people of rank. It was a disgrace to be a Christian in the eye of fashion or power. The early Christian literature is chiefly apologetic, and the doctrinal character is simple and practical. There were controversies in the church, and intense religious life, great activities, great virtues, but no outward conflict, no secular history. They had not as yet assailed the government or the great social institutions of the empire. It was a small body of pure and blameless men, who did not aspire to control society. But they had attracted the notice of the government and were of sufficient consequence to be persecuted. They were looked upon as fanatics who sought to destroy a reverence for existing institutions.
"In this [second] century the polity of the church was quietly organized. There was an organized fellowship among the members; bishops had become influential, not in society, but among the Christians; dioceses and parishes were established; there was a distinction between city and rural bishops; delegates of churches assembled to discuss points of faith or suppress nascent heresies; the diocesan system was developed, and ecclesiastical centralization commenced; deacons began to be reckoned among the higher clergy; the weapons of excommunication were forged; missionary efforts were carried on; the festivals of the church were created; Gnosticism was embraced by many leading minds; catechetical schools taught the faith systematically; the formulas of baptism and the sacraments became of great importance; and mona-chism became popular. The church was thus laying the foundation of its future polity and power.
“The third century saw the church more powerful as an institution. Regular synods had assembled in the great cities of the empire; the metropolitan system was matured; the canons of the church were definitely enumerated; great schools of theology attracted in
quiring minds; the doctrines were systematized [that is, defined, limited, and formulated into creeds and confessions of faith], Christianity had spread so extensively that it must needs be either persecuted or legalized; great bishops ruled the growing church; great doctors [of divinity] speculated on the questions [philosophy and science falsely so called] which had agitated the Grecian schools; church edifices were enlarged, the banquets instituted in honour of the martyrs. The church was rapidly advancing to a position which extorted the attention of mankind.
“It was not till the fourth century—when imperial persecution had stopped; when [the Roman emperor! Constantine was converted; when the church was allied with the state; when the early faith was itself corrupted ; when superstition and vain philosophy had entered the ranks of the faithful; when bishops became courtiers; when churches became both rich and splendid; when synods were brought under political influence; when monachists [monks] had established a false principle of virtue; when politics and dogmalies went hand in hand and emperors enforced 1he decrees of [church] councils—that men of rank entered the church. When Christianity became the religion of the court and of the fashionable classes, it- was used to support the very evils against which it originally protested. The church was not only impregnated with the errors of pagan philosophy, but it adopted many of the ceremonies of oriental worship, which were both minute and magnificent.
"The church became, in the fourth century, as imposing as the old temples of idolatry. Festivals became frequent and imposing. The people clung to them because they obtained excitement and a cessation from labor. Veneration for martyrs ripened into the introduction of images—a future source of popular idolatry. Christianity was emblazoned in pompous ceremonies. The veneration for saints approximated to their deification, and superstition exalted the mother of our Lord into an object of absolute worship. Communion tables became imposing altars typical of Jewish sacrifices, and the relics of martyrs were preserved as sacred amulets. Monastic life also ripened into a great system of penance and expiatory rites. Armies of monks retired to gloomy and isolated places, and abandoned themselves to rhapsodies and fastings and self-expiation. They were a dismal and fanatical set of men, overlooking the practical aims of life.
“The clergy, ambitious and worldly, sought rank and distinction. They even thronged the courts of princes and aspired to temporal honors. They were no longer supported by the voluntary contributions of the faithful, but by revenues supplied by the government, or property inherited from the old [pagan] temples. Great legacies were made to the church by the rich, and these the clergy controlled. These bequests became sources of inexhaustible wealth. As wealth increased and was intrusted to the clergy, they
iso
190
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
became indifferent to the wants of the people—no longer supported by them. They became lazy, arrogant and independent. The people were shut out of the government of the church. The bishop became a grand personage who controlled and appointed his clergy. The church was allied with the state, and religious dogmas were enforced by the sword of the magistrate.
“An imposing hierarchy was established, of various grades, which culminated in the bishop of Rome.
“The emperor decided points of faith, and the clergy were exempted from the burdens of the state. There was a great Hocking to the priestly offices when the clergy wielded so much power and became so rich; and men were elevated to great sees [bishoprics], not because of their piety or talents, but their influence with the great. The mission of the church was lost sight of in a degrading alliance with the state. Christianity was a pageant, a ritualism, an arm of the state, a vain philosophy, a superstition, a formula.”
Satan the enemy was, of course, at all times in control of Pagan Rome. The religion of that world power was the Devil’s own religion. lie now adopted hypocritically the Christian religion; his world power took on the name of Papal Rome, having a visible representative under the name and title of “pope”, who claimed to be the representative of the Lord Jesus Christ but who in fact was the representative of the Devil, whether he knew it or not. Millions of good people were deceived by this hypocritical move. Probably many of the clergy were deceived, but surely some of them were not deceived. The pope presumptuously assumed to rule as the visible representative of Christ. For a thousand jears Papal Rome held sway over the nations of the earth; and, though deprived of her temporal power in A.D. 1800, she yet exercises a tremendous power amongst the governments of earth.
During all this period of time the papal system has quoted the words of the apostle Peter (1:2:9), which read: “But ye arc a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should shew forth the praises of him who hath called you out of darkness into his marvellous light,” the papal system claiming to be the chosen people there mentioned by the Lord. But we see that this claim is absolutely false. The nation mentioned by the inspired apostle is a holy nation; and instead of the Roman empire’s being holy and the Roman church’s being holy there have been some of the blackest crimes of history committed in the name of and by that system.
Some God-fearing men protested in the name of Christ against the wicked reign of this system. Wyc-liff, Huss, Luther and others made an open warfare against the papacy. The result was the Protestant denominations, called the Protestant church, organized in the name of Christ. These denominations, of course, contained many good, God-fearing men; but it was only a matter of time until Satan overreached these. These Protestant systems have organized them
selves into real political companies. It has been well said that the Methodist denomination is one of the strongest political organizations in the world.
These various denominations have deemed it their business and commission to convert the world, and therefore think it necessary to bring into their denominations the rich and the influential. They have opened the doors to such and have made them the principal ones of their flocks. They havfc' organized the clergy, as distinguished from the laity; and tin sc clergy meet in councils and synods and control the system or denomination, and use it for political purposes. They make themselves a part of the world and claim that their denominations constitute God’s kingdom on earth.
Speaking to such James says: “Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity with God? whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world is the enemy of God.” (Jas. 4:4) The word “adulterer” here used does not refer to a lack of chastity between the sexes, but it means an illicit relationship between church and the world of which Satan is god. It means that these ecclesiastical systems have made friendship with Satan’s organization and have entered into an alliance with the commercial and the political powers of the world; and all together they constitute the visible part of Satan’s organization, which is designated in the Scriptures under the title and symbol of “beast”.— Rev. 13:1.
And now in more modern times these ecclesiastical systems, claiming to represent the Lord, are presided over by a class of clergymen who call themselves “modernists”. It is admitted that the modernists are in the majority in numbers among the clergymen. A modernist is one who denies the Biblical account of man’s creation, denies man’s deflection and sentence to death, denies the great ransom sacrifice of Jesus Christ and, of necessity, denies the Lord’s kingdom.
God foreknew that the ecclesiastical systems, Catholic and Protestant, in the name of Christ would be overreached by the Devil and used for his purposes, as a part of his organization. Through his prophet Jeremiah (2:21-25) God stated: “Yet I had planted thee a noble vine, wholly a right seed; how then art thou turned into the degenerate plant of a strange vine unto me? For though thou wash thee with nitre, and take thee much soap, yet thine iniquity is marked before me, saith the Lord God. How canst thou say, I am not polluted, I have not gone after Baalim [the Devil]? Sec thy way in the valley, know what thou hast done; thou art a swift dromedary traversing tier ways; a wild ass used to the wilderness, that snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure; in her occasion who can turn her away ? all they that seek her will not weary themselves; in her month they shall find her. 'Withhold thy foot from being unshod, and thy throat from thirst: but thou saidst, There is no hope: no; for I have loved strangers, and after them will I go.”
June 15, 1934
Gfie WATCHTOWER.
191
The prophet here shows, in harmony with the facts as wc see them, that eeelesiastieism has turned into the degenerate plant of a strange vine, that she has become polluted, that she has gone after Baalim, the Devil religion; that she has been in the valley, between the jiolitieal and financial elements of the Devil’s organization; and, like the characteristic trait of a dromedary or a wild ass, she illicitly runs after the ultrarieh and the ultra-influential,
that she might have the plaudits of men and the honor that the world could bring to her. Ecclesiasti-eism did not get this from the Lord God, but it was the result of falling under the influence of Satan the Devil. Hence the Word of Jehovah God plainly declares that eeelesiastieism must be utterly destroyed at the battle of Armageddon, -which is near at hand, in order that his glorious name and his infallible word may be cleared and vindicated before all creation.
LETTERS
UNITY OF JEHOVAH'S PURPOSE
Mv deir bikjthi::: Kl'TIIWuokd:
At this time, just when you are back again in Brooklyn, personal letters must be something of encroachment on yon. But I venture to send you a line in a way to welcome you back, and saying that I hope you are welt Your life is strenuous, and there must be much work which will call for attention as soon as you are on the spot.
Yesterday the Watchtower of April 15 came in, with its second article on the covenants. As L read it, following up the first article, Mary's words of exultation came into my mouth, “My spirit hath rejoiced in (Sod my Saviour,’’ because of tho full exposition of this matter, so clearly set forth. These two articles are like the opening up of a highway where before there had been only somewhat intricate nairow roads which led nowhere in particular. The fact that there was so much controversy about the new covenant was evidence that the last word had not been said. But the clear setting of this matter in these two articles cariies evidence of finality,because tho unity of the purpose of Jehovah is so clearly shown. What is yet to come in the ‘to be continued’ is looked for with expectancy, but with fullest confidence that the highway will lead into the fullest light. One has the feeling that tho Word of God is yielding up its last rich treasures, though certainly it is not a mine which is being exhausted.
The truth is the Lord’s, as you so constantly remind us; but one may thank him not only for the truth but for the instrument he uses to break the bread to and for his people, and I thank him for you and your service at this time.
liver with much love, I am
Your servant in him,
J. Hemery, London.
HEARD IN SOUTH AFRICA
Los Angeles Broadcast: First things first! I experienced the greatest thrill of my life early Monday morning when 1 heard the full hour's program from Los Angeles verbatim. I have repeatedly tried to pick up the big hook-ups on the best sets available in Cape Town, but always without success. But on Monday morning from 1: 30 to 2: 30 it was not merely a question of getting reception, but every word came through us clearly as though you had been speaking in the same room. It was thrilling beyond words, and as the climax of each talk was reached and the resolution was read and the great audience at the Shrine Auditorium shouted “Aye’’ in response, the brethren who listened with me and I were almost overcome with joy. It was a real pleasure to join in that great chorus of “ayes’’ which probably was heard in many parts of the earth. The station from which we got reception was W2XAF (Schenectady 31.46 meters). The explanation, of course, was, the time was just right for us to pick up that station and the weather conditions were favorable. From 6: 30 p.m. (the hour of your broadcast Eastern Standard Time) to 10:30 p.m. is the best time for us to pick up American signals. I do hope that it will be possible for you to annnge subsequent big chain broadcasts at the same hour. We had no sleep that night, but we will gladly do without a night's rest at any time to have a repetition of Sunday evening’s experience.
The companies were all notified beforehand and we arranged to give as much publicity as possible to the broadcast. Tele
grams received from the brethren indicate that reception was good throughout the country wherever brethren had suliieient-ly powerful sets to pick up America. Kimberley, Bloemfontein, Johannesburg and other towns have all reported excellent reception. I think this is the first time your voice has been heard diiect in this country. I hope the day may yet come when wa will be able to see you as well as hear you! I enclose a letter received this morning from Bloemfontein. It is tin- first lefter we have received at the office from this gentleman, and he, as yet, is not on our files. Be apparently has seen the advert in the local newspaper.
Geo. It. Phillips, South Africa.
19 First Street, Bloemfontein, South Afiiea, 26th March 1934.
Watchtower, Cape Town.
Dear Sir,
I have pleasure in informing you that I picked up Station W2XAF Schenectady this morning at 1: 30 n.m. on my 16 valve Mid-West machine and heard Judge Rutherford’s great message.
The reception was excellent, very distinct and of great educational value. Although the judge spoke rather fast, each word was clear and a message in itself. At the end of his hour’s address I found myself joining in saying “Aye’’ as being in favor of his remarks.
Kindly let me know when Judge Rutherford will be on tho air again.
Wishing Jehovah’s witnesses every success,
Yours faithfully,
Alex. C. Pe;-ters.
OPENS OUR EYES TO HIS SECRETS
Dear Brother Rutherford:
The report for our studies at Helsinki Bethel in April, 1934, is following:
“Satisfied with Thy Likeness” was the first of our articles, with its wonderful news. That Bible text, so many times lead, is now quite new and brings us surprisingly near the Laid. It is so, that we of oursehes do not see anything, although we stand in the midst of glorious things, before the I.md opens our eyes to his secrets. Praised be his glorious name. The oilier article studied was “His Name”, first part. Also it shows most interesting fulfilments of prophecy and diav.s us close to the last tremendous happenings, when God deliveis His people and all creatures from bondage. All these explanations have thrilled our hearts ami help us better to serve him.
There have been at the studies: April 3, 15 persons; 10th, 9; 17th, 13; and 24th, 13.
Our daily prayer before the throne of grace is. tliat our dear Lord may give you strength to continue in his service with that vigor with which you have done it until this time by the Lord’s help. We all send our hearty Christian gieetings.
Your little brother by His grace,
Hero Nironen, Secretary.
192
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
POSSIBILITIES BOUNDLESS
Dear Brother Rutherford,
A company of the ‘remnant-servant’ in service assembly at Portsmouth, England, desire to place on record theii heartfelt gratitude to Jehovah for the gracious privilege of hearing for the first time in these Isles your inspiring message, “His Organization,” by electrical transcription.
Every one present is thrilled to have this personal message, a message so clear and positive, making plain beyond all question of doubt that we are engaged in the greatest cause under the sun. Truly the commawls of Jehovah to his people in these days are mandatory and absolute, not optional or discretionary, and we are determined to obey these commands, not as unto man, but as unto Jehovah himself, the Head of this glorious organization.
The possibilities of the transci iption work are boundless, and we praise Jehovah for such provision. Well may it be that as we draw nearer to the final battle, and the forces of Gog become more savage and subtle in their attacks, it will not even be safe to set down in print some of the war commands from Jehovah; yet the Arm of the Mighty Warrior is not shortened, for by the electrical transci iption you may speak direct to the members of the ‘remnant’, and thus defeat the Devil and any of his attempts to hinder the work.
Daily we remember you befoie Jehovah’s throne of grace, knowing that the prayers of a righteous man (the remnant)
hath much power. Hence, with full assurance of faith and hope, we continue on with our brethren everywhere the onward march that leads to victory and the vindication of Jehovah’s name.
With warm love in Jehovah’s name, The Service Assembly, Portsmouth, England.
TO SERVE ACCEPTABLY
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Only a few days ago I received your gift, the Year Book, and 1 thank you so much and am rejoicing as I read this . wonderful report of how the Lord is so marvelously prospering his kingdom message to the vindication of his own name. Wools cannot express my deeply felt appreciation for your address to the remnant Sunday, as we were assembled at our contact point. Our loving Jehovah God always supplies the needful assistance at just the proper time. We surely do need to be strengthened and encouraged at this particular time, when Satan is using every subtle means to discourage and deceive the remnant.
May the Lord bless you and strengthen you, that you may be able to direct, aid and comfort us, that we may ail be able to serve acceptably in the army of Jehovah our God.
Yours in Jehovah’s service,
Rosella Millington, Pioneer.
SERVICE APPOINTMENTS
T. E. BANKS
W. J. THORN
Nashville, Tenn......July	3,4
Clarksville. Tenn......”	5, (J
.lack.son, Tenn........”	7,8
Memphis, Tenn..........”	10, 11
Trumann, Ark...........”	12,13
Wabbaseka, Ark........."	14, 15
Tinker. Ark..........July 17,18
Redfield, Ark..........."	111,20
Ford.vre, Ark...........”	21,22
Parkdale, Ark...........”	24,25
Momoe, Lu............” 20,27
Newellton, La..........."	28,20
Morrisville, Vt......July	1
Lyndonville, Vt.......’’	3
Derby Line. Vt.........”	4
Lakeport, N. II.........”	6
Elkins, N.H...........’•	7,8
Manchester, N. H........"	10
Nashua, N.H............July	11
Leominster, Mass........  ”	12,13
Orange, Mass.............”	14
Greenfield, Mass.........”	15, 1G
Pittsfield, Mass.........”	18, 19
Springfield, Mass...... "	20,21
G. H. DRAPER
McLaughlin, S. Dak.	July	3
Meadow, S. Dak........”	4
Vale, 8. Dak..........”	5
Lead, 8. Dak..........”	6
liapid City. 8. Dak...”	7
Marrin. S. Dak........”	8
Sent tsbluff, Nebr.....”	10,	11
Bushnell, Nebr. .......	”	13
Sidney. Nebr..........”	13
North Platte. Nebr, .... ”	14,15
McCook, Nebr............”	17
Mullen, Nebr. ........July	19
Sargent, Nebr..........’’	20
Li tv hlield, Nebr......”	21
Lexington, Nebr........’!	22
Wood River, Nebr........”	24
Grand Island, Nebr..*' 25,20
Hastings, Nebr..........”	27
Fail num t, Nebr........”	28
York, Nebr..............”	29
David City, Nebr........”	31
Columbus, Nebr........Aug.	1
G. Y. M’CORMICK
Grandview, Wash......July	3
1’ros.ser, Wash........”	4
Walla Walla. Wash......”	5
Pendleton, Oreg........”	G
Hermiston, Oreg........”	7
Wallowa. Oreg..........”	8
Dayton, Wash...........”	10
Pomeroy, Wasli.........”	11
Colfax, Wash...........”	12,13
Spokane, Wash......” 14,15
Whitehall, Mont.....July 17
Kalispell, Mont.........”	18
Pablo, Mont.............”	19
Hamilton, Mont..........”	20
Deer Lodge, Mont........”	21
Butte. Mont.............”	22
Great Falls, Mont.......”	24.25
Lewistown, Mont.........”	2'1,27
Billings. Mont.........."	28,29
Red Lodge, Mont.........”	31
S.
Kinston, N. C.......July
Mount Olive, N.	C..”
Hayne, N. C.......'...’’
Magnolia, N. C......."
Wilmington, N.	C..”
Arlington, S. C......”
Camden, S. C.........”
Columbia, 8. C......’’
Cope, S. C..........."
Augusta. Ga...........”
Chappells, 8. C......”
H. TOUTJIAN
3	Greenwood, S. C	July	18
4	Abbeville, S. C. 		”	19
5,6	Anderson, S. C	”	20
7	Union, S. C	"	21
8,9	Great Falks. S. C	”	22
11	Gaffney, S. C	”	21
12	Spartanburg, S. C	”	25
13	Taylor, S. C	  ”	2G
14	Greenville, S. C	”	27
15	Athens, Ga	”	28, 29
17	Young Harris, Ga	”	31
J. C. WATT
J. C. RAINBOW
Farmington, Minn.....July	3
Faribault, Minn........”	4
Waterville, Minn.......”	5
Eagle Lake, Minn.......”	G
Rochester. Minn.......”	7, 8
Austin, Minn...........”	10
Ostrander, Minn........”	11
VVlialan, Minn.........”	12
Wabasha, Minn..........”	13
River Falls. Wis......."	14
Glenwood City, Wis.	.. ”	15
Prairie Farm, Wis......"	17
Conrath, Wis.........July	IS
Stanley, Wis...........”	19
Katt Claire, Wis.......”	20
LaCrosse, Wis..........”	21
Black River F's, Wis. ”	22
Necedah. Wis...........”	24
Loval. Wis.............”	25
Withee, Wis...........’’	20
Mosinee, Wis. .........”	27
Wausau, Wis.............”	28, 29
Three Lakes, Wis......”	31
Bev ent, Wis.........Aug.	1
Hawesville,	Ky....July	3
Owensboro,	Ky......”	4
Henderson,	Ky.....’’	5
Providence.	Ky......"	6
Elizabethtown, Ky......”	7
Hodgenville, Ky........”	8
Campbellsville, Ky.....”	10
Eubank, Ky.............”	11
Bobtown. Ky............”	12
Harlan, Ky............’’	13
Siuitlisboro, Ky......’’	14
Dunham, Ky...........July	15
Garrett, Ky............”	17
Auxier, Ky.............”	18
Paintsville, Ky........”	19
Barnetts Creek, Ky....”	20
Craney, Ky.............”	21
Ashland, Ky.............”	22, 23
Huntington, W. Va......”	25, 2G
Pliny, W. Va. .........”	27
Charleston, W. Va. ___”	28, 29
Elkview, W. Va.........”	31
QTie WATCHTOWER.
Published Semi-Moxtitxt By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street • Brooklyn, N. Y., U. S.A. OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford President W. E. Van Ambvecii Secretary "And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children. "-Isaiah 54:13.
II IE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting,the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of creation and his active agent in the creation of r 11 that the Logos is now the Loid Jesus Christ in glory, with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created tho earth for man , created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that nun v. iKully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners ar.d without tho right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce tho ransom or redemptao price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divino and exalted him to heaven above every creatuie and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH'S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is tho Chief Officer thereof ami is tho rightful King of tho world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are childien of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, decline his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and tho Lord Jesus Ch’ist has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of tho peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ which has now begun; that tho Lord’s next gre it act is the destruction of Satan's organization and the establishment of righteousness in tho earth, and that under tho kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall be restored and live on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
BIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling tho people to know Jehovah God and 1 is purposes as exp:e~~ed in the Bible. It publishes Bible irmtruci 10:1
specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witness,3. It arrang'j systematic Bible study fur its renders and supplies other lit* r-ature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means ot public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres sthetly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organiz.ations. It is wholly and without reservation for tlio kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his Beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in th- light of tlm Scriptures. It does not indulge in. cuutroveisy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
VniteD States, $1.00; Canada and MisCelv.vncous ronmi.-r, ¥1.50; Gii-at Britain, Australasia, and Swih Africa, 7:.. American remittances should bo made by Express or Do-Jal Aim'* v Order, or by Bank Draft. Canadian, BritiUi, South African a.i l Australa-ian remittances should bo inado direct to tho re=.pecth branch ofiicos. Remittances from countries other than those mm-tiomd ronv be rondo to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British • . ........ 31 Craven Terrace, London. W. 3, Englaril Coaodiaii ...........-10	Irwin Avenue, Toronto, < nl.irlo, C.mm'.i
Auslrala«ia» . . 7 Beresford Bead, StriithlioliJ, N. S. W., Au.-ir.l'a South African . . . . Boston House, Capo Town, South Afri-a J’leaso address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
AH sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the Milismption pn o may hare The IVatchtoircr free upon written npi'ihatbm to tho publishers, made once each year, stating the re1 -on for so requesting it, V.o are glad to tints aid tho needy, but the written application onie each year is re.piired by tho postal re.-ulallor Notice to Suhscribcrs: Acknowledgment of n now or n renewal subscription vi ill bo sent only wl'-n requested. C'ii.imro of arl<lr< -, when requested, may be exi>eeted tn appear on address label witliui one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice <>f < 'o!,*.iiioni will be sent with the journal ono month before the snb-et >pt)on expire. Entered as Second Class Mail Matter at Brooklyn, N. V., Bostof'cc.
Act of March S, H13.
LONDON CONVENTION
August 31 to September 3 inclusive are the days for a convention of Jehovah's witnesses at London, England. The convention will be held at the Alexandia Palace, the pul-’ic meeting be'ng in tho large hall at Alexandra Palace, Sunday, September 2, The forenoon of each day will be devoted to field service; afternoon and evening meetings for tie’ interest" I. Those contemplating attending the London convention should address Convention Committee, 3-1 Craven Terrace. London, W. 2, England. The president of the Society expects to attend this convention and addieso the public.
“EF.YGND TRE GRAVE" AND "UIS WORKS”
Jehovah now blesses his faithful witne-ses and all [ eople of good will with two new potent instruments for use iu his service, to wit, two new booklets entitled 11-.yoticl the Grate and U is Works, respectively. The cover design of each is attractive and invites the beholder to a pctusal of the contents of :'..e booklet: there are also fitting illustrations within. Ail, Jtl.o-vah’s witnesses and Jonadabs alike, who desire to put th- .e excellent messages in the hands of the people may now obtain a supply ami 'begin the distribution thereof immediately. The usual contribution of 5c a copy will be accepted therefor.
“THE NATIONS’ HOPE” TESTIMONY PERIOD
A period of nine days has been specially designated us ‘‘The Natious’ Hope” Testimony Eviiod. This begins v.bli June ,ai rind concludes with July S. Puring this period ot nine <1 ,ys Jehovah’s witnesses will have tho privilege of di-‘tnbutin■> a new booklet, World coi ti >/.’ All people of good vviil me invited to join with Jehovah's witnesses in tho proclamation of this good news of the kingdom. To have a part in the giving of this witness is a blessed privilege.
FACTORY AND OFFICE CLOSED FOK FIELD SERVICE
Each year the Society closes the factory, office rind Betnel home for two weeks to give the brethren here an opportmuly to get away from their regular rmiline and (ng,age 111 lie; fold service. This rear the faetoiy and home will be clised ti-uu July 21 until August Ij. Puling tins time no mail will be attended to, and no shipments made. All readers of The II <tte si-tower should please take note and older sufficient Iileratuie to carry them through this period and two weeks lolb.'.'.ing. It will greatly f.ieilitute mantis it not too much eoric-poi.ilem e is received immediately after reopening the fuetoiy, except, of course, regular service leports and any rush 01 de- ' er 01 her uigent multi is Consider-ble nmil accumulates in tie Tix' be-ctiuse of responses to radio lectures, and we hope this can be given immeiiia’e attention without being delayed by mail th.it could have waited.
Vol. LV	July 1, 1934	No. 13
HIS COVENANTS
PART 7
“The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him; and he ivill shew them his covenant.’’—Ps. 25:11.
JEHOVAH’S covenant is his will or purpose expressed in his Word and states the means employed by him to put his will into force and effect.
His covenant is not his “plan”, because it would be inconsistent for the Almighty One to make a plan. Ilis purpose is certain to be accomplished, and he chooses his means of bringing about the accomplishment thereof. The purpose of Jehovah is a secret, and therefore hid from all creatures who fail to have an appreciation of man’s insignificance and of the goodness and supremacy of Jehovah. The man who does not fear God cannot have a proper appreciation of the relation of the creature to the Creator. Fear does not mean merely respect, honor and reverence for God. It means much more than that. The man who realizes that God is all-powerful and that He cannot look with approval upon anything that is unrighteous, and who learns and appreciates that all men arc imperfect and of themselves could not stand before God and live, such a man then begins to fear God, and that is the beginning of wisdom. He must have some knowledge of God before he can start in the way of acquiring wisdom. The man who fears God desires to learn concerning God’s will and then to do it. The more he learns, the more man appreciates the fact of the imperfections of the creature and the inability of the creature to stand before the great Creator. He continues then to grow in godly fear. In this attitude of mind a man is in position to be taught and to choose the right way. “What man is he that feareth the Lord? him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose. ’ ’ (Ps. 25; 12) It is to such humble-minded and obedient ones who continue to fear God, and who seek to know him, that God reveals his purpose or his covenant. Any' man impressed with his own importance does not fear God and is not in position to learn and to appreciate God's purpose or his covenant. God’s promise, therefore, is that he will show his covenant to those that fear him. He has kept this promise, as the facts abundantly prove.
2	The Israelites had seen the exposition of God's power when he. led them out of Egypt. Time and again thereafter he showed them his power and his lovingkindness,.but only a few of the Israelites had a proper fear of and devotion to Jehovah God. It was upon the plains of Moab that God caused Moses to say to the Israelites: “For Jehovah thy God is a devouring fire.” (Dcut. 4: 24. A.lt.V.) To those toward whom the new covenant is inaugurated, and who arc brought into the covenant for the kingdom, the words are repeated by the apostle: “For our God is a consuming fire”; and for this reason the apostle adds: “Let us have grace [gratitude and pureness of heart and devotion to God], whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear.”—Heb. 12:28,29.
3	The Israelites in Moab were a typical people, and the spiritual Israelites taken out from the nations for Jehovah’s name are an antitypical people, and to the latter the rules of Jehovah, announced to govern his organization, are unbending and unalterable. These divine rules must be obeyed, and woe is unto him who fails or refuses to obey. (Dent. 28 -. 58) Jehovah's will, and therefore his covenant, not only is expressed but is now revealed and continues to be revealed to those in the covenant for the kingdom and who faithfully and joyfully serve the kingdom.
* As the Lord spoke to natural Israel in Moab, so now he says to those in the covenant for the kingdom: ‘The secret things [not yet revealed] belong unto Jehovah our God, and the things that are revealed belong to us and our children, if we do all the words of this law.’ (Ueut. 29: 29, Itolh., margin) Jehovah God does not require of his children the doing of impossible things: “For this commandment v.hieh 1 command thee this day, it is not hidden from thee, neither is it far off. But the word is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou mayest do it. See, I have set before thee this day life and good, and death and evil.” (l)eut. 30:11,14,15) Increased responsibility, therefore, falls upon all who have been brought into the covenant for the kingdom, and necessarily curses are incorporated in the terms of the covenant for those who willfully disobey, (l)eut. 27:1-8, 13-26; 28:15-68; 29:16-29) The statement concerning the curses or punishments is not made to terrify one into obedience, but to warn against what to avoid.
156
Tile WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
(Der.t. 28:58) Jehovah has taken out a people for his own great and holj’ name, and he cannot and will not permit these to be contaminated by the Devil’s organization and at the same time continue in Jehovah’s organization. In this connection he announces his blessings upon those who do obey from a pure heart. (Deut. 30:1-10) The curses upon Israel would be pronounced from mount Ebal, meaning “unfruitful”; and the blessings from mount. Gerizim, meaning “rocky”, that is, the Great Dock, from whom all blessings flow.
s The fact that Jehovah made the curses and the blessings so prominent in that covenant at Moab shows not only that Jehovah would bring to those in line for the kingdom a full knowledge of the consequences of whichever course they might choose to take, but that Jehovah would also make plain to the faithful the subject of and concerning the “evil servant” class, as well as that of the “faithful and wise servant” class, disclosing the sharp contrast between them. Not only that, but that he would cause the sins of the “evil servant” class to be boldly pronounced or cried out by his faithful witnesses on the earth : “Cry aloud, spare not; lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and shew my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins.” (Isa. 58:1) The great Judge, Christ Jesus, is now sitting in judgment, and those gathered unto him and into the covenant for the kingdom participate, in this, that they announce the judgments, which have already been written. (Ps. 1-19:5-9) 7’Ac Watchtower could not render faithful service to the Lord without calling attention to the “evil servant”, “the man of sin,” “the son of perdition,” and to God’s rules relating to the same, and also to the wrongful course of those who serve God’s people for a selfish reason,, such as the “elective elder” class. The Watchtower docs not publish these truths for the purpose of criticism or holding up mon to ridicule, but only for the sake of Jehovah’s name in obedience to his commandment.
6	At the time of entering into the covenant by sacrifice, each one agreed to obey the will or commandment of God, and this fact must be kept constantly before the a+tention of his people. This is made sure and mandatory by the words of the Lord God spoken at Moab. (Deut. 6: 6-9; 11:18-21; 27:1-8) The covenant made at Moab required that the terms and rules thereof must be read publicly to the Israelites in the place (organization) chosen by Jehovah. (Deut. 31: 10-13) Thus is foretold the necessity that the rules concerning the covenant for the kingdom be kept constantly before God’s people that they may learn the requirements thereof. “Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things which we have heard, lest at any time we should let them slip.” (Heb. 2:1) “Wherefore I will not be negligent to put you always in remembrance of these things, though ye know them, and be established in the present truth. 2 Pet. 1:12.
T In times past the holy spirit was the comforter and helper of God’s people, and those brethren supposed to have the spirit of the Lord acted as teachers of the consecrated : but now, since the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple, Jehovah God and his Great Prophet, Christ Jesus, are the Teachers, and these are no longer pushed into the corner, but arc. clearly discerned by the faithful, and the faithful ones receive knowledge and understanding from the Word of God revealed to them through the Head of the temple organization. In making the covenant at Moab, which foreshadowed the kingdom covenant, the earth as wdl as the heavens is called to be a witness thereto. (Deut. 30:19) This shows that the kingdom covenant and matters pertinent thereto must be published on earth to others than those in the covenant, that they may know what is coming to pass. It is the covenant or purpose of Jehovah that must be declared, and no one must add to or take from that expressed purpose as set forth in his Word.—Deut. 4:2; 12:32; Rev. 22:18,19; Prov. 30:6.
8	This present time, therefore, is a day of deliberate decision, with full responsibility resting upon tho.-e who have been brought into the eovenant for the kingdom. (Dent. 11:26-28) It is to those who now faithfully and joyfully serve God at the temple to whom Jehovah reveals his secrets, as these secrets become due to be made, known. Learning these secrets, that is to say, getting an understanding of God’s purpose concerning those in the temple, the kingdom class or company must go forth to make proclamation toothers.
REMNANT BROUGHT IN
9	It is when Jehovah’s saints are gathered together unto him at the temple and when the new covenant is inaugurated toward them, and hence when Zion has brought, forth her ‘other children’, that the remnant of God’s people on earth arc brought into the kingdom covenant. This was foreshadowed by the words spoken to Israel in Moab, to wit: “Take heed and hearken, O Israel; this day thou art become the people of the Lord thy God.” (Deut. 27:9) Jehovah then separates his people from others for the reason and in order “that thou shouldest enter into covenant with the Lord thy God, and into his oath, which the Lord thy God maketh with thee this day: that he may establish thee to day for a people unto himself, and that he may be unto thee a God, as he hath said unto thee, and as he hath sworn unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob”. (Deut. 29:12,13) Thus Jehovah shows that the people taken out from among the nations and taken into the kingdom covenant are taken in to accomplish his purpose, to wit, that they may be used in connection with the vindication of his name. He bringing these into the temple, the garments of salvation and the robe of righteousness are laid upon the obedient ones that they may be fully identified as the people of God in his righteous organization, gathered unto him according to his purpose.
July 1, 1931
Tile WATCHTOWER.
137
"That he might preserve us alive, as it is at this day. And it shall be our righteousness, if we observe to do all these commandments before the Lord our God, as he hath commanded us.” (Dent. 6:24,25) For the comfort of those who are now in the covenant for the kingdom, and who are diligent to obey God's commandments, he says: “Happy art thou, 0 Israel: who is like unto thee, a people saved by Jehovah, the shield of thy help, and the sword of thy excellency! And thine enemies shall submit themselves unto thee; and thou shalt tread upon their high places.”—Deut 33:29. A.ll.V.
10	The remnant in the kingdom covenant are of the “chosen” ones of Jehovah. (Deut. 4:7,8,20,32,38) In times past they were not a people, but, now being taken out and anointed, they are the people of Jehovah for his name. (1 Pet. 2:9,10) The selection of those, and their induction into the kingdom covenant, is not due to any self-righteousness or so-called “character development” by the creatures, but is due to Jehovah’s faithfulness to his covenant, and for the vindication of his word and name. They are taken out for his name’s sake and approved because of their faithfulness and obedience. Failure of God’s professed people who have been called and who fail must be received as a warning, so that “let him that think-eth he standeth take heed lest he fall”.—1 Cor. 10: 12,13.
11	The Israelites had been led by the Lord for forty years, and were therefore not ignorant. Even so in 1919, the remnant were then not an ignorant people, but were acquainted with God’s past dealings with the faithful and also the rebellious ones during the period of ‘preparing the way before the Lord’; and this was foreshadowed by the Moab covenant.—Deut. 11:1-9.
12	Jehovah by the Moab covenant, that is, the covenant of faithfulness, foretold that he would give the remnant a new name, and that they must be a holy people devoted entirely to the service of Jehovah and serve him faithfully. (Deut. 26:18,19; 28:10) The remnant must ‘know therefore this day [that is, the day of Jehovah] that Jehovah is God’; hence they are responsible for making this great truth known and they must render full obedience to God in bearing testimony to the truth. (Deut. 4:39,40; 29:5,6) Obedience assures their remaining in the “land of the living”. (Deut. 5:33; 11:21) The covenant made in Moab emphasizes faithfulness; hence it is properly called the covenant of faithfulness.
13	Jehovah's great goodness toward and his loving provision for the remnant is made known in that covenant of faithfulness. (Deut. 8:2-5; 29:5,6) Therefore he plainly intimates that the remnant once in captivity to Satan’s organization shall be fully released and restored to God and made a part of his holy organization. (Deut. 30:1-8) Only the faithful continue in the privileges of service, and the privileges once enjoyed by those who have become unfaith
ful are. transferred to the faithful ones; and this is foretold by the covenant of faithfulness. (Dent. 32: 21) In harmony with this Jesus spoke the parable of the talents.—Matt. 25:14-30.
14	In that covenant in Moab God looked forward to the time when he would bring unto himself his children, and this was also foreshadowed by Esther and Huth, and that that class represented by them would be included in the covenant for the kingdom; and it is now seen that God has fulfilled this beautiful prophetic picture.—Deut. 29:14,15 ; 32: 43.
REQUIREMENTS
15	In that covenant at Moab Jehovah foretold his requirements of the remnant. They must be a sepr.rale people, and not conformed to this world.—Deut. 12:29-32; 16:21,22: 18:9-14.
1G	They must not commit adultery; and adultery of spiritual Israelites means chiefly illicit relationship with Satan’s organization. There must be none of this with God’s people. They are not even to touch the unclean thing, that is, Satan's organization. (Deut. 22: 13-30) They are not to compromise with the world, but must be wholly for God and for his kingdom.— Deut. 7:1-5; 12:1-3.
17	They shall not depend upon worldly help, but must lend the truth to all who desire it. (Deut. 15: 6) They must maintain their integrity toward God, which will be tested by their consistent praise to Jehovah or reproach upon his holy name. (Deut. 29:24-28) Jehovah has spread a feast for his royal organization, and the faithful remnant are caused to sit with Christ Jesus at his table and partake of that feast, and hem e must partake only of clean food that comes from flic Lord's table, and not be found seeking after the thines of men. (Deut. 14:1-21) They must faithfully abide by the terms of the everlasting covenant concerning the sanctity of life. (Deut.21:1-9) Among the remnant people at the temple there must be no usury, no injustice, no cheating, nor acts causing unfruilfulness. (Deut. 25: 11-16) Then: must be no oppression or defrauding amongst them, but generosity toward the poor and helpfulness one toward another.—Deut. 22: 1-8.
1S	Those taken into the kingdom covenant must not confuse their identity. They must not be effeminate, nor must they wear improper garments to attract attention to themselves. They must give glory to Jehovah. (Deut.22:5-12) They must all come to the condition of unity in Jehovah’s organization and be obedient to organization instructions, which instructions proceed from the temple. Being at unity, they will have confidence one in another and seek always to do good one to the other. Further showing that each one must be obedient to the instructions proceeding from the temple: they shall no longer do “every man whatsoever is right in his own eyes”, but observe order and proceed with the work assigned to them, offering their sacrifice of praise to Jehovah. (Deut. 12:8-14) Let all of the remnant now beware lest they fail because
198
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
of their headiness or their desire to follow their own ideas as to how God’s work should be done. The service of Jehovah must be at his chosen place where he put his name, which is his temple organization. That service must be regularly and faithfully performed, and in the manner he has pointed out. (Deut. 12:18-28; 14:23-27 ; 26: 1-3) The sanctuary having been cleansed, the remnant must continue in complete unity. The condition of the remnant must be that of great boldness in declaring the truth. Christ Jesus, being Jehovah’s great Priest, bestows the blessings upon those in the covenant. (Deut. 33: 6-29) After the time they are brought into the covenant and after the year 1926 it is a time of blessedness. (Dan. 12:12; sec The Watchtower, 1929, page 375) The faithful remnant will have complete confidence in Jehovah and will not fear the enemy; for Jehovah is their refuge.—Deut. 33:26-29,
10	That the remnant must now know and thus intelligently declare the judgments of the Lord, the book of Deuteronomy, written in connection with the Moab covenant, clearly reveals the “evil servant” and contains direct prophecies concerning the “evil servant” and that the ‘‘evil servant” class will be put to flight by the enemy and taken captive. (Deut. 32:15-27,30, 31) Jehovah will judge them. (Deut. 32: 34-38; Zech. 14:2) The covenant of faithfulness also shows that the faithful remnant will have nothing in common with the “evil servant” class, but will avoid them and refuse to engage in controversy with them.— Deut. 33:11.
WAR
20	Jehovah caused those with whom he made the covenant in Moab to fight against the Amalekites and Canaanites, foreshadowing that the faithful remnant must now carry on an aggressive warfare against those who now “stand in the holy place” and who arc enemies of God. (Deut. 20:10-17) Such enemies, falsely and fraudulently claiming to represent God, must be pushed back relentlessly and exposed by the truth. (Deut. 7: 22-24) Jehovah gave battle instructions and the method of war that was to be carried on by his typical people. (Deut. 20:1-20) The remnant are instructed in the matter of warfare against the enemy and, trusting in the Lord, must bravely follow the specific instructions siven them by the Lord. (Deut. 7: 22-24) The faithful remnant, being in the army of the Lord, arc not to fear the attack of modern entrenched enemies, the representatives of Satan. (Deut. 7:17-21) The faithful will tread down the opposition and continue to advance, even though there is much inconvenience and suffering entailed upon them by reason of their faithfulness. They must fearlessly continue to proclaim the praise of Jehovah, to announce his judgments and his kingdom. Jehovah God is in their camp, and they must keep the camp clean and wholly devoted to Jehovah. (Deut. 23: 9-14; 31:1-S) The complete unity of Jehovah’s remnant, and their
continuance in faithful performance of service with singing and joy, strikes terror into the heart of the enemy; and this was foretold by the covenant made in Moab.—Deut. 2:25; 11:25; Phil. 1:27-29, lVei/»i.
21	Jehovah is the God of his righteous people whom he designates as Jeshurun, and they are the people of God. They have been separated from all of Satan’s organization, instructed in the secret things of the Most High, receiving this instruction in the secret place or the temple, and now they are sent forth to boldly declare his name. Such are the people of God who are in the earth, and who are now in the covenant for the kingdom. These requirements and blessings foreshadowed in the covenant for the kingdom were written aforetime to increase the comfort and hope of God’s faithful people. (Rom. 15:4) Particularly for their comfort and that they might be made strong Jehovah caused to be written for the benefit of the faithful remnant these precious words: “There is none like unto. God, O Jeshurun, who rideth upon the heavens for thy help, and in his excellency on the skies. The eternal God is thy dwelling-place, and underneath arc the everlasting arms. And he thrust out the enemy from before thee, and said, Destroy. And Israel dwelleth in safety, the fountain of Jacob alone, in a land of grain and new wine; yea, his heavens drop down dew. Happy art thou, O Israel; who is like unto thee, a people saved by Jehovah, the shield of thy help, and the sword of thy excellency! And thine enemies shall submit themselves unto thee; and thou shalt tread upon their high places.”—Deut. 33:26-29, A.R.V.
RELATIONSHIP
22	The one paramount purpose of Jehovah is the vindication of his name, that all creation may sec and know that he is God and that if creatures would live they must be in harmony with him, the Holy One. Therefore all the covenants of Jehovah bear a relationship to each other. When Lucifer rebelled and turned man into the way of sin Jehovah declared that he would put enmity between the seed of the woman (God’s woman; picturing his organization) and the seed of Satan, and that the seed of God’s woman should ultimately triumph to the vindication of God’s great name. (Gen. 3:15) That declaration was in fact a covenant of Jehovah, because it was an expression of his purpose, which purpose is unalterable and unchangeable. Christ Jesus, the seed of promise, will completely triumph over Satan and his organization, to the glory of Jehovah God.
23	The everlasting covenant which God made with Noah concerning the sanctity of life was a declaration of his purpose showing to all creation that Jehovah is the Life-giver, the only true and Almighty God, and that none have a right to take life without the permission of Jehovah and that no other can give life. This covenant is a vindication of Jehovah’s holy name. —Gen. 9:1-12.
July 1, K'Jl
ttz WATCHTOWER,
199
24	Jehovah took Abraham into the land of Canaan and there used Abraham to picture God himself, and Abraham’s wife to picture God’s organization, and their son Isaac to picture the ‘Seed of promise’, whom God would use as his vindicator. The blessings of the people that should come to them through the Vindicator and Redeemer would necessarily be incidental to the vindication of Jehovah’s name, as effect resulting from cause, for the reason that life to the obedient would prove that Jehovah's name stands for life and that he can put men on earth who will maintain their integrity toward him and receive life in his appointed way. Jehovah did not permit Satan to kill Job when that great drama was being staged. (Job 2: G) Had Job been killed he could not have been further used in that prophetic picture. The offering of Isaac as a sacrifice by Abralmm foreshadowed that God would permit his beloved Son to be put to death at the hands of Satan and that Jehovah would demonstrate his supreme power and the vindication of his own name by raising his beloved Son out of death. That was a triumph to Jehovah and a vindication of his name. God provided that the death of Christ Jesus, his beloved Son, should furnish the ransom or redemptive price for man; but that goodness and loving-kindness toward mankind is secondary to the vindication of Jehovah’s name. All who do believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and obey him, and who receive life, will be a vindication of Jehovah’s name and his word.
23	The Abrahamie covenant is therefore God’s unalterable anil unchangeable expression of his purpose to produce a seed, which seed is his beloved Son, and who would maintain his integrity toward God, and who because of his faithfulness unto death should receive the highest place in all of his organization, be made the great High Priest of Jehovah and the Vindicator of his holj’ name. The resurrection of Jesus from death, his exaltation, and the giving to him of a name above all creation, and the declaration of Jehovah that every knee shall bow to him and every tongue shall confess his name, to the glory of God, is proof conclusive that the primary purpose of the Abrahamie covenant is to show that Jehovah is the only true and almighty God, the Giver of every good and perfect gift. His provision to give life to the obedient ones of the human race through Christ Jesus is of secondary importance to that of the vindication of his name. There is no reason why Jehovah should make a covenant to give life to any creature, but there is every reason why he should covenant, that is to say, express plainly his purpose, to vindicate his name; and such is the purpose of his covenant.
26	Jehovah then set the stage in Egypt to make a picture showing forth his purpose to vindicate his name. (2 Sam. 7:23) Uis gathering to himself and separating to himself a people is not merely for the purpose of saving them, but that he might have a people for his name; and his salvation of them de
pends upon their obedience in the performance of the duties assigned to them. Before he would bring forth the ‘Seed of promise’ Jehovah pictured how he would take out a people for his name, and this he did with the covenant made in Egypt and ratified at Sinai. The imperfect and sinful nation of Israel could not be a people wholly for Jehovah’s name until the coming of the promised Seed; therefore the law covenant was added “because of transgressions [that is to say, imperfection and sin], till the seed [Christ Jesus] should come to whom the promise was made”. (Gal. 3:17,19) Isaac, the son of Abraham, was a type of Christ Jesus, the beloved Son of God, and who is the ‘Seed of promise’, lie must come before there could be a people taken out for Jehovah’s name.
27	When Christ Jesus did come the few Jews who were faithful and who accepted and obeyed his Word were transferred from Moses, the mediator of the law covenant, to Christ, and all the other Israelites were rejected and cast away. Jehovah made with Christ Jesus the new covenant that by this means he would accomplish what the old law covenant had failed to do, to wit, to take out from the nations a people for his name, which people must be wholly devoted to (tod. The new covenant was the expressed will or purpose of Jehovah that he would take out of the nations a people for his name, and that covenant is the means employed by Jehovah to accomplish his purpose. The new covenant is not a means of giving life to anyone, but those taken into the covenant must first have a conditional right to life, and, if faithful to the Lord, they receive unconditionally everlasting life. This faithfulness must be proved after they are taken into the new covenant. All who are brought into the new covenant must first unconditionally agree to do the will of God, basing their faith and their action upon the shed blood of Christ Jesus as the redemptive price for man, and being the only means by which man can get life. Being thus justified by faith and then begotten of the spirit of God, all such come under the terms of the new covenant, and those proving faithful up to the point of the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple for judgment, and who are approved at that, judgment, are of the people taken out of the nations for Jehovah's name, and the new covenant is there inaugurated toward them, and these are taken into the covenant for the kingdom.
28	Jehovah God made a covenant with David for the kingdom. (2 Sam. 7: 1G) In that covenant David foreshadowed or pictured Christ Jesus, whom Jehovah made King. “I have made a covenant with my chosen, I have sworn unto David my servant, Thy seed will I establish for ever, and build up thy throne to all generations. My mercy will I keep for him for evermore, and my covenant shall stand fast with him. Uis seed also will I make to endure for ever, and bis throne as the days of heaven. My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips.” (Ps. 89:3,4,28,29,34) Here is the immutable deelara
200
JJKe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
tion of Jehovah’s purpose to establish his kingdom with his beloved Son on the throne. Later Jesus told his disciples that Jehovah had covenanted with him for the kingdom and that those taken out for Jehovah’s name, and who continue faithful, Jesus covenanted with them to be a part of the kingdom and in the kingdom with him. (Luke 22:28-30) The new covenant was therefore Jehovah’s means employed to take out a people for his name that those so taken out and proving faithful might be taken into the covenant for the kingdom and become a part of the kingdom.
20	In Moab Jdiovah made.the. covenant with his chosen people who had been brought out of Egypt forty years previously, and that covenant in Moab foreshadowed the covenant for the kingdom. Jesus, made of a woman and under the law, was not a son of the law’, but he was and is the Son of God. lie kept the terms of the covenant made at Moab, and Jehovah made him the great Prophet, whom Moses was used to foreshadow. Further showing the relationship between the covenant made in Moab and the kingdom covenant, when Jesus was being put to the test by Satan he quoted from God’s words recorded by Moses in the book of Deuteronomy. When the integrity of Jesus was called in question by Satan, he quoted Deuteronomy 8:3. “But he answered and said, It is written, Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proeeedeth out of the mouth of God.” (Matt. 4:4) In the second temptation Jesus quoted from Deuteronomy 6:16. “Jesus said unto him, It is written again, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God.” (Matt. 4:7) When the other temptation was presented to him by the Devil, Jesus quoted from Deuteronomy 6:13. “And Jesus answered and said unto him, Get thee behind me, Satan: for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.” (Luke 4:8) On other occasions Jesus quoted the words of the prophecy recorded in Deuteronomy, and amongst these will be found, to wit, Matthew 5:31,33,38, and Mark 10:4. When Jesus spoke the words concerning the gathering of God’s elect he clearly had in mind the words of Moses recorded in Deuteronomy 30:4.—Matthew 24:31, and Mark 13:27.
30	The relationship of the law covenant made in Egypt and inaugurated at Sinai to the covenant of faithfulness made in the land of Moab well foreshadowed the relationship of the new covenant made in antitypieal Egypt and inaugurated at Mount Zion to the covenant for the kingdom, which latter covenant requires absolute faithfulness on the part of those who will ultimately share in the kingdom of Christ Jesus. (Dcut. 29:1; Luke 22:14-20.28-30, Ding.) At the institution of the Memorial Jesus declared to his disciples that the new covenant had been made and he invited them to share in it, and then and thereafter he told them that Jehovah had covenanted with him
for a kingdom, and his words to his disciples show that faithfulness is the chief thing required of those who are brought into the covenant for the kingdom. The new covenant is the instrument of G’od employed to take out of the world a people to be his witnesses to his name; while the covenant for the kingdom is his preparatory arrangement affording opportunity’ to those taken into the covenant and who are Jehovah’s witnesses to prove their faithfulness even unto death. —Rev. 2:10.
31	The relationship of the new covenant to the Abrahamie covenant and the covenant for the kingdom seems to be clearly foreshadowed by the ephod and breastplate of the typical high priest serving natural Israel. “And they shall make the ephod of gold, of blue, and of purple, of scarlet, and fine twined linen, with cunning work. It shall have the. two shoulderpieces thereof joined at the two edges thereof; and so it shall be joined together. And the curious girdle of the ephod, which is upon it, shall be of the same, according to the work thereof; even of gold, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen. And thou shalt take two onyx stones, and grave on them the names of the children of Israel: six of their names on one stone, and the other six names of the rest on the other stone, according to their birth.”— Ex. 28:6-10.
32	Aaron the high priest bore or had suspended from his shoulders the ephod. The forepart of the ephod pictured the Abrahamie covenant. The rear half of the ephod seems to clearly picture the new covenant, into which God’s children are brought after they have made a covenant by sacrifice and which covenant is made at the time of their consecration. (Ps. 50:5) The new covenant is the definite means employed to gather out from the nations a faithful company of people who by adoption become a part of the seed of the Abrahamie covenant.
33	Concerning the breastplate of judgment it is written : “And thou shalt make the breast plate of judgment with cunning work; after the work of the ephod thou shalt make it; of gold, of blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, and of fine twined linen, shalt thou make it. Foursquare it shall bo, being doubled; a span shall be the length thereof, and a span shall be the breadth thereof. And thou shalt set in it settings of stones, even four rows of stones: the first row shall be a sardius, a topaz, and a carbuncle: this shall be the first row. And the second row shall be an emerald, a sapphire, and a diamond. And the third row a ligure, an agate, and an amethyst. And the fourth row a beryl, and an onyx, and a jasper: they’ shall be set in gold in their inclosings. And the stones shall be with the names of the children of Israel, twelve, according to their names, like the engravings of a signet: every one with his name shall they be according to the twelve tribes.”—Ex. 28:15-21.
34	This breastplate, which bore the jewels, repre-
Juxw J, 1934
WATCHTOW ER.
201
scnted the covenant for the kingdom, to which kingdom the spirit-begotten ones are called, and in which kingdom the faithful share with Christ Jesus, Jehovah’s King and great High Priest. Those taken into the covenant for the kingdom must be wholly devoted to Jehovah, even as the inscription engraved upon the plate of pure gold worn on the miter of the High Priest declared ‘Holiness to Jehovah’. Such arc the ones who are Jehovah’s faithful witnesses, who advertise the King Eternal in his kingdom and who prove their faithfulness unto death and enter fully into the inheritance of the kingdom.—Zech. 9:16.
M The law covenant made in Egypt was added to the Abrahamie covenant for a purpose and for a fixed time, but failed to produce a people for Jehovah’s name that might have been made a part of the seed of the Abrahamie covenant; hence it was abolished. Immediately upon that law covenant’s becoming old the new covenant was made, and this was Jehovah’s instrument added to or attached to the Abrahamie covenant; and by the new covenant a people for Jehovah’s name are brought forth and made his witnesses to declare his name, and the faithful ones are the ones taken into the covenant for the kingdom. Israel’s high priest bore the ephod and breastplate by clasps on his shoulders holding the two parts of the ephod together. Even so the great High Priest of Jehovah, who is Christ Jesus, the priest for ever after the order of Melchizedcc, bears the charge of the Abrahamie covenant, the new covenant, and the kingdom covenant, all of which are Jehovah’s instruments employed to accomplish his purpose. On the shoulder pieces of the ephod, to clasp the two parts together, were two onyx stones engraved with the names of the twelve tribes, and these were set in ouches of gold. Thus was foreshadowed that the twelve divisions or tribes of spiritual Israel, who are the people for Jehovah’s name, constitute the link between the Abrahamie covenant and the new covenant. It is therefore clearly made to appear that all the covenants are Jehovah’s covenants and his instruments used to accomplish his will or purpose, and that the hidden or secret things concerning that purpose are made known to those who fear him and who faithfully7 and joyfully obey him. The greatest of all things thus revealed is of and concerning the holy name of the Most High, which he will now fully vindicate.
QUESTIONS
30	Some appropriate questions may here be considered with profit and aid in obtaining a better understanding of the covenants of Jehovah; hence the question is propounded, and the answer immediately follows.
37	Question : Which one of the covenants of God is the everlasting covenant?
Answer : All unilateral covenants made by Jehovah arc everlasting, for the reason that such constitute
the declaration by Jehovah himself of his purposes and Jehovah does not change his purposes. (Mal. 3: 6) All covenants between Jehovah and his creatures are everlasting so far as Jehovah is concerned.
38	Question : Is it Scriptural to say that the Abra-hamic covenant is the Sarah covenant, and that such covenant produces the seed of promise?
Answer: No, the Scriptures nowhere speak of a “Sarah covenant”. In the Abrahamie covenant Abraham stood for or represented Jehovah God himself; hence what is called the Abrahamie covenant is the expression of God’s purpose, and that without conditions attached, to bring forth a seed through which all the families of the earth may be blessed. Jehovah bound that declaration by his oath, and, as the apostle states, by reason of both his word and his oath this promise or covenant is immutable. (Heb. 6:18) Abraham was the father, or life-giver, of Isaac, who typified the seed, which seed is God’s Son. God’s woman is not his covenant, but the woman stands for or represents God’s organization. Christ Jesus, the seed of promise, is the seed of God. The covenant does not produce a seed, but Jehovah by his woman, picturing his organization, does bring forth the seed.
39	Question: Is the church the offspring or seed of the new covenant or the Abrahamie covenant?
Answer: The new covenant docs not bring forth a seed, but it does bring forth a people for the name of Jehovah whom Jehovah uses as his witnesses, and those who are in the new covenant and prove faithful he adopts into the royal house of God’s sons and thereby they become by adoption part of the seed of Abraiiam. These are not the seed either of the Abra-hamic covenant or of the new covenant. They are the seed or the sons of God. “Beloved, now arc wc the sons of God; and it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall sec him as he is.” (1 John 3:2) It is not the covenant that gives birth to the seed, but God’s woman, that is to say, his organization; and the life proceeds from Jehovah himself.
40	Question : Did not the apostle Paul say that Sarah was a type of the Abrahamie covenant? And is it Scriptural to speak of that covenant as the “Sarah covenant”?
Answer-. No, there is no such thing as the “Sarah covenant”. The Abrahamie covenant is God’s covenant. What the apostle said was that Abraham’s son by7 his free woman Sarah was an allegory7 representing or picturing Jerusalem in heaven, that is to say, Jehovah’s organization, which is the mother of all of God’s sons.
41	Question : Is the new covenant the covenant of restitution, which will be in operation and bring life to the world of mankind during the reign of Christ?
Answer: No. The new covenant is not a covenant for the restitution of life, and will not be in force
292
WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
and operation during the reign of Christ to restore mankind.
42	Question: What, then, is meant by the apostle Peter, when he said: ‘The heavens must retain Christ Jesus until the times of restitution of ail things’? If that did not mean the. restitution of all the human race, what is meant by the scripture?
Answer: See next issue of The Watchtoicer.
(To be continued)
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
H 1. What is here meant by fa) “his eownant’’} (b) “Them that fear him’’? (c) “He will shew them’’}
H 2, 3. Conipaie the oeeasimi and purpose of the (leeluiation recorded at Deuteronomy 4:21 with that when Daul quoted these words (licit. 12:29).
K 4, 5. Point out (a) tlie leasonableness of Jehovah’s requirements of his children, (b) The purpose and importance of his statement concerning the curse or punishment for disobedience.
T 6. Show from the Scriptures how necessary and important it is that the terms and rules relating to obedience and to disobedience be kept constantly before God’s covenant people.
U 7, 8. Point out the significance of the statement and exhortation of Deuteronomy 30: 19 in its application both ' (a) at the time when spoken and (b) at the present time.
K 9. When ami how do the prophetic words of Deuteronomy 27:9 have fulfilment? Those of Deuteronomy 29:12,13? Of Deuteronomy 33: 29}
H 10-14. Show, with scriptures, that the remnant in the kingdom covenant are of the “chosen’’ ones of Jehovah, and
why; and, further, that Jehovah’s goodness toward tho faithful remnant at the present time, with assurance ox his continued loving provision for them, was by him foretold in his dealing with bis typical people Isiael and by his covenant with them in Moab.
1J-1S. With the scriptures in point, show that in the covenant made in Moab Jehovah loretold his requirements of the remnant.
* 19. What does the book of Deuteronomy reveal conecrn.ng the “evil servant’’ class, and regarding the proper course of the faithful remnant in this respect?
$ 20. Apply the prophetic instruction given by Jehovah to his covenant people Israel in Moab concerning warfare against the enemy. '
K 21. What is the application, and the purpose, of the prophetic statement recorded at Deuteronomy 33: 20-29 ?
15 22-35. In what one purpose, of Jehovah are all his covenants interrelated? To show how the covenant served that paramount purpose, explain the purpose and the n.aimer of operation or fulfilment of (a) tho covenant <h iTuatiori of Genesis 3: 15. (b) The everlasting covenant made witli Noah, (e) The Abiahamie, covenant, (d) The law covenant. (e; The covenant by sacrifice, (f) The new covenant, (g) The covenant made in Moab, (h) The covenant with David, (i) The kingdom covenant.
If 3G, 37. Which of the covenants of God is the everlasting covenant?
$ 38. Is it Kcriptur.nl to refer to the Abrahamic covenant as the Sarah covenant, and to say that such covenant produces the ‘seed of promise’?
X 39, 40. Is the church the seed of the new covenant or the Abrahamic covenant? What of Sarah’s being a type of the Abrahamic covenant}
$ 41, 42. Is tho new covenant a covenant of “restitution’’? or what did the apostle Peter mean when he said that ‘the heavens must retain Christ Jesus until the times of restitution of all things’?
PURPOSE OF JUSTIFICATION
JUSTIFICATION by faith, Ion" mistaught and misunderstood, may now be clearly comprehended by anyone who desires to consider the plain statements on this subject which are found in the Word of Cod. Is justification necessary? What is the basis for it, and can it be enjoyed by all?
The basis for the reconciliation of man is the shed blood of Jesus poured out according to the terms of the covenant by sacrifice. No other sacrifice is required. Ilis lifeblood poured out fully met the requirements and produced the ransom price. It pleased God, however, that there might be taken from amongst men other willing ones who should be taken into the covenant by sacrifice. These are first reconciled to God through the blood of Christ. These are called saints. (1 Cor. 1: 2; 2 Cor. 13:13; Eph. 1:18) No unrighteous person could be taken into the covenant by sacrifice. It follows, then, that those who are taken in must first be reconciled to God and have a perfect standing before God. It was in behalf of this class that the blood of Jesus was first presented and applied as a sin-offering when he appeared in the presence of God following his resurrection. (Ileb. 9: 24) At Pentecost, not many days later, God gave outward evidence that the sacrifice of Jesus had been accepted as a sin-offering, and this was made manifest by the shedding foith of the holy spirit upon the disciples who had already
devoted themselves to God and his service. (Acts 2: 1-18) Because of faith in God and in the shed blood of Christ Jesus, God justified and reconciled those faithful men to himself. Concerning this the apostle wrote: “Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ: by. whom also we have access by faith into this giaee wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God. But God commendeth his love toward us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ ilied tor us. Much more then, being now justified bj’ his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him.’’—Rom. 5:1,2, 8, 9.
To be taken into the covenant by sacrifice the Scriptures point out that one must take this couise, to wit: Faith in God as the great Creator and Rewarder of all who diligently seek to serve him (Ileb. 11:6); faith in Jesus Christ as the great sacrifice for the ransom of mankind (John 3:16; 14:6); full agreenu nt to do the will of God, which means consecration (Matt. 16:24 ; Luke 9:23) ; justification, which means that God justifies such because of the shed blood of Christ, and the faith and obedience of the one thus consecrating (Rom. 8:33); and when so justified that one has peace with God.—limn. 5:1,2.
Justification of man by Jehovah is, during the age of sacrifice, only for the purpose of taking the just i-
July 1, 193-1
*3Te WATCHTOWER,
203
fled otic in as a part of the sacrifice of Jesus. The justified one must be baptized with the same baptism of death wherewith Jesus was baptized. (Mark 10: 38, 39) Such is called to follow the same course that Jesus the perfect man took. (1 Pct. 2:21) The justified one is counted right and has a perfect standing before God by reason of the blood of Christ. He is now counted as acceptable for sacrifice and is offered up to Jehovah God by the great High Priest, Christ Jesus. At that time such a one is'begotten of the spirit; and if thereafter he responds to the call to the kingdom and is taken into the kingdom covenant he is anointed and thereby adopted into the body of Christ, and from that time forward is a member of Jehovah’s royal house. (Hom. 8:1-15) The promise to such is that he shall be a joint-heir with Christ Jesus in glory provided he is faithful to his consecration and suffers with him and dies with him.—Hom. 8:16,17.
The disciples were not invited into this covenant for the kingdom at the time they were first selected. Just before the crucifixion of our Lord he celebrated the passover required by the law covenant. After he had completed eating this passover with his disciples he took the bread and broke it, thus symbolizing the breaking of his humanity or laying down of his life, and said to his disciples: “Take, cat; this is my body.” He meant, of course, that that symbolized or represented his body. Then he took the cup and offered it to them, saying: “Drink yc all of it: for this is my blood of the new testament [eovenant], which is shed for many for the remission of sins.”—Matt. 26: 26-28.
Under the Jewish law the drinking of blood was an offense punishable by death. (Lev. 17:10) The disciples knew, of course, that Jesus’ offering them to drink of his blood was an invitation to them to participate in his sacrifice, which meant his death. On another occasion he had said: “Except yc cat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, yc have no life in you. Whoso eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, hath eternal life; and I will raise him up at the last day. For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me, and I in him.” (John 6: 51-56) To cat of his flesh symbolically meant that men should believe that the laying down of his life was the basis for the reconciliation of man to God; and that the drinking of his blood means to participate with him in his sacrifice, and that these arc the expressed terms whereby one might become his jointheir in the kingdom.
Again the clergy have been misled by the enemy Satan and have become the tools of him to grossly misrepresent the Lord. There are divers and numerous denominational systems teaching conflicting doctrines. If you ask a clergyman, What is necessary to become a Christian and go to heaven? he will tell you that you must believe on Christ as a great example and be brought into the church and continue a consistent church member until death. If confronted with
the fact that the different church systems teach different doctrines, the clergyman will reply: ‘That is not material. It matters not what you believe, just so you are a good member of the church.’ In fact, the clergy are not particular what their parishioners believe. To keep them in the flock and to regularly receive from their pockets that which is needful to keep up the clergyman is to him most important.
The Lord laid down the rule that no man could become a member of the church, which is the body of Christ, and enjoy eternal life and immortality with him except that man be first justified by faith in the blood of Jesus and baptized into his death and be faithful unto death. To drink of his blood means to share with him in his sacrifice and, after having entered into the covenant, to be faithful unto the end; and that means to be faithful to God and to Christ and refuse to be associated with any part of the Devil’s organization. All the members of the true church must be baptized into the death of Christ. (Rom. 6: 3-6) These are reconciled to God through the blood of Jesus Christ before being taken into the covenant.
Christ Jesus is the Mediator between man and God to bring such ones into the covenant with God. The reconciliation of those who become Christians is through Christ and because of faith and obedience. The Christian, that is to say, the justified one who is begotten and anointed of the holy spirit, becomes a part of the sacrificial body of Christ Jesus and is sacrificed by him; and continuing faithful unto death, he is made a part of “Abraham’s seed” and of the “heirs according to the promise” and, as such, shares with Christ Jesus in his glory and immortality. As it is written: “For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. And if ye be Christ’s, then arc yc Abraham’s seed, and heirs according to the promise.” (Gal. 3:27-29) Christ Jesus ALONE is the “seed of Abraham” according to the unconditional covenant Jehovah made toward Abraham. (Gen. 12:1-3; Gal. 3:16) How, then, do these others get into Christ? Clearly by adoption. “Adoption” means to bring another son into the family. The body members of Christ picture a part of the seed of Abraham by virtue of being brought into Christ Jesus and received and adopted into the house of God, of which Christ Jesus is the Chief and Head. They do not get into Christ’s body by reason of anything they do. Paul’s argument in bis epistle to the Galatians is that in the fullness of time God sent forth Jesus “to redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons. And because yc are sons, God hath sent forth the spirit of his Son [Christ Jesus] into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father. Wherefore thou art no more a servant, but a son ; and if a son, then an heir of God through Christ”. (Gal. 4: 4-7) It was Jehovah’s purpose from the beginning to bring these other sons into his family by adoption;
204
WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
“Having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will.”—Eph. 1: 5.
In the covenant by sacrifice is there a mediator? The answer is: As between Jehovah Cod and Jesus, No; for the reason that the covenant was made by Jehovah on one side and the perfect man Jesus on the other side, and both parties to the covenant were competent to contract. A mediator is required only where one party to the contract is disqualified or incompetent. But as for any other one who is brought into the covenant by sacrifice: No one is brought in until he is justified and therefore stands righteous before Jehovah. Thus such come into the covenant by sacrifice by virtue of being justified and accepted by Jehovah through the sacrifice of Jesus Christ, the Mediator between Cod and man.
Without a question of doubt the Scriptures disclose that the Logos was the chief executive officer of Jehovah in the creation of all things, and therefore Priest of the Most High God. (John 1:3) “Priest” means one who serves for another in an official capacity as principal officer. It is only when a priest is taken from amongst men that the Scriptures show that he performs the office of sacrifice. From the beginning of creation the Logos was “Priest of the Most High God”, because he was the chief representative of Jehovah. Coming now to the time of the sacrifice of a perfect man for sin and to be a sin-offering, the service of a priest was required. In the days of Abraham there was a man of God named Melchizedek, who was both king of Salem and priest of the Most High God. (Gen. 14:18,19) Centuries later the Jewish priesthood was taken from the tribe of Levi. Paul states the relationship of the Levitieal priesthood to animals sacrificed and then adds: “It is yet far more evident: for that after the similitude of Melchisedec there ariseth another priest, who is made, not after the law of a carnal commandment, but after the power of an endless life.”—Heb. 7:15,16.
The word “ariseth” here used means to stand up. That does not argue that the Logos was not priest of the Most High in the creation of all things, but
rather that at the time the covenant by sacrifice was made was the time when Ged gave his oath that he should be a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec.—Heb. 7:17-21.
Prior to that time the Logos or Jesus had not possessed immortality; but uow the opportunity was given to him to be put to the supreme test, and on Jesus’ successfully meeting that test God would grant unto him immortality and elevate him to the highest place in the universe next to the Father. At the same time he would make him the Author of eternal salvation to all them that obey him. (Heb. 5: 8-10) This furnished the basis of the covenant; and because of his faithfulness unto the ignominious death of the tree God raised him up and highly exalted him, giving him a name above ail others. (Phil. 2: 8-11) ‘And behold, he is alive now for evermore’ and never can die.—Kev. 1:18.
It is therefore clear that at the Jordan the covenant by sacrifice was made and thereafter God gave his oath that Christ Jesus should be for ever a priest of the Most High God after the order of Melchisedec, and from that there would never be a change. Jesus was a perfect man at the Jordan, and there the sacrificial duties were added to his office and he sacrificed himself. The law covenant was made in Egypt. Paul says that since that time, that is to say, thereafter following his baptism in the Jordan and his temptation, Jesus was made a high priest for ever. “For the law maketh men high priests which have infirmity; but the word of the oath, which was since the law, maketh the Son, who is consecrated for evermore.” (Heb. 7:28) At the Jordan the man Jesus consecrated himself, and is consecrated for evermore; and by the word and oath of God he performs the office of priest for evermore, which includes the work of sacrifice. From that time forward all sacrifices offered to Jehovah must be offered by him, Jesus, the great High Priest. After Jordan no further reason existed for the Levitieal priesthood, and there it ended. The sacrificial work of the Levitieal priesthood merely foreshadowed the sacrificial work of the Melchisedec priesthood to be performed entirely by Jesus Christ.
THE TEMPLE OF GOD AND ANTICHRIST
THE rulers in the kingdom, the government of righteousness which Jehovah God has promised to establish for the vindication of his name and for the welfare and blessing of the human race, will all be spiritual, that is to say, they will all be spirit creatures. Christ Jesus is the chief one in that kingdom, he being “Lord of lords and King of kings”, and those of his footstep followers who overcome the world and are faithful unto death will be with him, sitting with him in the heavenly throne and wielding power over the nations. These followers of Jesus are
all originally human creatures, and to attain to this exalted spiritual position in the heavens they must first devote themselves to the Lord God and be begotten of his holy spirit to the new life. Each one-must be brought forth as a spiritual son of God.
The one begotten of the holy spirit is a new creature in Christ, according to the words of the apostle Paul in his second epistle to the Corinthians, chapter five, verse seventeen. His hope of life now is on the- spirit plane with Christ Jesus. Iio is counted dead as a human creature, because his right to lice as a human
July 1, 1934
tfTie WATCHTOWER.
205
creature expired with God’s acceptance of his sacrifice through the merit of Christ Jesus. To him the apostle says: “Set your affection on things above, not on things on the earth. For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God.’’—Col. 3:2,3.
The one now addressed must he budded up as a living stone in the temple of God, if he would be of the royal line and participate in the great empire. Bccau.se he is just beginning he is spoken of as a babe newly bom; and addressing such the apostle Peter says: “As newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby: if so be ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious. To whom coming, as unto a living stone, disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God, and precious, ye also, as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.. Wherefore also it is contained in the scripture, Behold, I lay in Sion a chief corner stone, elect, precious: and he that believeth on him shall not be confounded. Unto you therefore which believe he is precious: but unto them which be disobedient, the stone which the builders disallowed, the same is made the head of the corner, and a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offence, even to them which stumble at the word, being disobedient.’’—1 Pet. 2:2-8.
When Peter wrote this the leaders of the Jewish people in particular had rejected Jesus, the chief corner stone. The apostle adds: “Jie that believeth on him shall not be confounded.” To believe means to remain steadfast and faithful; we must, show our faith by what we do. Pel er says also: “Unto you therefore which believe he is precious.” It is a precious thing to observe the chief corner stone and to be conformed according to his way. Such are called to follow in his steps. (1 Pet. 2: 21) The one who is thus designated a living stone which is to be budded up into the building of God is anointed after he responds to the call to the kingdom and meets the preliminary requirements to be chosen or elected. To anoint means to designate one to some position in the empire. To the chosen ones it is written: “Now he which stab-lisheth us with you in Christ, and hath anointed ns, is God.” (2 Cor. 1:21) These are anointed to represent Jehovah and the Lord Jesus Christ.
God having made this promise, and as his promises are never broken, he counts his anointed ones as now a part of the new kingdom or empire or nation. Hence the apostle says concerning them: “But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should shew forth the praises of him who hath called you out of darkness into his marvellous light.” (1 Pet. 2:9) In order to show forth the praises of Jehovah God they not only must believe Jehovah is God, but must joyfully obey his will, represent his cause, and use the faculties with which they arc endowed to testify to his great name and his goodness and his purposes. To do this one could not conform himself to the evil world, but must
stand aloof from it and serve the Lord God. The Word of God is his guide. The Word informs him that he must not conform himself to the world, because Satan the enemy is the god of this world.—Horn. 12: 2.
The transformation process now is carried on by the Christian, building up his mind by studying the Word of God; from it ascertaining the will of God and by it proving what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God. It ean easily be seen that the Lord would not make anyone a member of that empire unless he is in full and complete harmony with the Lord Jesus, the chief corner stone, as it is written: “For whom (God] did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brethren.” (Hom. 8:29) This means that each one who will ultimately be a member of that empire must grow in the likeness of the Lord Jesus. To those today in the temple organization and faithfully serving Jehovah it is written: “But we. all, with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the spirit of the Lord.” (2 Cor. 3:18) .Such must be faithful witnesses of Jehovah, because they have been with Jesus and learned of him and must do as he does, and they must be bold in bearing the testimony to the name of Jehovah. (Acts 4:13) Thus their course of action is changed from what it was before 1918, during the Elijah period of the church, and they become like the Lord, as bold and fearless witnesses. Not that they should Ite rude witnesses, but they must calmly and fearlessly tell the truth.
The expression “changed . . . from glory to glory ” does not mean that those of the remnant or temple company today arc changed from the glory of God’s law covenant with natural Israel to the glory of his new covenant with spiritual Israel; but that they are changed into the likeness of Christ Jesus as faithful witnesses to the name of Jehovah. During the Elijah period of the church the faithful ones in a measure reflected the glory of the Lord, but, being now transferred from the Elijah period to the present El'.sha period of the Lord’s work, they have great honor and glory of service, because the Elisha work is an unselfish devotion to the honor of Jehovah’s name. The faithful ones reflect the Lord’s glory that even those outside, the Jonadab class, may determine who are really unselfishly devoted to Jehovah. Such transformation conforms such ones to the likeness of Christ.
The expression “this world” means the people of this earth organized into forms of government under the supervision of their overlord, Satan the enemy. (2 Cor. 4:3,4) The Devil is the prince or ruler of this world. (John 14:30) lie is the enemy of the Lord Jesus Christ, the enemy of God, and the enemy' of everyone who attempts to do God’s will. The one who will ultimately be of the empire of righteousness must not love the world, as it is stated by the apostle John in these words: “Love not the world, neither
206
fffie WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N.Y.
the things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world. And the world passeth away, and the lust thereof: but he that doeth the will of God abideth for ever.”—1 John 2:1547.
Early in the experience of the church it was manifest that those whom God will approve must be transformed into the likeness of Jesus Christ. Christ Jesus is Head over the house of the sons of God, and all the other members of the household must honor Jehovah as Jesus honors Jehovah. They do and must love God with a sincere devotion, and delight to show forth his praises and to testify that he is God. Their very course in the way of righteousness would draw against them the opposition of Satan the enemy.
After Jesus was put to death Satan the enemy thought that he had succeeded in destroying the heir of the promise of God, who was promised a kingdom. Satan therefore reasoned that he would continue to rule the world without any successful interruption. He must have been disappointed when Jesus was raised from the dead. He must have observed what took place fifty days later, at Pentecost, when the holy spirit was poured out upon the faithful disciples of Jesus and such were anointed, and there Satan noted the beginning of the building of the other living stones in conformity with the chief corner stone, Christ Jesus. It is reasonable to presume that he was familiar with the instructions given by the inspired apostles to those of the true church. He would understand that these who were united in. Christ were to form part of the seed of the promise of God, which seed is to bless all the families of the earth, even as the apostle Paul had testified. (Gal. 3:16,27-29) Destruction of such ones would bring reproach upon God, and now this became the objective and purpose of Satan the enemy. He saw that the Lord Jesus Christ, exalted to the divine life, was now beyond the influence of his (Satan’s) power. He realized that he must now do something to counteract the influence and power of those who were being brought into Christ, if he would thwart the divine purpose.
"Antichrist” means that which is offered as a substitute for Christ the Messiah, therefore that which is in opposition to the Messiah. Satan the enemy set about to organize "the mystery of iniquity” or of lawlessness; an arrangement which would be contrary to and in opposition to Christ. Evidently he knew that John had said to the church: "It is the last time.” (1 John 2:18) The Devil would therefore reason that if he eould corrupt the seed of promise and turn their minds, and the minds of the people, from God he would defeat God’s purposes.
It was in the days of Enos, the grandson of Adam the first man (Gen. 4:26, margin), that Satan had adopted the hypocritical scheme of having the people call themselves by the name of the Lord while at the
same time misrepresenting the Lord God. He thereby mocked God and brought reproach upon God’s name. Early in the Christian era Satan the enemy adopted a similar scheme of hypocrisy, but on a far greater scale. He knew that man is so constituted that he must worship something; and if Satan could not get the people who call themselves Christian to directly worship him, then he would inaugurate a scheme by which he would turn away their minds from Jehovah God, and yet let them call themselves Christians.
Satan saw that it would be profitable to his scheme to have the Christians become more popular; therefore the Christian religion became ostensibly the religion of his wicked world. The Devil thereafter planted amongst the Christians ambitious men, those who had a desire to shine amongst men and who in the course of time had themselves appointed or elected to the positions of bishops and chief elders; and in due course there was established a clergy class, as distinguished from the laity or the common people. The clergy thus organized introduced into the church false doctrines taught by heathen philosophers, which, of course, were the Devil’s own doctrines. These were used to corrupt the message of the Lord God. The clergy and the rulers in the church then established theological schools wherein men were trained for the clergy for the purpose of carrying on the work of their system already organized and in operation. In due course statements of belief, or creeds, were formulated and presented to the professed Christians, and anyone who taught contrary to these creeds was considered a heretic and was dealt with accordingly.
False doctrines were freely introduced and substituted for the truth. Amongst these were and are the doctrines of the trinity, immortality of all souls, eternal torture of the wicked, the divine right of the clergy, and the divine right of kings to rule. In the course of time Mary, the mother of the child Jesus, was deified; and the people were called upon to worship her as the mother of God. Satan’s purpose in all this, of course, was to turn the minds of the people away from Jehovah. Crucifixes were erected, and the worship of the people was turned to these rather than to let them intelligently worship the Lord Jehovah and the Lord Jesus Christ. Beads, so-called "holy water”, and like things were used, and are still used, to blind the people. Gradually, subtly, seductively and wickedly the Devil, through willing instruments, corrupted those who called themselves Christians. Thus was the way blazed for the establishment of the popular religious systems which parade in the name of God and of Christ even to this day, to the defamation of the glorious name of Jehovah God.
This departure from and rebellion against the Word and law and true faith of God reached its climax in the formation and manifestation of the "man of sin”, "the son of perdition,” who is at the head of that which is antichrist. (2 Thess. 2:1-8) This "man of
July 1, 1034
WATCHTOWER.
237
sin” is the ‘‘evil servant” class, which has been manifested or brought forth to the light since the coming
of the Lord Jesus to the temple of God for judgment work. This is the class found unfaithful at his coming.
THE RIGHT WAY
THE people of good will toward Jehovah and his righteousness are hearing the truth and arc taking the right way by declaring for Jehovah and his kingdom. Companies are being organized to study God’s Word and for the preaching of this gospel of the kingdom to other hungry souls. The following is a sample resolution and letter from a company of those who love Jehovah and who desire to serve him:
A RESOLUTION
We, the Jonadabs from various communities, assembled here in Audubon, Iowa, April 15, 11)34, wish to express our gratitude to Jehovah God for the light he has brought to us through the medium of books, booklets, radio and transcription machines.
In thankfulness for this heart-cheering and marvelous light,
we wish to adopt the Los Angeles (“World Control’’) resolution, to wit:	'
“Resolved, That we do now take our stand on the side of Jehovah God and his kingdom; and that we will obey, serve and worship Jehovah God and his beloved Son, Christ Jesus, who is the rightful Ruler of the world, and we will thus participate in the vindication of Jehovah’s name.’’
• « • «
Dear Brethren:
The above resolution was voted on and passed at a transcription meeting at Audubon, Iowa, last Sunday afternoon. (April 17, 1931) with 115 present.
The forenoon was spent with 25 out in the service; 1*2 testimonies, 8 books, 39 booklets, and 25 hours. All but 6 were new at the witness work.
Your brother in Jehovah’s service,
Albert G. Carpenter, Iowa.
(Continued from page 208)
Brooklyn WBBR Su 10: loam Su 6:30pm Mol0:30am Til 10:30am	Tu	6:30pm
We 10:30am	Wo	0:30pm
Th 10:30am	Th	6:30pm
Fr 10:30am	Fr	6:30pm
Buffalo WGR Su 10:00am Buffalo WKBW We 10:00am Frecpoit WGBB Su 9:00am - Tu 7:00pm Th 7:0Opm Hudson F. WGLC Su 10:45am Jamestown WOOL Su 9:30am New York WBNX Su 2:3opm New York WOV Su 4:30pm SaranacL. WNBZ Su 10:15am
Tu 4:15pm Th 4:15pm Svtacuso WSYR Su 10::’,0am Tupper L. WHDL Su 10:15am
Th 11:30am
Wh. Pl’ns WFAS Su 6:00pm Mo l:p0pm Sa 9:00am
NORTH CAROLINA
Asheville WWNCTh 5:30pm Charlotte WSOC Su 10:15am Greensboro WHIG Su 9:45am Raleigh WPTF Su 9:45am
NORTH DAKOTA
G’d Forks KFJMSu 5:00pm We 5:00pm Fr 5:00pm
OHIO
Akron	WADC Su 1:45 pm
We 10:45am
Cleveland WHKSu 7:00pm
Tu 3:15pm Fr 6:30pm
Cleveland WJAY Su 9:45am
Columbus WAIU Su 10:00am
Th 7:30pm
Columbus WBNS Su 10:45am
Mo 2:00pm We 2:00pm Fr 2:00pm
Dayton WSMK Su 1:30pm
Mt. Orab WHBD Su 4:30pm
We 4:30pm Fr 4:30pm
Toledo WSPD Su 9:30am
Sa 8:15am
Youngst’nWKBN Su 10:00am We 4:00pm
Zanesville WALR Su 10:00atn We 4:15pm
OKLAHOMA
Elk City KASA Su 1:15pm FuncaCity WBBZ Su 10:00am Wo 9:00pm
Sliawiico KlIFFMo 8:15pm Wo 8:45pm Fr 8:15pm Tulsa KVOO Su 9:15am
OREGON
Klamath F. K F JI Mo 8:15pm Marshfield KOOS Mo 1:30pm Medford . KNED Su 10:00am Th 4:00pm
PENNSYLVANIA
Erie WLBW Su 10 :15arn
G’l'nside WIBGSu 1:15pm Johnstown WJACSu 4:30pm Fhil ’a WC AU Su 12 :00 nn Philadelphia WIPSu 6:15pm Fittsb’gh KQV Su 10:3<)am
We 1:45pm Fr 1:45pm
Pittsb’gh WWSW We 5 :15pm Reading WEEU Su 3:45pm
We 3:45pm
Wash’ton WNBOSu 9:45am W’msport WEAK Su 9:15pm
Th 7:15pm
York WORK Su 3:00pm
PHILIPPINE ISLANDS
Manila KZEG Su 7 :00pm Th 7:00pin
SOUTH CAROLINA
Charleston WCSC Su 1:00pm
We 7 :l'0pin Fr 7:00pm
Columbia WIS Su 11:15am
Fr 1:30pm
Greenville WFBC Su 10:00am
Spart’b’g WSI’ASu 6:30pm
SOUTH DAKOTA
Pierre KGFX Su 1:00pm
Tu 4:00pm Th 4:OOpm
Watertown KGCR Su 9:15am
Wo 8:45pm Fr 8:45pm
TENNESSEE
Cha’nooga WDOD Su 1:15pm
Th 8:00am
Jackson WTJS Su 1:30pm
We 5:30pm Fr 5:30pm
Knoxville WI’OLSu 7:00pm
Memphis WMC Su 4:30pm
Memphis WREOSu 9:00am
TEXAS
Amarillo KGRSSu 9:00am Austin KNOW Su 10:00am Beaumont KFDM Su 10:00am
Tu 7:45pm
CorpusChr. KGFI Su 9:00am Wo 6:45pm Fr 6:45pm
Dallas	KRLD Su 10:30am
Dublin	KFPLTIi 8:00pm
Fr 8:45am
El Paso KTSMSu 1:15pm
Ft. Worth KT AT Mo 5:15pm
We 5:15pm Fr 5:15pm
Galveston KJ.UF Su 3:45pm We 8:00pm
Houston KXYZ Su 10:00am
S. Angelo KGKL Su 1:45pm
Th 8:4Jaiu
S. Antonio KTSA Su 10:45:im Wichita F. KGKO Su 12:30pm
Th 8:45pm
UTAH
Ogden KLO Su 3:15pm
We 5:00pm
Salt L. City KSLSu 9:45pm
VERMONT
Rutland WSY'B Su 10:00am
Th 5:30pm
St.Albans WQDM Su 1:00pm
VIRGINIA
Ch’loti esv. WEI IC Su 10:45am
Danville WBTMSu 9:15pm
Lynehh'g WIA A Su 12:45pm
Norfolk WTARSu 12:30pni 1’etersb’g WPUR Su 6:45pm
We 10:00am
Richmond WRVA Su 12:15pm
Roanoke WDB.1 Su 12:30pm We 5:00pm
WASHINGTON
Aberdeen KXRO Su 1:15pm
Bell ’ham K VOS Su 10:00am
Th 5:30pm
Seattle KJR Su 10:00am
Seattle KVLMo 6:15pm
Tu 6:45pm We 6:45pm
Tli 6:45pm Fr 6:45pm
Sa 6:45pm
Spokane KFIOSu 9:15am
Spokane KGA Su ti:00pm
Tacoma KVJ Su 2:45pm
Walla Walla KUJ Su 7:45am
Su 1:30pm
Wenatchee KPQ Su 1:00pm
Wo 7:00am
Yakima KITSul0:0Oam
Th 7:00am
WEST VIRGINIA
Bluefield Wills Su 9:00am
Fr 8:00am
Chn’ston WOBU Sa 4:00pm
Fairmont WMMN Su 12:45pm
Hunt’ton WSAZ Th 4:00pm
Wheeling WWVA Su 10:00am
WISCONSIN
LaCrosse WKBH Su 12:00 un
Madison WIBA Su 10:05am
Mani’woe WOMT Mo 7:00pm
Th 1:00pm
WYOMING
Casper KDFN Su 10:30am 'I’ll 8:45pui
WATCHTOWER.
RADIO SERVICE
The good news of the kingdom of Jehovah is broadcast each week or oftener by these and other stations at time shown.
[Current local time is shown in each instance.]
AUSTRALASIA
NEW SOUTH WALES
Albury 2-AYTu 8:45pm
Broken Hill 2-XLSu 8:45pm
Goulburn 2-GNSu 7:30pm
Grafton 2-Gfc’Tu 7:30pm
Gunnedah 2-MO Su 7:05pm
Lismore 2-XNWe 7:15pm
Newcastle 2-HD Su 9:30am
Su 7:15pm We 6:45pm
Sydney 2-UE Su 9:15am
W ’ga W’ga2-WG We 9:30am
We 7:45pm
QUEENSLAND Brisbane 4-BC Su 10 :15am Mackay 4 .MK Su 11:00am Townsville 4-TO We 8:00pm
TASMANIA
Launceston 7-LA Er 10:15pm
VICTORIA
Ballarat 3-BA Su 12:45pm
Bendigo 3-BO Tu S ;00pm
Hamilton 3-HASu 6:15pm llmsliam 3 IISSu 7:00pm Melbourne 3-AW Su 12:15pm
Mildura 3-MASu 7:15pm
Sale 3-TRSu 6:30pm
Kwan Hill 3 SH Su 7:15pm
Wungaratta 3 WR Su 8:15pm
WEST AUSTRALIA Kalgoorlie (1 iCGSu 7:40pm Berth 6-MLSu 7:00pm
BELGIUM
Hainaut BONNE Sa 5:30pm (330 m) ESPERANCE
CANADA ALBERTA Calgary CECN Su 5:45pm
NOVA SCOTIA
Sydney CJC’BSu 9:00pm
ONTARIO
Hamilton CKOC Su 10:30am
Su l:30pni Su 8:15pm
CHINA
Shanghai XMHA Su 9:45am
CUBA
Caibaricn CMIIDSu 7:00pm
Havana CMK Su 11:30am
also Spanisli Su 9:00pm
Santa Cl’a CMHI Su ll:35um
ESTH ONIA
Reval RADIO-Su 3:30pm (296.1m) TALLINN
FRANCE
Beziers RADIO-Th 8:00pm (220.1m) BEZIERS
Bordeaux RADIO-Mo 7:45pm (237 m) SUD-OUEST
Fecamp RADIO-NOR-(206 m) MANDIE
French Tu 8:00pm
Paris RADIO L L Fr 8:15pm (370 m)
Paris RADIO- Sul2:00nn
(312.8 in) VITUS
Th 7:30pm Sa 7:30pm
Toulouse RADIO- We 7:15pm (385.1 m) TOULOUSE
MEXICO
Mexico XECW
Spanish Th 10:00pm
UNITED STATES
ALABAMA
Birm’ham WAPI Su 12:45pm Birm’ham WBRC Su 10:00ai’i We 4:30pm
Dothan WHET Su 1:30pm M’tgomery WSFA Su 3:45pm Muscle S. WNRASu 6:00pm
We 8:00pm Er 8:00pm
ALASKA
AnchorageKFQD Wo 9:30pm
Ketchikan KGBU Mo 7:15pm Th 7:15pm Sa 7:15pm
ARIZONA
Bisbee KSUN Su 4:00pm Wo 4:00pm Fr 4:00pm
Jerome KCKJ Mo 5:15pm We 5:15pm Sa 5:15pm
Spanish Th ».30pi
Prescott KPJM Su 5:45pm We 5:45pm Fr 5:45pm
Tucson KGAR Su 7:00pm We 5:45pm Fr 5:45pm
Yuma KUMA Su 6:15pm Spanish Su 6:00pm
ARKANSAS
Fay’ville KUOA Su 12:45pm
We 11:45am Fr 4:30pm
JlotSp’gs KTHSSu 5:00pm Little R’k KARKSu 9:00am Little R’k KGHI Su 7:00pm
We 5:45pm Fr 5:45pm
Little R ’k KLR A Su 10:30am Paragould KBTM Su 10:00am We 11:30am
Texarkana KCMC Su 6:45pm
CALIFORNIA
El Centro KXO Su 10:00am Eureka KIEM Su 10:30am Fresno	KM J Su 3:45pm
Hollywood KNX Su 9:15pm LongB’ch KGER Su 10:45am Los Angeles KTM Su 9:30am
Su 8:00pm Th 8:00pm
Oakland KLS Su 11:15am We 2:4.5pm Fr 2:45pm
Oakland KROW Su 10:15am Su 6:15pm Mo 8:15pm
We 8:15pm Sa’mento KFBK Su 9:30am San Diego XEBC Su 11:45am
We 7:45pm
S. F’cisco KTABSu 9:30am Sa 8:30a m
Stockton KGDM Su 9:30am We 7:15am Fr 1:15pm
COLORADO
Col ’o Spr. KVOR Su 10:30am
We 5:30pm Sa 4:30pm Denver KEEL Su 7:00pm Grand J’n KFX.J Su 1:30pm Greeley KFKA Su 6:45pm Lamar KIDW Su 7:15pm
Wo 2:40pm Fr 2:40pm Yuma KGEK Mo 12:45pm
We 12:45pm Fr 12:45pm
CONNECTICUT
Bridgeport WICC Su 10:00am
DELAWARE
Wilm'ton WDELSu 6:15pm
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA Washington WOL Su 6:00pm
FLORIDA
Miami WIOD Su 12:15pm
Miami WQAMSu 5:15pm
Orlando WDBO Su I2:45pm
Pensacola WCOA Su 1:00pm We 7:00pm
GEORGIA
Athens WIFI Su 9:45am
Atlanta WGST Su 5:45pm
Atlanta WJTLSu 2:15pm
Augusta WKDWSu 3:00pm
Th 7:45pm
Columbus WRBLSu 9:30um LaGrangeWKEU Su 3:00pm
Me 3:00pm Frl0:00arn
Macon WMAZ Su 4:00pm
Romo WRGA Su 12:30pm We 8:45pm Fr 8:45pm
Savannah WTOC Su 1:00pm
HAWAII
Honolulu KG JIB We 12:05pm
Fr 7:15pm
IDAHO
Boise KIDO Su 10:30am
We 8:45pm
Idaho Falls KID Mo 10:00am
Nampa KFXD Su 11:00am
Mo 7:45pm
Pocatello KSEI Su 2:00pm
Su 9;00pra
Twin Falls KTFI Su 10:45am
Su 4:45pm
ILLINOIS
Decatur WJBL Su 10:00am
Fr 6:30pm
Harrisb’g WEBQ Su 6:00pm
Mo 10:30pm Fr 10:00pm La Salle W J BC Su 2:15pin Quincy WTAD Su 12:30pm
Wo 1:00pm
Rockford WROK Su 10:00am
Su 10:00pm We 10:30pm
Sp 'glield WUBS Su 12:30pm
Sa 11:15am
Tuscola WDZ Su 12:45pm
INDIANA
Ind’apolisWKBF Su 10:00am
Th 1:00pm
Muncie WLBC Su 1:30pm
Fr 7:30pm
IOWA
Des Moines WHO Su 10:15am
KANSAS
Coffeyville KGGF Su 1:45pm Th 8:00pm
LOUISIANA
Shrevep ’t KWEA Su 10:15am
MAINE
Bangor WLBZ Su 10:45am
MARYLAND
Baltimore WBALSu 3:15pm
Cumberl’dWTBO Mo 1:15pm
We l:15pin Fr 1:15pm
Bagerst’n WJEJ Su 10:15am
MASSACHUSETTS
BabsonP. WBSO Su 12:30pm Boston WNAC Su 10:00am Sp 'glield WMAS Su 10:30am Worcester WORC Su 10:30am
MICHIGAN
Calumet WJIDFTu 6:15pm
Detioit WJRSu 9:45am
Jackson WlHMSu 6:30pm
KalamazooWKZO Su 9:45am
We 2:00pm
MINNESOTA
F’gusFallsKGDE Su 10:00am
Mooihcad KGFK Su 7:3<ipm Wo 5:15pm Er 5:15pm
MISSISSIPPI
Hatticsb ’gWPFB Su 1:30pm
We 7:45pm
Laurel WAML Su 12:45pm
Meridian AVCOC Su 10:00am
We Miss. City WGCMSu We		6:45pm 9:45am 8:45pm
	MISSOURI	
Columbia Kans.C ’y	KFRU Su We KWKC Su Tu	6:15pm 7:15am 2:0(ipm 7:00am
Billings Kalispell	MONTANA KGHI. Su KGEZSu	12:30pm 9:00am
NEBRASKA Kearney KGFW Su 10:00am Lincoln KFAB Su 9:30am Scottsbl’f KGKY Su 10:15am We 5:45pm Fr 5:45pm		
NEVADA
Reno KOH Su 10:30am
NEW JERSEY AtlanticC’y WPG Su 10:00am Newark WNEW Su 10:00am
NEW MEXICO
Albuq'que KOHWe 5:45pm
Roswell KGFL Su 5:15pm
We 4:30pm Fr 4:30pm
NEW YORK
Auburn WMBO Su 6:30;>m Sa 2:1Jpa
Bing’mtonWNBF Su 7:1 Spin (Continued on page £07)
WATCHTOWER.
Published Semi-Monthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N. Y., U. S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford President W. E. Van Amburgii Secretary
"And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and •great shall be the peace of thy children.”* Jraiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man wilfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are bom sinners and without the right to life.	'
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce tho ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every ereaturo and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH'S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is tho rightful King of tho world; that tho anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whoso duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare liis purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of tho kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and tho Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of tho peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah's kingdom under Christ which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great net is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall bo restored and live on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his Beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of t' > Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, 51.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1X0; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 7s. American remittances should bo made by Express or Postal Aloni y Order, or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African an I Australasian remittances should bo made direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British . .............31 Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England
Canadian.............40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, CanmJ.t
Australasian. . . T Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. S. W., Australia South African .... Boston House, Capo Town, South Africa Please address the Society In every case.
{Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
AH sincere students of the Bible who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription prn’i may have The Watchtower free upon written application to tlio publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. .We are glad to thus aid tho needy, but tho written application once each year is required by the postal regulations. Xotlce to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent Only when requested. Chan-re of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on a(ldr<*ss label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of e-'niration) will be sent with the journal one month before tho subscription expires. Entered as Second Class 'fail flatter at Brooklyn, N. Y., Postofiiee.
Act of 31arch 3, ISIS.
LONDON CONVENTION
August 31 to September 3 inclusive are the days for a convention of Jehovah’s witnesses at London, England. The convention will be held at the Alexandra Palace, the public meeting being in the huge hall at Alexandra Palace, Sunday, September 2. The forenoon of each day will be devoted to field service; afternoon and evening meetings for the interested. Those contemplating attending the London convention should address Convention Committee, 34 Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England. The president of the Society expects to attend this convention and address the public.
PUBLIC LECTURES BY TRANSCRIPTION
Jehovah’s blessing has been markedly upon the use of the portable transcription machine. lie has plainly manifested that this machine meets the need of the hour, when the enemy, under Gog, is seeking to curtail the use of the radio by God’s anointed and when the people’s ears are eager to hear, not man’s message, but God’s. The transcription machine has increased the power of Jehovah’s witnesses afield to preach Uis truth manyfold, so that the desiie for the literature is stimulated and study classes of many interested hearers are being formed. Besides more than 450 such machines in the United States alone, great numbers are now being effectively used in countries near and afar. For more information, write the Society.
RADIO AND THE PRINTED WORD
All witnessing parties and all individuals who engage in the witness work should mention the radio station in their vieintiy that is broadeasting the watchtower programs. This often proves a means of opening the way to place tic books in the hands of the people. Have in mind that the chief purpose of the radio is to call the people’s attention to the truth and then furnish the opportunity for them to get a wider understanding of the message concerning the government of Jehovah by reading what is being printed.
Every one who now participates in the field wotk in territory served by broadcasts of the watchtower program may have a share in telling the people that this unique service is available each week. Workers report that distribution of the radio folder (supplied by the Society) is proving to be a convenient and effective method of giving continual public notice of this pio-gram while engaging in the house-to-house witnessing.
ANNOUNCING COMPANY MEETINGS
Many hearers of radio transcription lectures have the desire to meet with Jehovah's witnesses and to study his Word with them. Hence wherever the kingdom message is radiocast, Hie time and place of meeting of the local company of Jehovah’s witnesses should be announced after the transcription. The time on the air being paid for, the station manager ought to readily grant your request to make such annouu.-c ncnt.
Vol. LV	July 15, 1934	No. 14
HIS COVENANTS
PART 8
“I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles.”—Isa. 42:6.
JEHOVAH’S unconditional promise to Abraham is called the Abrahamic covenant, for the reason that Abraham served lo picture Jehovah himself, while Sarah his wife served to picture Jehovah’s organization, which brings forth the seed for his purpose. That is a unilateral or one-sided covenant. It is a declaration of the unchangeable purpose of Jehovah to do a certain thing, and the result thereof does not at all depend upon what the man Abraham or any other creature might do or fail to do. That is the covenant that announces God’s provision for man to obtain life, for the reason that therein it is plainly stated, “In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.” The blessing of the families or peoples of the earth means that God will give them opportunity to live, and such opportunity must come in his appointed way, to wit, by and through the promised seed, which is Christ Jesus.
2	The Scriptures do not disclose that God has made or ever will make a covenant with the creatures of men to restore them. After the degradation of Adam every one of his offspring was disqualified to enter into a covenant with God. All were born sinners, and God could not make a covenant or contract with any creature who is a sinner. Any creature entering into a covenant with Jehovah must have a standing before God, which standing means that the creature is actually justified or by reason of his faith God counts him as justified. The new covenant was made with Christ Jesus and afterwards with only those who, first having exercised faith in the shed blood of Christ Jesus, made a consecration to do the will of God, thereby entering into an agreement by sacrifice, and who were then justified. God has expressly provided that life shall come to those of the human race who have real faith in the blood of Christ Jesus. Then why should God make a covenant, even with a mediator, to give such creatures life, when he had already provided that ‘life is the gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord’?—Rom. 6:23.
RESTITUTION
’The word “restitution” occurs only once in that part of the Scriptures written after the coming of
211
Jesus to earth and which we have been in the habit of calling the New Testament, and that one place is at Acts 3:21. The word “restitution” there is from the root word rendered “rcstoreth” at Mark 9:12. That word “restore” means to reconstitute something that once had an existence. The human creatures born in sin because of Adam’s sin never had any right to exist. Their brief existence is by sufferance of .Jehovah. The fact that God has provided a way to give such creatures life through Christ .Jesus is proof that such creatures have no inherent right to be restored; and, in fact, if they were restored to what existence they had, that would be an undesirable thing. Human creatures have a desire for life, and they have a measure of life, and they exist for a brief time and then die. The shed blood of Christ Jesus is the purchasing price for mankind, and he is the life-giver to those who believe on and obey him. It follows, then, that the gift of life is not a restitution, but is a gift.
‘Some of the faithful disciples were with Jesus in the mountain where he was transfigured before them: “And there appeared unto them Elias, with Moses; and they were talking with .Jesus.” (Mark 9:4) In that transfiguration scene Elias (Elijah) pictured Christ Jesus doing a certain work concerning the kingdom which concluded at a specific time, to wit, the work of ‘preparing the way before the Lord’; and Moses pictured Christ Jesus the great Prophet, Priest and King and who therefore is the Executive Officer of Jehovah. That transfiguration scene had reference to God’s kingdom under Christ Jesus, his mighty Vindicator. This is made certain by the words in the context: “A voice came out of the cloud [symbolic of the presence of Jehovah], saying, This is my beloved Son; hear him” (Mark 9:7); that is to say, the dramatic transfiguration there pictured Christ Jesus, the beloved Son of God, his great High Priest, whom all men must obey because God had sent him forth to be his vindicatpr and to carry out his purpose.
5	It is written that “Elias [Elijah] verily cometh first, and rcstoreth all things”. Does this have reference to restitution of the human race during the millennial reign of Christ? It docs not; but it does have rtf-
212
£TIe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
crence to the restoring of that which had once existed among the Israelites, and which had been lost, to wit, the all-important doctrines of Jehovah’s name and his kingdom. When the disciples came down from the mountain where Jesus was transfigured before them they were talking about what they had seen and heard, and they propounded to Jesus this question: “Why say the scribes that Elias must first come? And he answered and told them, Elias verily cometh first, and rcstoreth all things; and how it is written of the Son of man, that he must suffer many things, and be set at nought.’’ (Mark 9:11,12) In this text and other Scriptural lexis directly related thereto both John the Baptist and Jesus are identified as well as a work done by them. Concerning John the Baptist the prophecy says: “And he shall go before him [the Messiah] in the spirit and power of Elias, ... to make ready a people prepared for the Lord.” (Luke 1:17) In answer to a question John the Baptist quotes from the prophecy of Isaiah concerning himself, to wit, “I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness, Make straight the way of the Lord.” (John 1:21-23) John in a measure fulfilled the prophecy uttered concerning Elijah, but Christ Jesus himself must fulfil in completion that prophecy, as other scriptures show. (.Mal. 3:1; 4:5, G) These prophecies relating to restoration had reference to restoring the great truths which the Israelites had lost, to wit: That Jehovah is the only true Cod and that he would make a tmnic for himself by and through his kingdom. The words of Mark 9:12, “The Son of man , . . must suffer many things, and be set at nought,” show that the complete fulfilment of the prophecy concerning Elijah must be preceded by the sufferings of Christ Jesus, all of which pertains to the vindication of Jehovah’s name. Jesus did suffer death, was raised from the dead, and went away to receive the kingdom, the setting up of which must be preceded by a restitution work, which restitution work is the restoring to his true followers the great truths that had been hid or lost from them and to prepare a people for God's purpose.
6	The key of knowledge and understanding of God’s purpose is unselfish devotion to Jehovah, the one and only true God, and diligence in doing the will of the Most High. When Jesus came to earth there was iitlle or no knowledge and understanding of Jehovah’s purpose, because the selfish leaders of Israel had lost the key of knowledge and had taken it away from others who might desire to hear the truth. It was the boundm duty of the scribes and Pharisees to teach the people concerning the expression of the will of God. but they had failed to do this and were devoting themselves to senseless and selfish ceremonies. For this reason Jesus denounced them in the nmst emphatic terms. (Luke 11:42-53; Matt. 23:13-33) By all of his prophets Jehovah had expressed his purpose to make a name for himself and to establish bis kingdom under the Messiah to accomplish that purpose. Because of their
selfishness the leaders in Israel were blind to thc.:e truths and the kingdom was nothing to them. For this reason Jesus said to them: “The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof.” (Matt. 21:43) They were not bearing to the people the fruits of the kingdom, namely, God’s Word of truth, but were proclaiming their own selfish doctrines.
’By liis prophet Jehovah had foretold the coming of Elijah to do a preparatory work before “the groat ami the terrible day of the Lord”. (Mal. 3:1; 4: 5, ti) Without a doubt Christ Jesus himself is the messenger and anlitypical Elijah meant by this prophecy, and who must do a certain preparatory work before the great and terrible day of Jehovah. This prophecy must have its fulfilment just preceding Armageddon. John the Baptist did not fulfil this part of the prophecy, but he did fulfil a part of the prophecy only in miniature. He emphasized the kingdom, saying to the Israelites: “Repent ye: for the kingdom of heav.n is at hand.” (Alatt. 3:2) Christ Jesus took up 1lie work that John had not finished, and bo began his ministry by the selfsame words used by John, to wit : “Repent: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.” (Matt. 4:17) John was preparing the Jews to receive the Messiah, the King, and Jesus Christ prepares a people for Jehovah’s name. The all-important thing in the day of John, and since, is the kingdom, because that is the means employed for the vindication of Jehovah's name. All the parables of Jesus emphasize the kingdom of God and that God’s name must be honored. The transfiguration in the mountain was a manifestation of God’s purpose to set up that kingdom. Jesus was impressing upon his faithful disciples the importance of the kingdom. He further emphasized the kingdom when he told them that he must go away and receive the kingdom, and that he would return and receive his faithful followers to himself, that is, those who would love his appearing and his kingdom. The disciples emphasized the truth of and concerning the kingdom, but within a short time after they died selfish men again became leaders in the church, and because of their selfishness the.v lost the key of knowledge and tock it away from others. In due time Jehovah directed Christ Jesus, the Greater Elias or Elijah, to do a preparatory work, that is, to prepare a people who would see and appreciate the kingdom. In doing this preparatory work the Lord used the consecrated who engaged in an ambassadorial or witness work, and this work had to do with the restoring of the truth to the followers of Christ Jesus. Titis preparatory work must be done, before Jehovah’s Messenger comes to the temple; as it is written : “Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me: and the Lord, whom }e seek, shall suddenly come to liis temple. e\ ui the messenger of the covenant, whom to delight in: behold, he shall come, saith the Lord of hosts.” (2Lil. 3:1) The preparatory work referred to in this propk-
July 15, 1934
W/XTCHT0WER.
213
coy was not preparing a people for heaven, even though the ones maintaining their integrity and continuing faithful find their final reward in heaven. The work is preparing the people for Jehovah’s name, which people must do a .specific witness work after they are taken out from the world and prepared. It is now clearly seen that it is those v.ho Tove his appearing and his kingdom’ who are the ones made ready for the name of Jehovah. The restoration work mentioned by Jesus in Mark 9:12 was not a work of restoring or setting up the kingdom, but it was a restoring to the faithful the truths of and concerning the kingdom. In the time of that preparatory work the false doctrines of the trinity and eternal torment were completely taken away and it was seen that there is but one true and almighty God and one Lord and Savior, Christ Jesus, who is the King. But the great revelation of prophecy, not being a restoration work, is given to the people of God after the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple and after the gathering of the faithful ones to himself at the temple. It was since then that the faithful have learned that there is a difference between the work of the. church foreshadowed by Elijah and that foreshadowed by Elisha. There clearly appears to be a difference in the work embraced within the language of Mark, to wit, “Elias verily cometh first and restorelh all things,” and the work embraced within the meaning of the words uttered by the apostle Peter concerning the restoration of all things spoken of by all the prophets.
TIMES OF REFRESHING
sThe word “ restore!h” as used by Jesus in the foregoing text being directly related to the word restitution used later, the matter is here appropriately considered. In the early days of the church the apostle Peter used the word restitution, and for many years past we have understood that the apostle there meant the restitution of the world of mankind during the thousand-year reign of Christ Jesus, and that such restitution means the giving of life to human creatures. In the light of the truth revealed since the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple that conclusion concerning the restitution of mankind does not seem to be warranted by the Scriptures. What, then, is the moaning of the words of the apostle Peter, to wit: “Whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began.”—Acts 3:21.
8	Peter spoke under inspiration of the holy spirit, and due consideration must be given to all his words uttered in connection with the word restitution there used. In Acts 3:19 the apostle tells of ‘times of refreshing that shall come from the face of Jehovah’. Manifestly the time here mentioned is the time when Jehovah turns his face toward and gives attention to the building up of Zion, as it was written by his prophet: “When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall
appear in his glory.” (Ps. 102:16) Jehovah appears at Zion in the representative capacity of his great High Priest, Christ Jesus; hence it is written: “And he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you.” (Acts 3:20) In the preceding nineteenth verse of that chapter the apostle declares that “your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come”. Manifestly these words last quoted have reference to the refining and cleansing work performed by Jesus at the temple in order that the cleansed ones might offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness. (Mal. 3:3) Following that cleansing work, and hence at the same time, there comes great refreshing to the cleansed ones. This does not mean the cleansing from inherited sins, but a cleansing from the sins that attach Io the church at the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple. Being cleansed, these approved or cleansed ones are covered with the robe of righteousness and given the garments of salvation, and they are greatly refreshed and rejoice. (Isa. 61:10) these approved ones, at the invitation of Christ Jesus, enter into the joy of the Lord. (Matt. 25:21) They are brought into the temple, ami the new covenant is inaugurated towaid them. It is a time of great refreshing to the cleansed ones. Thin time of refreshing could not come until alter Jesus was sent forth by Jehovah to rule amongst his enemies, and that v.as doin' in 1911. The time of refreshing could not come until Jesus returned from heaven and gathered unto himself his faithful ones, and this is emphasized by the words of the apostle, when he says concerning .Jesus: “Whom the heaven must [retain] until the times of restitution of all things.” Thus definitely is the time of restitution fixed, to wit, at the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple.
10	Note now that the apostle Peter quotes from Iho words of Deuteronomy 18:15,18 and directly connects the same with the times of restitution. Thus the apostle identifies Christ Jesus alone as the one foreshadowed by Moses, the coming of whom at The command of Jehovah marks the time of refreshing to the faithful followers of Christ Jesus who love his appearing. This proves that there is a direct and important relationship of the covenant made in Moab, which was a covenant of faithfulness foreshadowing the kingdom, and the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple, and the times of refreshing from the face of Jehovah and the “restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began”. It follows conclusively, then, that restitution here must take place at the time of the coming of the great Prophet foreshadowed by Moses.
11	In the days of Abraham Jehovah had sot up his typical kingdom by Melchizedek, “priest of the most high God.” being placed upon his throne. (Gen. 14:18; Ileb. 7:1-1) That typical kingdom passed away, and hundreds of years thereafter Jehovah made a covenant with his peoi>le in Moab, which covenant
214
«3Te WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
of faithfulness foreshadowed the covenant later made with Jesus for the kingdom. That covenant made in Moab shows that it was Jehovah’s purpose to revive or restore the kingdom of God, which he had set up under Melchizedek. The book of Deuteronomy is the only place in the prophecies written by Moses that instructions are definitely laid down to the people of and concerning a future King and kingdom, which King must come as the antitype of Moses. (Deut. 17:14-20; 28:36) It is true that in Exodus 19:6 God had told the Israelites that if they would obey his voice they should be a kingdom of priests and a holy nation; but that nation failed to oliey the Lord God, and it is in the book of Deuteronomy, written thereafter, that the future kingdom is emphasized. In the book of Deuteronomy the kingdom and things pertaining thereto are pictured by a mountain of rock and Jehovah is called “The Kock”, meaning the King of eternity. (Deut. 32:4) Then in Deuteronomy 33:5 his kingship is expressly stated in these words: “And he was king in Jeshurun, when the heads of the people and the tribes of Israel were gathered together.” This prophecy shows that the kingdom foreshadowed in Moab would be set up at the time the Lord Jesus, the Greater Moses, should appear and gather God’s righteous people, his saints, together unto him.—I’s. 50:5; 2 Thess. 2:1.
12	The Israelites looked forward to the coming of a King, because all the prophets had foretold the coming of Messiah; and then in due time the promised King was limited to the house of Judah, concerning whom the prophet wrote: “The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David, he will not turn from it; Of the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy throne.” (Ps. 132:11) 'Without a doubt King David was a type of Jesus Christ, the Head of Zion, the capital organization of Jehovah. “For the Lord hath chosen Zion: he hath desired it for his habitation. This is my rest for ever: here will I dwell; for I have desired it.” (Ps. 132:13,14) Other men succeeded David as king of Israel, and in the year 606 B.C. the typical kingdom exercised by the Israelites fell down and passed away. Such was the situation when Jesus was with his disciples, and after his resurrection very appropriately his disciples said to him: “Lord, wilt thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel?” (Acts 1:6) The word restore there used is the. root word for “restitution” appearing at Acts 3:21 and thus directly connects the words of the apostle concerning the restoring of the kingdom with the restitution mentioned in the latter text.
THE FACTS
13	The words of the apostle Peter in Acts are partly a quotation of the prophecy uttered by Moses and partly his own words spoken under inspiration of the holy spirit, and which words spoken by him were also a prophecy to be fulfilled in the future. Until that prophecy is in course of fulfilment or has been
fulfilled it cannot be properly understood. The kingdom looking to the vindication of Jehovah’s name had been typically set up and had fallen down, and in due time must be restored. Christ Jesus is the ‘Stone cut out of the mountain’ (Dan. 2: 34), the chief corner stone of Zion, the One who is the vindicator of Jehovah’s name. When Jesus was offered as king to the nation of Israel, that was a miniature laying of the corner stone of the kingdom, God’s holy capital organization. (Matt. 21:1-11) In 1914 Christ Jesus received the kingdom and was sent forth by Jehovah to rule, and it was then that he began his rule and cast Satan and his wicked ones out of heaven. (Ps. 110: 1,2; Rev. 12:1-9) In 1918 the Lord Jesus gathered unto himself the faithful of Jehovah and was there presented to all professed followers of Christ Jesus as the King and rightful Ruler of the earth, and, above all, the Vindicator of Jehovah’s name. That was the laying of the chief corner stone of Zion, and in completion. (Isa. 28:16,17) Here at the laying of the chief corner stone, the presentation of Jesus as King, he, the great antitypical Melchizedek, fulfilled the prophecy, to wit: “Rejoice greatly, () daughter of Zion; shout, 0 daughter of Jerusalem; behold, thy King cometh unto thee; he is just, and having salvation; lowly, and riding upon an ass, and upon a colt the foal of an ass.” (Zech. 9:9) This was the time for great rejoicing, hence a time of great refreshing. (Zech. 4:7; Preparation, pages 70,71,154-161) Approximately at that time the faithful were taken into the covenant for the kingdom, which covenant had been foretold by the covenant of faithfulness made in Moab.
14	After the coming of the Lord to the temple he opened up the prophecies, and they became plain to those who devote themselves to Jehovah God. The living stones, then gathered to the temple and made a part thereof, built up into that holy structure, receive the light of the temple and greatly rejoice. the face of Jehovah was turned toward them, and the faithful discern their Teachers, Jehovah and Christ Jesus, who are no longer pushed into a corner but are now made manifest. (Isa. 30:20) “Times of refreshing” there begun have continued and have increased upon God’s people, and they have been marvelously refreshed by the unfolding of the prophecies. Appropriate to this time is the language of the psalmist, to wit: “Thou preparcst a table before me in the presence of mine enemies: thou anointest my head with oil; my cup runneth over.” (Ps. 23:5) “But my' horn shalt thou exalt like the horn of an unicorn: I shall be anointed with fresh oil.” (Ps. 92:10) From that time forward have been ‘times of blessedness’ to those in the temple who continue faithful. (Dan. 12:12) The reason for such great rejoicing is that the “man child”, which is the kingdom, is born and has been set up and restored by Christ Jesus, the King and Executive Officer of Jehovah ; and his faithful followers, gathered unto him, have re-
July 15, 193-1
SFfc WATCHTOWER,
215
ccived at his hands the robe of righteousness and have had their ‘sins blotted out’. In the language of the apostle, Christ Jesus, who had theretofore been preached to the faithful, had now come and received unto himself his faithful followers.
13	The coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple marks the beginning of times of restitution of all things which God has spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began. This could not have reference to the restitution of the human race to perfect human life, because such is not “the all-important thing”, neither have all the prophets foretold the restitution of the human raee. All the prophets have “foretold of these days”, to wit, of the restitution of the kingdom as God’s instrument for the vindication of his name; and the most important of all is the vindication of his name. The only Scriptural conclusion that'can possibly be reached is that “the restitution of all things” means the restitution of God’s kingdom, which existed once in miniature, which had fallen down, and which is now set up in completion with Christ Jesus the Chief, the Head Stone, the great Prophet, Priest and King on the throne. Immediately following and in connection with this statement of “restitution of all things” the apostle quotes the prophecy from Deuteronomy IS: 15-18 and definitely shows that Christ Jesus is the Greater Moses and that every one whom he gathers unto himself must now be wholly and entirely obedient to God's great Executive Officer. Whatever the Scriptures teach about the salvation of the human race, and bringing the obedient ones to human perfection, the texts at Acts 3:19-23 have no reference to such work.
TABERNACLE OF DAVID
’• A tabernacle symbolically stands for a dwellingplace. The name “David” means “beloved” and pictures Christ Jesus, the beloved Son of God. The tabernacle or dwelling-place of Jehovah God as related to his creatines is Zion, his capital organization, of which Christ Jeans his beloved Son is the Head. “For the Lord hath chosen Zion: he hath desired it for his habitation. This is my rest for ever: here will I dwell; for I have desired it.” (Ps. 132:13,14) As a type foreshadowing his dwelling-place Jehovah God set up Melchizcdek as his priest and king, and concerning whom it is clearly stated that Christ Jesus is the one whom Melchizcdek foreshadowed. (Heb. 7:1-3) When Jehovah by the mouth of Moses made the covenant of faithfulness in Moab, he told the Israelites that he would choose for them a ‘king from amongst their brethren’. (Deut. 17:15) Later the promise was confined to the house of David and David was put upon the throne as king. Later that typical royal house fell down. Then by his prophet Jehovah God said: “In that day will I raise up the tabernacle of David that is fallen, and close up the breaches thereof; and I will raise up his ruins, and I will build it as in the days of old: that they may possess the remnant of
Edom, and of all the [nations], which are called by my name, saith the Lord that doeth this.” (Amos 9:11,12) In the eleventh verse above quoted the words “in that day” refer to the day of Jehovah • beginning with 1914, when he sent Jesus forth to rule; and thus the time for rebuilding the tabernacle of David, foretold by the prophet, is fixed, which time is the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple in 1918 and the building up of Zion to the glory of Jehovah God. Amos’ prophecy refers to the fact that, when its fulfilment took place, the Greater David would be in possession of the nations. In harmony with this it is written concerning Jesus: “Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion. Ask of me, and I shall give thee the (nations] for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.”— Ps. 2: 6, 8.	’
17	This prophecy of Amos must be fulfilled at some time, and the tabernacle of David must be builded up. But before the building of that tabernacle and the completion of Jehovah’s capital organization, he declares his purpose to take out from the nations a people for his name, which people so taken out must be witnesses to his name. The apostles of Christ Jesus were holding a conference at Jerusalem, considering what should be done about the gospel’s going to the non-Jews. There, guided by the holy spirit, they reached the correct conclusion, and then they sent messengers to others to inform them of God’s purpose. (Acts 15: 21-2G) At that time Jehovah had made with Christ Jesus the new covenant, the purpose of which is to take out from the nations his witnes-.es for his name. At the time of this conference in Jerusalem some of the disciples had carried the message of the kingdom to the Gentiles or non-Jews. lienee James on that occasion said: “Men and brethren, hearken unto me: Simeon hath declared how God at the first did visit the Gentiles, to take out of them a people for his name.” Such is the work of the new covenant, which work must progress to a completion and until the coming of the Lord Jesus, and the building up of Zion. Continuing, the apostle James said, quoting from the prophet Amos: “And to this agree the words of the prophets; as it is written, After this I will return, and will build again the tabernacle of David, which is fallen down ; and I will build again the ruins thereof, and I will set it up; that the residue of men might seek after the Lord, and all the Gentiles, upon whom my name is called, saith The Lord, who doeth all these things.” (Acts 15:15-18) This proves that the purpose of Jehovah from the beginning was to take out a people for his name and, when these are taken out, then he would set up his kingdom, that is to say, set up Zion as his dwelling-place, that he wou'd build the tabernacle of David which had fallen down; and this work constitutes exactly what Peter called “the restitution of all things” spoken by rhe mouth of all the holy prophets since the world began.
18	Now compare the facts with the prophecy. The
216
tffe WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
work of taking out the people for Jehovah’s name has progressed. In 1918 Christ Jesus, the antitypical David, at the command of Jehovah, gathered together the saints and built up Zion, Jesus himself being laid as the chief corner stone therein. Christ Jesus, the great Priest and King, takes charge of God’s people. “The dead in Christ,” that is to say, those faithful men such as the apostles, ‘were raised first’ and made a part of Zion, the tabernacle of David, which once existed and fell down and is now restored and set up. (1 Thess. 4:15,16) At the time Jesus came and builded up Zion there stood in his presence a number of persons who were in line for the kingdom, and at the judgment of such the approved ones were taken into the temple and formed, by the command of the Lord Jesus, the “faithful and wise servant”. (Matt. 24:45-47) Those who were found faithful at the beginning of the temple judgment, and who were foreshadowed by Mordecai and Naomi, arc designated in the Scriptures as “the remnant”. The Lord then announces what shall then immediately follow the setting up or restoring of “the tabernacle of David”, meaning God’s kingdom organization, to wit: “that the residue [remnant] of men might seek after tho Lord.” The “residue”, or remnant, here undoubtedly means those found faithful and who are made the servant of God to bear testimony to his name. (Rev. 12:17) Then says the prophet, and which the apostle quotes: “And all the Gentiles, upon whom my name is called,” manifestly meaning all those pictured by Esther and Ruth, who were brought to the truth and into the temple after the beginning of the judgment at the temple. This could not have any reference to the world in general, because the scripture says “upon whom my name is called”, that is, Jehovah’s name. The new name is given onljr to those who arc of the sanctuary company. This honor no others have or ever will have. (Isa. 42:8) The “restitution of all things” and the ‘rebuilding of the tabernacle of David’, therefore, could have no reference whatsoever to the restitution of the world in general during the thousand-year reign of Christ. The announced purpose of Jehovah from the beginning was to build up an organization for his beloved Christ Jesus, which would be used to the vindication of Jehovah’s name. In pieparing this organization he has taken out from the world a people for his name, and these include the “remnant” and all who subsequently come into his organization upon whom he puts his name, all of whom constitute Jehovah’s faithful witnesses in the earth.
BLESSING OF THE PEOPLE
10 If the words in Acts 3: 21, to wit, “times of restitution of all things,” have no reference to the restitution of mankind during the thousand-year reign of Christ, then is there no means for the blessing of the people with life and eternal happiness? Yes, most certainly there is such provision made by Jehovah, because the blessing of the people is announced in the
purpose of Jehovah. That expressed purpose first states that God will select a seed, and by and through that seed “all families of the earth shall be blessed”. That declared purpose of Jehovah, and which is called the Abrahamic covenant, is the only covenant pertaining to the blessing of the people, and that covenant is not made with any creature. Therefore it can be said without hope of successful contradiction that there exists no covenant with any creatures by and under which thej- arc to be restored to perfect human life. It is the unconditional promise of Jehovah, made doubly sure and binding by his word and oath, when he says: “By myself have I sworn, saith Jehovah.” What did Jehovah swear that he would do'? Bring forth a seed that shall possess the gate of his enemies, and that in that seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. (Gen. 22:16-18) The seed must first come, and through the seed the blessing would come. Why should Jehovah make a covenant with men and nations to bless them, after he had given his word and bound it with his oath that he would do so? The necessity for a covenant, such as the new covenant, for the. restitution of the human race or the giving of the human race life on the earth, does not exist, but there is necessity for the new covenant to take out a people for Jehovah’s name. Jehovah gave his word of promise that he would bless mankind after the taking out of this people for his name and the setting up of his kingdom, ami that blessing must come through his chosen seed, Christ Jesus. That being his expressed purpose, God will perform his purpose.
20When Jesus came to earth John said of him: “Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world.” (John 1: 29) Jehovah having purposed that Jesus should be the Redeemer of and the sin-oftering for the world, it would not be necessary for him to make a covenant with these creatures of the earth in order to accomplish his purpose. In order for men to receive the benefit resulting by reason of the sacrifice of Jesus Christ men must believe and be obedient to the Lord. Such is not a covenant with them, but is a statement of Jehovah of what he will do for those who do believe; therefore it is written: “For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.” (John 3:1(1) The lifeblood of the man Christ Jesus alone is the purchase price for the human race. No other creatine has any part in furnishing that purchase price. No one ean receive the benefit thereof without first believing on the Lord Jesus Christ. There is no otlu r name given under heaven whereby salvation ean be had. (Acts 4:12) God could not make a covenant with imperfect or sinful men to restore them. No such covenant has been or will be made. The blessings of life to the human family must and will come by and through the promised seed, Christ Jesus, and will be given only to those who love and obey Christ Jesus and Jehovah.
July 15, 1934
Flic WATCH TOWER
217
21	Misunderstanding has resulted from the conclusion reached by men that a covenant of Jehovah God with his creatures is necessary for the creatures to obtain life; but that conclusion is incorrect. It is definitely and unequivocally stated: 'Life is the gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord.’ (Rom. 6:23) By the disobedience of Adam death resulted to all, and by the sacrifice of the man Christ Jesus in the place and stead of the sinner Adam the opportunity for life as a free gift comes to all of Adam’s offspring, to such as believe and obey. Concerning this it is written: “Therefore, as by the offence of one judgment came upon all men to condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life. For as by one man’s disobedience inanj' were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous.’’ (Rom. 5:18,19) The lifeblood of Christ Jesus poured out purchased the human family, and Jehovah God clothes him with authority to give life as a free gift to those who obey him. Hence those who do obey will be made righteous or justified.
22	Those taken out for his name and who now constitute the witnesses for Jehovah did receive the gift of life exactly in the same way that mankind will receive it during the reign of Christ. They first learned of the Lord Jesus as their Redeemer and believed upon him and were justified or made righteous by faith in God and in Christ Jesus. After being thus justified and begotten of the spirit of God these now as new creatures in Chr'st are taken into the new covenant, which covenant prepares them to be Jehovah’s witnesses and to bo made members of his royal house. The world of mankind must receive life as a gift by believing on the Lord Jesus and rendering obedience unto him. Their justification is accomplished when they have proved obedient. They could not be taken into any covenant with God until they arc justified or made righteous; and this does not take place, until the end of the thousand-year reign of Christ, and at that time there would be no occasion for a covenant such as the new covenant. The irresistible conclusion is that the world of mankind does not get life by or through the new covenant, but will receive life everlasting as a free gift at the hand of Christ Jesus, Jehovah’s great high priest and chief officer. He reigns until all enemies arc destroyed; and the race is under him, and is turned over to Jehovah after being fully justified.
COVENANT OF THE PEOPLE
23	Under the reign of Christ Jesus, and during which time all nations obeying him shall be blessed, is there no covenant in force for the people? Yes, but there is no covenant in force with the people. God’s unconditional prom’oe to bless all nations is the covenant, because it is the manifestation of his will or purpose and must be carried out. He accomplishes this purpose by and through his ‘seed of promise’. Such seed of promise constitutes his 'elect servant’, Christ
Jesus. In support of this conclusion notice that Jehovah says: “Behold my seiwant, whom I uphold, mine elect, in whom mjr soul delighteth; I have put my spirit upon him; he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles [that is to say, those who are not of the house of Judah, the spiritual class].”—Isa. 42:1.
24	Christ Jesus, the Redeemer and Vindicator of Jehovah’s name, is the 'elect servant’. Those who arc made members of iiis royal house are counted in as a part of that organization, and hence form a part of that servant, and upon the servant company Jehovah has bestowed his name, and the like honor no other will ever receive. Jehovah now gives his elect servant “for a covenant of the people”. He docs not make a covenant with the people. Keep in mind that a covenant does not have to be made with creatures, but may be a one-sided or unilateral covenant. A covenant is a binding promise or agreement or expression of purpose to do or not to do a certain thing. God’s word of promise that he would bring forth a seed, in which seed all the families of the earth should be blessed, constitutes a covenant of Jehovah, that is to say, a binding agreement or declaration to bless the human race. Then, when the seed is brought forth, and the kingdom is set up and the name of Jehovah is vindicated, Jehovah will give his elect servant, Christ, “for a covenant of the people. ” That means that his great servant, Christ Jesus, will stand as a guarantee to the people that God’s purpose long ago announced will be faithfully carried into operation.
25	Concerning this it is written: “I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles.” (Isa. 42:6) Such is a part of the commission of Christ. In addition thereto the anointed servant renders aid to the “great multitude” class.—Isa. 42:7,9.
20	The elect servant, Christ, stands as an absolute assurance to the peoples of the world that they shall receive the blessings of life as a free gift from God through Christ Jesus. In order to receive such a gift the people must receive knowledge, which is the first essential to faith, and must be willing to accept the free gift. Therefore concerning Christ Jesus it is written: “Behold, I have given him for a witness to the people, a leader and commander to the people.” (Isa. 55:4) Being made the leader, instructor, and commander of the people, Christ Jesus gives to them the knowledge, leads them in the right way, and commands them what they shall do, and they must obey him before they would receive the gift of life. It is upon the shoulder of Christ, the great Prince of Peace, that the righteous government or kingdom rests. He is the Wonderful Counselor or adviser of the people, and he is the Everlasting Father, because he gives life to all of those who obey him. (Isa. 9: 6, 7) Therefore it is written concerning Christ Jesus and for the benefit of the people: “And in his name shall the Gentiles hope.”—Matt. 12:21, H.V.
218
■Tile WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
27 By his covenant Jehovah God is majestically carrying forward his announced purposes. He has taken out a people for his name, which people must now be his witnesses; and, continuing faithful, they soon shall participate in the vindication of his name. But before the battle of the great day of Cod Almighty it is his expressed will concerning his witnesses, who are by his favor a part of the servant, that they must, under the leadership of Christ Jesus, bring knowledge home to the people of good will, that they may have opportunity to turn their hearts and their devotion to God and his kingdom. Therefore he gives commandment to his holy people, to wit: “Go through, go through the gates; prepare ye the way of the people; cast up, cast up the highway; gather out the stones; lift up a standard for the people.’’ (Ba. €2:10) The present duty of the anointed witnesses of Jehovah is hence plain and clear. The obligation is laid upon them to proclaim Jehovah’s name and his kingdom as the means of blessing the world, and this obligation must be performed. Its performance is not discretionary, but mandatory. It is 1 heir privilege to invite the people of good will to join them In making such proclamation.-—JIev. 22:17.
-'‘.Jehovah’s great Prophet, Christ Jesus, is in command of God’s work being carried forward, and every soul of the temple must render complete obedience to that great prophet. (Acts 3:23) The course of the anointed is clearly pointed out. Their service unto Jehovah must be continuous praise giving glory to his name while pointing the people of good will to the kingdom as their sole and absolute hope. All the temple class will now continue to give testimony of praise to Jehovah's name, that all willing ones may know that Jehovah is God. The covenant of Jehovah announcing his expressed purpose to bless all the nations of the earth through Christ Jesus his seed is an everlasting covenant. All of its purposes will be completely performed. He gives his chosen one, the Christ, for a covenant for the people, fully assuring them that if they would receive the blessing of life everlasting in happiness they must know that Jehovah is God and Christ is his High Priest, and they must render full and complete obedience to Christ to the glory of God.
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
V 1. What is the Abn.Iiamic covenant, and why is it so called? *’ 2. Is it necessary, tor giving life on caith to the obedient of mankind, that G.id make a covenant and provide a mediator therefor? Why? Who have been received into the new covenant, and oa what condition?
U 3. Show whether the word “restitution” can be properly applied to Jehovah’s provided way for giving life on earth to human cieatures.
f -1. Explain the tian-nguiation scene.
’[ 5. What was the position of John the Baptist, according to his own declaration and also that of the angel to Zacharias concerning him? What did Jesus mean by his statement that “Elias verily cometh first, and restoreth all things'’? Mlmt is the relationship thereto of his further statement, that “the Son of man . . . must suffer many tilings, and be set at nought”?
ti C. How had the lenders of Istael “taken away the key ot knowledge”? What did Jesus mean bv his words of Matthew 21:-13?	'
7. Vilien and how were Malachi 3:1 and 4: 5, <1 fulfill'd? 1; 8, 9. Referring to Acts 3: 19,20: When would Jehovah send
Jesus (.'litist? and when, by whom, and .to whom w.-.s he previously punched? What were the “fin-,” lieie mentioned, and how were they “blotted out”? Of what did the “times of refreshing” consist, mil when did limy come? Why would they come ‘Horn the taco of Jehovah'? f 10-12. .Show that there is a direct relationship between the covenant made in Moab and the events referred to by Peter in Acts 3:19 21. Account for the question as recorded in Acts 1: 0.
T 13-15. Point out the fulfilment of the prophecy concermag the laying of the chief coiner stone of Zion; also its relationship (a) to the ‘times of refreshing coming fioni the lace of Jehovah’ and (b) to the “times of natilu-tion of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets”.
V 1(1-18. Explain how God ‘visited the Gentiles to take out of them a people for his name’. Also the relationship thereof to the fulfilment of Amos 9: 11,12.
19. How is the new covenant in its operation related to the fulnlment of the Abrahamie covenant?
T 20-22. Explain Jehovah’s provision for blessing the human race with life on earth, and the condition on which the creature will gain such blessing. Compare with this the manner in which those in the new covi mint received the gift of life; abo the basis and time of receiving their justification.
K 23, 21. 1’oint out the fulfilment of Isaiah 42:1. Explain whether during the reign of Christ Jesus there will be a covenant in force for the people, and the means by which God will fulfil his promise to bless all the families of earth.
£ 25, 2(i. Apply (a) Isaiah 42: 6. (b) Isaiah 55: 4. (c) Isaiah 9:0,7. (d) Matthew 12:21.
27. To v.hom is the commandment of Isaiah 02: 10 addressed, and how is that work accomplished?
K 28. What course of action is now the privilege and duty ot the anointed? and what is the purpose of the testimony to bo given?
COVENANT BY SACRIFICE: REQUIREMENTS
LONG ago a unique provision was made by the Almighty Creator for bringing into complete * peace and harmony, with himself and with one another, those of the human family who have a sincere desire for righteousness and who will obey the instruction of his King, Christ Jesus.
No natural descendant of Adam has ever been suitable for a sacrifice looking to man’s reconciliation. It was the perfect man Jesus alone who was qualified for such sacrifice. There could be no covenant by sacri
fice prior to our Lord’s consecration, because he was the only perfect man on earth since Adam. Not even the angels of heaven could enter into such a covenant to redeem the human race, because the perfect man was required to provide the purchase price. It follows then that there would have been no reason for Jehovah’s disclosing to the Logos before coming to the earth that he was to be a sacrifice. He could not enter into the covenant until he became a perfect Tuan. The apostle makes it clear that Christ Jesus him-a if
July 15, 1934
fflle WATCHTOWER.
219
is the one that enters the covenant by sacrifice and that there is but one sacrifice. “Nor yet that he should offer himself often, . . . but now once in the end of the world hath he appeared, to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself. ... So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many.”—Ileb. 9:25-28.
How then can anyone else be sacrificed in order to be with Christ? It follows that no one would be an acceptable sacrifice to Cod unless he is taken in as a part of the sacrifice of Christ Jesus himself. It follows that anyone joinin" Jesus in such sacrifice must do so on the basis of what Jesus did. Therefore the merit of Christ Jesus’ sacrifice must be presented in heaven and the foundation laid for the justification of all who arc taken into the covenant.
There is therefore no separate or individual covenant by sacrifice made by those who will compose the body of Christ, but all are one in Christ Jesus. Each one, accepted is offered as a part of the sacrifice of Christ.
All of the members of the true church are one in Christ. “For as the body is one, and hath many members, and all the members of that one body, being many, are one body; so also is Christ. For by one spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free; and have been all made to drink into one spirit.” (1 Cor. 12:12,13) Xll are baptized into his death. (Korn. 6: 3-6) The first ones brought into the covenant with Jesus were his disciples, and then other Jews. Thereafter the favor was extended to the Gentiles. lienee it is written: “But now, in Christ Jesus, yc who sometimes were far off, arc made nigh by the blood of Christ. For he is our peace, who hath made both one, and hath broken down the middle wall of partition between us; having abolished in his flesh the enmity, even the law of commandments contained in ordinances; for to make in himself of twain one new man, so making peace; and that he might reconcile both unto God in one body by the cross, having slain the enmity thereby; and came and preached peace to you which were afar off, and to them that were nigh. For through him wo both have access by one spirit unto the Father. Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellowcitizcns with the saints, and of the household of God.”—Eph. 2:13-19.
No one can make a covenant with Jehovah at the time of his consecration, for the obvious reason that he is imperfect and not competent to contract and has no sacrifice bj’ which to make a covenant. All man can do is to consecrate himself to do the will of God. How then is it possible for any man to get into the covenant by sacrifice ? It is only by the grace of God through Jesus Christ.
A man learns that he is a sinner, that Jesus Christ is his Redeemer, and he whom Jehovah has given for the salvation of man. He believes this and fully surrenders himself unto God, agreeing to do his will what
soever that may be. The man’s faith in the shed blood of Jesus Christ is the basis of his presentation by Jesus to Jehovah. “It is God that justifieth.” (Rom. 8:33) The man, therefore, being justified by faith, has counted unto him by Jehovah the right to human life which the Lord Jesus, by the grace of God, now offers unto Jehovah as a part of his own sacrifice. This was pictured in the sacrifice of the goats in connection with the tabernacle and the temple. (Lev. 16:9-16) Jehovah, graciously receiving the consecrated and justified man as a part of Christ Jesus’ sacrifice, affords the individual the greatest opportunity of all times. That great privilege and opportunity to man is for him to be made a part of the body of Christ for sacrifice. For this reason some of the afflictions of Christ are left over for the body’s sake, which is the church. (Col. 1:24) But individually no man could bargain at the time of his consecration that he is consecrating in order to be taken in as a part of the sacrifice and later taken to heaven. Such would be presumptuous on the man’s part. Nor could any individual say that he makes a full consecration with the understanding that he is to remain on earth for ever. God alone must determine that.
It is the will of God that there shall be taken from amongst men those who shall be members of the bodj’ of Christ in glory, the humanity of all of which must be offered up by the High Priest as a part of his own sacrifice. These are all one in Christ. From the number of those who consecrate themselves wholly unto God, ultimately the required number will be taken to compose the body of Christ. Such will be faithful unto the terms of the covenant.—Rev. 2:10.
While the individual cannot himself make a covenant by sacrifice with Jehovah, the advantage is ultimately ail on the individual’s side; hence it is a matter of grace from God. Christ Jesus made the covenant by sacrifice; and the individual members are taken into the covenant as a part of his sacrifice, mid arc therefore counted as having made a covenant by sacrifice. The reward to them will be life and glory with Christ. Jehovah takes no advantage to himself from the covenant by sacrifice, but permits it all to go for the benefit of mankind. Therefore The Christ, that is to say, the body of humiliation and the human life, is baptized into death, resulting from the covenant by sacrifice, and from being baptized into Christ’s death. (Rom. 6:3,4) “Else what shall they do which are. baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? Why are they then baptized for the dead?”—1 Cor. 15:21,29.
Although at the time of consecration a man may desire to be accepted into the covenant arrangement, yet he could not be certain thereof. By that is meant he might desire to be dead with Christ and reign with him, but that is a matter for Jehovah to determine. It is Jehovah who justifies according to his own will the one consecrating, that he might be taken into the covenant by sacrifice; and it is Jesus who slays the
220
WATCHTOWER.
Buookxyn, N. Y.
justified ones and offers them up as a part of his own sacrifice after God has justified them for that purpose. The consecrating one does no deciding at all. lie must wait for the Lord’s action. (Rom. 9:16) The greatest favor that God grants to man is to permit him to be taken into the covenant by sacrifice with Christ and share in his vindication work. That is why Paul says: “Because to you it was graciously given on behalf of Christ, not only to believe into him, but also to suffer [death] on his account.”—Phil. 1:29, Diaglott.
The promise to Abraham was: “In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.” What is the relationship of that promise to the covenant by sacrifice? Those taken into the covenant by sacrifice and thereafter into the kingdom covenant received the gift of life (which is sacrificed) in the same way mankind receives it during Christ’s reign. It was his only son Isaac whom God commanded Abraham to sacrifice on Mount Moriah. Abraham there offered Isaac, his only son, and received him in a figure as though resurrected from the dead. (Heb. 11:17-19) This sacrifice of Isaac, and his figurative resurrection, foreshadowed that he who would be the “seed”, through which the blessings of reconciliation should come, must first be. put to death by sacrifice and then be raised from the dead. Such is what Jehovah did with his beloved Son, whom Isaac foreshadowed. All taken into the kingdom covenant with him must also die and be raised from the dead as members of the divine body of Christ if they shall have a part in the work of reconciliation of fallen man. The conditions imposed upon all taken into the
covenant are these: “It is a faithful saying: For if we be dead with him, we shall also live with him: if we suffer, we shall also reign with him: if we deny him, he also will deny us.” (2 Tim. 2:11,12) These must suffer ignominy with Christ Jesus the Head and must die with him as a part of his sacrifice in order to live with him and reign with him.
Are not all those who are in the covenant by sacrifice priests? The body members are called “an holy priesthood”, but they are not sacrificing priests. They are merely assistants to the Priest, Christ Jesus, who is the acceptable sacrifice and who makes the offering for sin. (1 Pet. 2: 5, 9 ; Lev. 16: 6) No individual offers a sacrifice for sin, for the reason that “this man [Jesus] . . . offered one sacrifice for sins for ever”. (Heb. 10:12) What sacrifices, then, ere offered by the assistants to the High Priest? Paul answers: "By him therefore let us [new creatures in Christ, counted members of his body] offer the sacrifice of praise Io God continually, that is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his name. But to do good, and to communicate, forget not: for with such sacrifices God is well pleased.”—Heb. 13:15,16; see also Pss. 4:5; 27:6; 51:17; 107:22; 116:17.
Each faithful one must be the servant of God and render his reasonable service. For this reason Paul stresses the importance of faithful service: “J bcs.eeh you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service.” —Rom. 12:1.
LIFE FOR MANKIND BY A RANSOM
IT IS very important that we understand the meaning of the term “ransom”, for long ago God made this wonderful promise through his prophet Hosea (13:14) : “I will ransom them from the power of the grave; I will redeem them from death: 0 death, I will be thy plagues; () grave, I will be thy destruction.” Hence we here define the term. Hansom means “something to loosen with”; that is, a redemptive price. It is the means or price or value which can be used in loosening or releasing something that is in bondage or in restraint or imprisoned. Necessarily the ransom price must be exactly equivalent to, or corresponding with, that which justice requires of the thing or creature that is in bondage or imprisonment. Hence we say that ransom means an exact corresponding price. A perfect man sinned and was sentenced to death; hence an exact corresponding price would bo the death of another perfect man and the value of his life presented in place of the one who first sinned and was held in bondage.
“Sin-offering” means the presentation and use of the ransom price. On the yearly atonement-day service performed by the Jews in type, the shed blood of
the bullock of the sin-offering represented the animal’s poured-out life; and therefore it stood for the ransom price or value of the life. The priest's carrying the blood into the most holy of the sanctuary and sprinkling it there pictured the sin-offering, that is, <i presentation in the most holy (which represented “heaven itself”) of the value or merit of the perfect life. We shall sec, therefore, as we examine this question that the ransom price was provided on earth by the death of Jesus; that preparation for the sin-offering was begun on earth, but must be finished in heaven, where the value of the ransom price is presented.
Other scriptures in the Bible show that it was purposed by Jehovah that the great Redeemer should pour out his life in death and that this should constitute the ransom price, which should be made an offering for sin. God foretold this (which act is equivalent to a promise) through his prophet Isaiah (chapter 53) when he wrote concerning the great coming Redeemer the following words:
“ Who hath believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the I.ord revealed? For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry
July ]5, 1934
WATCHTOWER,
221
ground: he hath no form nor comeliness; and when we shall sec him, there is no beauty that we should desire him. lie is despised and rejected of men ; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was despised, and we esteemed him not. Surely be hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows: yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afilieted. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his stripes we are healed. All we, like sheep, have gone astray; we have turned every one to lies own way; and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all. lie was oppressed, and he was afilieted; yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth. Ue was taken from prison and from judgment: and who shall declare his generation? for he was cut off out of the land of the living: for the transgression of my people was he stricken. And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death; because he had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth. Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him; he hath put him to grief: when thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall sec his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied: bjr his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; for he shall bear their iniquities. Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong; because he hath poured out his soul unto death: and he was numbered with the transgressors; and he bare the sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors.”
Because of this death sentence standing against Adam the first man, he was and is held in death. He and his offspring who have died are in the grave spoken of by the prophet Job (17:13; 3:18) in these words: ‘‘If I wait, the grave is mine house: I have made my bed in the darkness.” ‘‘There the prisoners rest together: they hear not the voice of the oppressor.”
The dead could never again live, nor could those who are living ever hope 1o have eternal happiness, unless the disability resting upon mankind because of sin be first removed; and the Scripture is quite clear, as noticed before, that this can be removed only by means of the great ransom sacrifice. Since ‘‘ransom” means an exact corresponding price, the ransomer must he exactly like the perfect Adam in Eden.
A perfect man had sinned and lost even-thing; therefore none but a perfect man could provide a price sufficient to buy and release Adam and his race from this sentence of death and its effects. Divine justice demanded the life of a perfect human creature, and this was received when Adam went into death. It followed that divine justice would accept nothing
more nor less, as a price for releasing Adam and his offspring, than a perfect human life. In order to meet these divine requirements, the ransomer must be a perfect human creature.
When God gave the law to Israel at Mount Sinai in Arabia he indicated by the promise of that law that the onlj- means by which the human race could be redeemed or ransomed would be by the giving of a perfect human life in the place of Adam’s perfect human life, which he had forfeited by his disobedience. We remember that the apostle Paul said that this law was ‘a shadow of better things to come’. (Ilcb. 10:1) That law required an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, a foot for a foot, a life for a life: that is to say, a price exactly corresponding to that which had been lost. As an illustration: Under the law, if one man knocked out another’s tooth, he must lose one of his own teeth. If he struck out a man's eye, he must give up one of his own eyes. If he took tho life of his fellow creature, he must give up his own life. Thus the law pictured that the great ransoimr would correspond exactly with the perfect man Adam when Adam was in Eden.— Ex. 21:23-25; Lev. 24: 17-21; Deut. 19:21.
But who in all the world was able to bear this burden or meet the requirements of the divine law? Adam could not redeem himself. All of his offspring were imperfect, and God could not accept an imperfect human creature as a ransom. Was there nobody, then, on earth wiio could redeem the human race from death according to the Lord God’s promise? The prophet of the Lord answers: “None of them [no creature on earth] can by any means redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom for him.” (Ps. 49:7) For this reason, then, it seemed hopeless for man ever to expect to be released from the conditioirof death. Furthermore, this judgment and sentence against Adam was entered in the divine court of heaven and it follows that not only must the ransom price, namely, the value of a perfect human life, be provided by the death of a perfect human creature, but the value of that life must be presented to divine justice in heaven itself; and no human creature has access to heaven.
Hence there were two reasons why it was utterly impossible for any of Adam’s stock or offspring to redeem mankind: First, because all were imperfect and none could provide the price; and, second, if the price wore provided, it could not be presented in heaven by any such.
Thus is presented to the human race a condition of absolute helplessness. Thus we see that mankind was wholly without power to release itself from the condition of death, and that there never could be any hope that anyone of the human family would enjoy life everlasting in a state of happiness unless Ged, in the exercise of his loving-kindness, should make some provision. He had promised to make such provision. His great purpose provided for such. It is first necessary, however, for us to see man’s absolute
222
ffTie WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
extremity in order that we may appreciate God’s opportunity for blessing mankind, and the great debt which the human race owes to Jehovah and his beloved Son for the provision made.
If a man found himself and his family in a dungeon and a million dollars were required to release him, and he had not one penny, but a friend of his appeared and provided the money and released him and his family, that man would owe a great debt of gratitude to his deliverer. He would feel much gratitude in his heart. lie would surely love his deliverer and would be anxious to do anything he could for him. Adam and all of his family arc either in the condition of death or under the effects of death; and if wc find that the great Jehovah God has made provision for the release and deliverance of all such from the tomb, with a view to granting the obedient ones everlasting life, liberty, and happiness, then such facts should bring joy to the heart of every one who learns of it.
The apostle Paul, having in mind these things, wrote; ‘We were children in bondage under the elements of the world: but when the fullness of the time
was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the law.’ (Gal. 4:3,4) How did God send his Son? Since a perfect man had sinned and the life of a perfect man must be given as a sin-offering, it is now important to see if the Son of God whom he sent was qualified to meet the requirements of the law and be the ransomer or redeemer.
It is easy to be seen that Jesus when on earth could not have been merely an incarnated spirit creature, because that would constitute a fraud, and God would not sanction anything wrong. He must be a man, perfect in every respect, equal and corresponding to the perfect Adam while in Eden. It is also easy to be seen that Jesus could not be part God and part man, because that would be more than the law required; hence divine justice could not accept, such as a ransom. The divine law definitely shows that the ransomer must be exactly corresponding to Adam, a perfect human creature. And this is what the beloved and only-begotten Son of God became when his heavenly Father sent him down from heaven to earth to bear witness for God and to redeem the entire human family.
PROCLAIMING EARTH’S NEW LEADERSHIP
OPINIONS of wide variety have been expressed as to the purpose of Jesus’ mission in the earth, and also as to what has been the purpose of the faithful followers or disciples of Jesus. A number of scriptures clearly show that the work of Jesus and those who were with him when he was upon earth was a work which they were under contract to do. When Jesus received the anointing of the holy spirit he became the heir of David the king, and the everlasting covenant for the kingdom applied to him from then on. Why was the covenant made? Among other reasons God’s prophet answers: “Behold, I have given h'm for a witness to the people, a leader and commander to the people.” (Isa. 55:4) God made the everlasting covenant with Jesus for a throne, and immortality, whien included all the interests of his righteous government on earth. The kingdom interests required him to be a witness to the name of Jehovah. Pilate said to Jesus: “Art thou a king?” The answer of Jesus was: “Thou sayest that I am a king. To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth. Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice.” (John 18:36,37) This is proof conclusive that one of the conditions of the everlasting covenant was that he should bear witness to the name of Jehovah. To his faithful followers Jesus said: “And I covenant for you, even as my Father has covenanted for me, a kingdom.” Just as surely as Jesus must bear witness to the truth, even so must every one who is in that covenant bear witness to the truth. This is especially
true after the Lord comes to his temple. By that covenant Jesus was made the leader of the people. It also follows that all who arc taken into that covenant must become leaders of the people under the direction of the Ilead. That leading of the people must be in the way of God’s righteousness. To be a leader each one must be a faithful witness as opportunity affords. It means also that such leaders must be entirely out of accord with the evil world and its god the Devil. Jesus refused to compromise with the Devil. Uis followers must do the same thing. As Jesus forgot self and did only as his Father commanded, even so those who are taken into the covenant must forget self and joyfully obey the commandments of the Lord.
In this day of distress and perplexity, when the people are suffering under the burdens of unrighteous governments and know not which way to turn, never was there such a blessed opportunity as that given now to the true followers of Jesus to lead the people in the way of righteousness by pointing them to God's kingdom. It is that righteous government that shall bring relief and everlasting joy to mankind. Some of the anointed ones for a time neglected the privilege of being such witnesses. The Scriptures show that some of these become aware of their negligence and awake to their privileges and then take a part in proclaiming the glad message; and so doing, God bestows upon them his everlasting blessings. (Isa. 59:20,21) While the Lord progresses with the establishment of his government, he says to those whom he has chosen for his witnesses: “I have put my words in thy mouth,
July 15, 1934
WATCHTOWER,
223
and I have covered thee in the shadow of mine hand, that I nay plant the heavens, and lay the foundations of the earth, and say unto Zion, Thou art my people.” -—Isa. 51:16.
The fact that he has put his message in the mouth of these witnesses is conclusive proof that they must be proclaiming his name and his government to those who have hearing ears. This is the part of such in the planting of the invisible, as well as the visible, part of God’s government. It is their privilege and duty to tell the people what the present events mean and how the Lord will establish for them a government that will bring them peace and blessings. In s,o doing, these associates with Christ Jesus constitute lenders for the people.
For years the name of Jehovah has been pushed aside, and not even Christians have known the meaning thereof. Now the followers of Jesus learn that the name of Jehovah signifies his purposes toward his people and that the time has come to exalt his name in all the earth. The exaltation of Jehovah’s name is not for any selfish reason on his part, but in order that the people might have opportunity to know that he is the Savior and Blosser of mankind and that there is no other means of obtaining life. Through his prophet he indicates the time that such proclamation concerning the exaltation of his name shall begin.
“In that day,” when used in the Scriptures, invariably refers to the time when God enters upon the great work in the establishment of his government. God through his prophet puts a song in the mouth of his faithful servants, telling them what to sing as he progress! s with his great work. ■ The remnant began that glad song shortly after 1918. The song opens with the words: “And in that day thou shalt say, 0 Lord, I will praise thee: though thou wast angry with me, thine anger is turned away, and thou comfortedst me.”—Isa. 12:1.
Up to that time many consecrated ones had put their trust in men as teachers and leaders. The experiences through which the Lord brought them caused them to see the necessity of putting their trust in him.—Ps. 11S:S, 9.
The prophet continues: “Behold, God is my salvation; I will trust, and not be afraid: for the Lord JEHOVAH is my strength and my song: he also is become my salvation.” (Isa. 12:2) Uis faithful witnesses realize that Jehovah is all-powerful nnd that his purpose is now to bring liis government into action, and they trust him implicitly and have no fear. They fully appreciate his promise that God preserves those that love him and that are faithful to him.—Ps. 31: 23.
“Therefore with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation. ’ ’ (Isa. 12:3) Water is a symbol of truth. But the knowledge of the truth alone does not bring salvation. It is the truth known and used according to God’s will that brings his approval. A well is a fountain of water. Drawing water from the
wells of salvation therefore symbolizes the taking from the fountain of truth the great refreshing truths which God provides for his people and using them according to the commandments of the Lord. Only those who receive the truth and hold it in love and obey the Lord's commandments draw water (truth) from the wells of salvation. Others draw from their own wells. This is shown by the words of the prophet: “For my people have committed two evils; they have forsaken me, the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no water.”—Jcr. 2:13.
Then the Lord directs what the faithful remnant shall do: “And in that day shall ye say, Praise the Lord, call upon his name, declare his doings among the people, make mention that liis name is exalted.” (Isa. 12:4) These words are not addressed to individuals. The fact that the word “ye” is used shows that it is addressed to the company of faithful ones who are anointed of the Lord and who compo-e the “servant” to whom the Lord has committed the interests of his kingdom.—Isa. 42:1; Matt. 24:45.
The marginal rendering of this text is “preeiaim his name . . . among the people”. It is a clear command that the proclamation must be made that the name of Jehovah may be exalted in the minds of the people. Now the name of Jehovah is exalted in Zion his organization. It must be exalted in the minds of others. If now some, claiming to be in Zion, oppose the service of singing forth the praises of Jehovah, that of itself is strong evidence that such are not of the temple class: “Tn his temple doth every one speak of his glory. ’ ’—Ps. 29: 9.
Then the prophet shows that the “servant” must not be content with singing the song for a while and then ceasing, but he must continue to “sing unto the Lord; for he hath done excellent things: this [make] known in all the earth”. (Isa. 12: 5) This is in exact harmony with the words of Jesus that this good news of the kingdom, God's kingdom, must be told to all the nations of the earth. In giving forth this message the witnesses are not to assume an apologetic attitude, but vith boldness they arc to proclaim it. “Ury out and shout, thou inhabitant of Zion: for great is the Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee.” (Isa. 12:6) Those who are really of Zion now see the evidence of God's early nnd complete victory over the powers of evil, and with joy they give a shout of triumph in anticipation of such victory.
What are 1he facts in fulfilment of this prophecy? It is since 1918 that the Lord has brought into action the radio. By means of the radio the good news of the kingdom has been heralded throughout the nations of earth. Selfish interests, under the control of Satan, use the radio, to be sure. These same selfish interests endeavor to prevent the use of the radio for a wide proclamation of the truth. Jehovah will permit just such use of it as he desires. He could pre
22-1
STIe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
vent the enemy from interfering, but he does not; and he has good reason for so doing. In his own good way he so arranged that on July 24, 1927, the greatest chain of radio stations ever used on earth to that time was linked together and used in giving proclamation to the message of good news concerning his righteous government. At that time the evils of Satan’s oppressive government were brought before the people in contrast with God’s righteous government and the blessings to flow therefrom. This the Lord arranged and had done that the people might have notice of his kingdom and that his name might be exalted in the minds of those who would hear. Since then, the message of Jehovah’s kingdom has been broadcast with ever-increasing effect in many countries, and particularly in the United States.
Because it is God’s will and his due time a little company of the followers of Christ now employ the radio to proclaim to the people the name and the purposes of Jehovah God. For this same reason they print and publish books and go from house to house and place these books in the hands of the people at a
minimum cost. They engage in the service, not for money, but because it is the greatest privilege and joy to serve the Lord and his King and to carry this message of good news to the people. Just who the individuals are that go to make up the remnant, no man can say. “The Lord knoweth them that are his.” (2 Tim. 2:19) It is not necessary for man to know. To those who continue faithful to the end God has promised to give a name that will be known only to the Lord and to the one [class] who receives the name. (Rev. 2:17) Thus he shows the sweet and confidential relationship between himself and those who arc faithful to him. Those now on earth, being the last members of the body of Christ, of course, constitute, as the figure shows, the “feet of him”; and to those that continue faithfully in the service of the Lord he says: “How beautiful upon the mountains arc the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that publishcth peace; that bringeth good tidings of good, that publishcth salvation; that saith unto Zion, Thy God reigneth! Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice; with the voice together' shall they sing; for they shall see eye to eye, when the Lord shall bring again Zion.”—Isa. 52: 7, 8.
PRAISE JEHOVAH FOR LIGHT AND TRUTH
Pear Brother Rutherford:
The Harrisburg (Pa.) company of Jehovah’s witnesses unanimously extend to you a word of encouragement and appreciation for the last two lectures recently broadcast over radio, "Fleo Now” and ‘‘World Control”, to which we had the privilege of listening. We thoroughly enjoyed them both, and
give thanks and praise to the great Jehovah for the light and truth as it now shines from his Word.
May tho dear Lord bless, comfort and sustain you in your earnest endeavor to make known the name of the great Jehovah, is the prayer of the Harrisburg company of Jehovah’s witnesses.
SERVICE APPOINTMENTS
T. E.
BANKS
W. J. THORN
Bntnn Rouge, Lit. July 31, Aug. 1
Beamuont, Tex.......Aug.	3, 4
Port Arthur, Tex......"	5,0
Houston, Tex.........'*	8, 9
Galveston, Tex.......’’ 11,12
Wharton, Tex.........” 11,15
San Antonio,	Tex...Aug. 1G,17
Austin, Tex............”	IS, 19
Mevia, Tex.............”	21, 22
Dallas, Tex............”	23,21
Oklahoma City,	Okla. ”	26,27
Tulsa, Okla............”	29, 30
Worcester, Mass......Aug.	5, G
Quincy, Mass..........•”	8, 9
Boston. Mass...........”	10-12
Lynn, Mass............."	14,15
Beverly, Mass..........”	16,17
Lawrence, Mass.........”	18,19
Haverhill, Mass........”	21
Newburyport, Mass. Aug. 22
Pot I la nd, Me.- ......”	23,24
Freeport, Me............”	25
Phippsburg, Me..........”	26
Belfast. Me.............”	28
Bangor, Me..............”	25, 30
Pittsfield, Me. ........”	31
G. H. DRAPER
Spalding, Nebr......Aug.	2	Lincoln, Nebr.....Aug. 25, 2G
Clearwater. Nebr......”	3	Nebraska City, Nebr. ”	28
Norfolk, Nebr.........”	4	Humboldt. Nebr.........”	29
Winnebago. Nebr.......”	5	Du Bois, Nebr...........”	30
Omaha, Nobr..........” 22, 23 Wymore, Nebr................ ”	31
Fremont, Nebr. .......”	24	Beatrice, Nebr........Sept.	1
S. H. TOUTJIAN
G. Y. M’CORMICK
Casper, Wyo.............Aug.	2, 3
Cheyenne, Wyo..........”	4,5
Casper, Wyo.............”	21
Roscoe, Mont............”	23
Clyde Pai k, Mont.....”	24
Manhattan, Mont........’*	25
Butte, Mont.............”	2G
Pocatello, Idaho .....Aug.	28, 29
Filer, Idaho ...........”	30
Boise, Idaho .....Vug. 31, Sept. 1
Nampa. Idoho	...Sept.	2, 3
Ontario, Dreg...........”	5
Weiser, Idaho	.....”	G, 7
Salt Lake City,	Utah ”	9,10
Jasper, Ga...........Aug.
Rome, Ga..............”
Rock Mart, Ga..........”
Dallas, Ga.............**
Atlanta, Gn............”
Eatonton, Ga...........”
Carrs Station, Ga......”
Thomson, Ga............"
Seal boro, Ga..........”
Brooklet, Ga. ........."
1	Savannah, Ga...........Aug.	10-19
2	Taylors Creek, Ga........”	21
3	Groveland, Ga............”	22
4	Daisy, Ga................”	23
5-8	Collins, Ga..............”	24
10 Swainsboro, Gn............25
11	Summertown, Ga. _________”	2G
12	Macon. Ga................... ”	29,	30
14	Ft. Valley, Ga.......... ”	31
15	LaGrange, Ga...........Sept.	1
Stevens Point, Wis. ..Amr.	2, 3
Black Creek, Wis	”	4
Pulaski, Wis	”	5
Green Bay, wis	”	7
Oshkosh, Wis	”	8
Lohrville, Wis	”	9
Markesan, Wis	”	10
Campbellsport, Wis	”	11
Sheboygan, It is	”	12
Milwaukee, Wis.......Aug. 14*17
Lake Mills. Wis........”	IS, 19
Madison, Wis...........”	21, 22
Richland Center, Wis. ”	23
Monroe, Wis............”	24, 25
Janesville, Wis.......”	26
Racine, Wis............”	28
Kenosha, Wis...........”	29.30
Waukegan, Ill..........”	31
J. C. RAINBOW
J. C. WATT
Mt Lookout, W. Va.	Aug.	1,2
Rainelle, W. Va........”	3
Glen Jean, W. Va......”	4, 5
Whipple, W. Va.........”	7
Bet k ley, W. Va.......”	8
Ottawa. W. Va..........”	9
Allen. W. Va...........”	10
Portsmouth, Ohio.......”	11,	12
Chillicothe. Ohio.Aug. 14, 15
HilMmro, Ohio .........."	Hi
Cincinnati, Ohio .......”	17-19
Hamilton, Ohio .........”	21,22
Middletown. Ohio .......”	23. 24
Dav ton, Ohio ..........”	25, 26
Springfield, Ohio ......”	28, 29
Tippecanoe City, Ohio	”	30,31
WATCHTOWER.
Published Semi-Monthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N. Y., U. S. A.
officens
J. F. Rutherford President W. E. Vax Ambulch Secretary "And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.”-ImmA 54:13-
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation and his active agent in tiro creation of all things; that the Logos is now tho Lord Jesus Chi 1st in glory, clothed with ali power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
that GOD created tlio earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man wilfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men aro born sinners and Without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and tho man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Josus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH'S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is tho Cbi“f Officer thereof and is tho rightful King of tho world; that tho anointed aud faithful followers of Christ Jesus tiro children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whoso duty and privilege it is to testify to tho supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in tho Bible, and to bear tho fruits of tho kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and tho Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of tho peoples of earth can coma only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ which has now begun; that tho Lord’s next great net is tho destruction of Satan’s organization and tho establishment of righteousness in tho earth, and that under the kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall be restored and live on earth foiever.
ITS MISSION
BIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction
specifically.designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in tho Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to tho Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his Beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of tho Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns aro not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
Unitiid States, 51.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreicn, $1.5<); Great Britain, Australasia, and Sot.m Africa, 7:. American remittances should bo made by Express or I’o-tal Money Order, or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South Afraan and Australasian remittances should bo made direct to tho rcs;,c<-tivo branch offices. Itcriittanccs from countries other iban th-i-o mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by into national Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British .......... Bl Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, Ln .'land Canadian............40	Irvin Airinto, Toronto, Ontario, Can i.la
Auslralnslan . . 7 Beresford Bond, Stiulliliclil, N. S. V>'., Australia South African . . . . Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa I'lcaso nddrc-A tho Society In every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay tho subscription pi:<‘0 may have The V.'alelitoirer frie upon written niqilication to tins publishers, made once ca.-h year, stating the reason for so requesting ii. We are glad to linn aid the needy, but tho written application once each year is required by the postal regulations. Tiottce to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of iuM.tsi, when requested, may be expected to appear on nddre s label v.'Liri one month. A renewal bitink (en vying notice of explr iti.vi I ".ill be sent with the journal one month befoie tlio subscription expires. Entered as Second Class Mail Matter at Hroollyn, N. 1’., Postoflec.
Act of March 3, 2373.
LONDON CONVENTION
August 31 to September 3 inclusive are the days for a convention of Jehovah’s witnesses tit London, England. The convention will be held at the Alexandra Enlace, the public meeting being in the large hall al Alexandra Palace, Sunday, September 2. The forenoon of each day will be deleted to field service; afternoon and evening meetings for the interested. Those contemplating attending tho London convention should address Convention Committee, 34 Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England. The president of the Society expects to attend this convention and address the public.
ADVERTISING WATCHTOWER PROGRAMS
Advertising the Kingdom helps also to advertise the radio stations which are broadcasting the kingdom message. Hence all witnessing parties and all individuals engaging in the field service should mention the radio station in their vicinity which carries the Watchtower programs. This magnifies to the people called upon the message which Jehovah’s witnesses introduce, and often results in interest in the printed message on the part of the radio listener. This is one of the chief purposes of sending out the message over the radio, to encourage the people to read the literature. In this behalf the Society supplies radio folders, and all workers should make constant use of them in house-to-house calling, leaving one of them, if nothing else.
PUBLIC LECTURES BY TRANSCRIPTION
Jehovah’s blessing has been markedly upon the use of the portable transcription machine, lie Ims plainly ma,ntested that this machine meets the need of the hour, when the iwmj, under Gog, is seeking to curtail the use of the radio by God’s anointed and when the people’s ears are eager to hear, not man’s message, but God’s. The transcription machine has increased the power of Jehovah’s witnesses afield to preach 11 is truth manyfold, so that tho desire for the literature is stimulated and study classes of many interested hearers are being formed. Besides more than 430 such machines in the United States alone, great numbers are now being effectively used m countries near and afar. For more information, write the Society.
TRANSCRIPTION MACHINES
The Society has made arrangements to construct and assemble portable transcription machines at our own factory at 117 Adams Street. These machines will be somewhat dill’erent in construction from those previously furnished. They will be spring-wound, and operated from a G-volt wetwell battery. Every machine will be furnished complete with the battery and a battery charger, so that it can be kept up to its full strength. We are pleased to announce that this machine can b? e icred at ?100, complete, to brethren in tho United States.
Vol. LV	August 1, 1934	No. 15
HIS KINDNESS
“IIow precious thy lovingkindness, 0 God; therefore the sons of men under the shadow of thy wings seek refuge: they abundantly relish the fatness of thy house, and out of the full stream of thine own pleasures thou givest them to drink. For with thee is the fountain of life, in thy light we see light.”—Ps. 36: 7-9, Roth.
PART 1
JEHOVAH having builded up Zion and gathered unto himself his saints, he gives them a broader view of his loving-kindness than previously it was possible for them to have. Those at the temple being now in the secret place of the Most High, and there taught of God by and through Christ Jesus, are commanded to go out amongst the people and from the housetops to declare the name of Jehovah, making known to those of good will the loving-kindness of Jehovah to the children of men. This loving-kindness, when known, is precious to those who love Jehovah God. They know that their own refuge is under the shadow of the wings of the Almighty, and they delight to point others to God's provision for their refuge. The rich provision of Jehovah makes glad the heart of everyone who is in his royal organization.
8	By his great executioner Jehovah will mete out exact justice to those who have willfully and deliberately broken his everlasting covenant concerning the sanctity of human life. God’s judgment toward mon is tempered with mercy toward those who have a good heart and who desire righteousness. He has commanded that his mercy shall be shown toward all those who have been unwittingly drawn into Satan’s trap and caused to break his law. His acts of justice are like the great deep, and his mercy endureth for ever. It is the privilege of those who desire knowledge and understanding to learn now about the loving-kindness of our God.
8	Jehovah has made known to the temple company that he is the fountain of life and that there is none other. He has given them such knowledge not merely for their own good, but that they might make this known to those of good will and honest heart. The battle of the great day of God Almighty is near at hand, and in that battle Christ Jesus, the Vindicator, will destroy the wicked; but the kindness of Jehovah has provided a place of refuge for those who now turn their hearts toward righteousness, seeking to join themselves unto Jehovah’s organization. Such are known as the Jonadab class, because Jonadab fore
227
shadowed them. Jehovah’s provision made for them in connection with his house is a rich provision. “Thou shewest lovingkindness unto thousands, and rccom-pensest the iniquity of the fathers into the bosom of their children after them: the Great, the Ei ghty God, the Lord of hosts, is his name, great in counsel, and mighty in work: for thine eyes are open upon all the ways of the sons of men; to give every one according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings.” (Jer. 32:18,19) There is an obligation laid upon Jehovah’s witnesses to bring these truths to the attention of the Jonadabs, that they may be advised of the only way of escape in the great disaster that shall shortly overtake the world. They must know Jehovah, take their stand on his side, and there remain steadfastly faithful, serving him, if they would receive God’s gift of life through Jesus Christ our Lord.
CITIES OF REFUGE
4	To aid the student in the examination of what follows, a brief outline is here given, to wit: The cities of refuge provided by the law of God were a place of protection for those who had unawares or unwittingly broken the everlasting covenant by taking a human life. This loving provision made by Jehovah being announced at the time of making of the covenant of faithfulness shows that the cities of refuge foreshadow God’s loving-kindness for the protection of the people of good will during Armageddon; that they must come to know these truths after the building up of Zion and before Armageddon; that the remnant of Jehovah’s anointed on earth have a positive obligation laid upon them now which must be performed toward those of the Jonadab company; and that the Jonadabs must perform certain specific requirements in order to be assured of refuge during the trouble, and to ultimately receive life.
5	Jehovah first spoke to Moses about the cities of refuge while Moses was in the plains of Moab. God having now made known Io his people that the word spoken by him, as recorded in Deuteronomy, applies
228
£HIe WAT C HT0WER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
since the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple, wc may expect to find that the provision for tire cities of refuge, as set down in the prophecies, have an antitypical fulfilment in close proximity to the time of taking the faithful followers of Christ Jesus into the covenant for the kingdom. “And the Lord spake unto Hoses in the plains of Moab, by Jordan near Jericho, saying, Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye be come over Jordan into the land of Canaan; then ye shall appoint you cities to be cities of refuge for you; that the slayer may flee thither, which killeth any person at unawares.”—Num. 35: 1,10,11; Deut. 19:1-10.
6	Moses was a type of Christ Jesus; and what Moses did on the plains of Moab, as set forth in the book of Deuteronomy, and before the Israelites crossed the Jordan to Jericho, seems to have relation to the closing days of the time of the work of ‘preparing the way before Jehovah’. (Mal. 3:1; Deut. 18:15,18; Acts 3: 19-23) Shortly before .Moses ended his work, and after receiving instruction from Jehovah concerning the cities of refuge, he communicated that law to the Israelites: “These be the words which Moses spake unto all Israel on this side Jordan, in the wilderness, . . . And it came to pass in the fortieth year, in the eleventh month, on the first day of the month, that Moses spake unto the children of Israel, according unto all that the Lord had given him in commandment unto them.” (Deut. 1:1,3) “Then Moses severed three cities on this side Jordan toward the sunrising; that the slayer might flee thither, which should kill his neighbour unawares, and hated him not in times past; ami that fleeing unto one of these cities he might live: namely, Bezer in the wilderness, in the plain country, of the Reubenites; and Rainoth in Gilead, of the Gadites; and Golan in Bashan, of the Manassites. And this is the law which Moses set before the children of Israel.” (Deut. 4:41-44) Three of the cities of refuge were on the east side of Jordan, and three on the west side, in the land of Canaan, according to the commandments of Jehovah.—Num. 35:13,14.
’ Those of the temple company have learned that Jehovah at times uses his devoted people on earth to do certain things in fulfilment of his prophecy without their knowing at the time the meaning thereof; but afterwards Jehovah makes known to them these truths and thus exhibits his loving-kindness toward them in so using them to fulfil prophecy. The setting up of tire cities of refuge was notice to those who should have need therefor that God had made provision for their protection and refuge in time of distress. That was a part of the prophecy, and, being a prophecy, it must have its fulfilment at some later day and at the coming of the Greater Moses. On the 24th day of February, A.D. 1918, by the Lord’s grace and manifestly by his overruling providence and his direction, there was delivered, at Los Angeles, for the first time the message “The World Has Ended— Millions Now Living Will Never Die”, and thereafter
that message was proclaimed by word of mouth and by printed publication throughout “Christendom”. No one of God’s people understood fully the matter at that time; but since being brought into the temple they see and understand that those on the earth who may live and not die are the ones who now ‘get into the chariot’, as Jonadab at the invitation of Jehu got into the chariot with Jehu. This throws more light on the Scriptures concerning the cities of refuge, and there must be some comforting information therein for the remnant at the present time.—Rom. 15:4.
8	Jehovah’s commandment was that there should be given to the Levites forty-eight cities and suburbs. This shows that the peoples of “Christendom” have no right to crowd Jehovah's servants, and particularly his anointed witnesses, out of the land, but must allow them freedom of activity and a reasonable amount for their maintenance. This also supports the conclusion that those who obtain literature, and thus receive an opportunity to gain a knowledge and understanding of the truth of and concerning Jehovah and his kingdom, should contribute something to defray the expense of publication, that more books may be brought to tho people by Jehovah’s witnesses that other people might know the name of Jehovah and his loving-kindness. The Jonadab class now see that they have the privilege of aiding in this work and of bearing the message to others and thus showing their love for God and appreciation of his kindness.
8	Out of the forty-eight cities provided for the specific benefit of the Levites there were designated six cities for a place of refuge. “And among the cities which ye shall give unto the Levites, there shall be six cities for refuge, which ye shall appoint for the manslayer, that he may flee thither: and to them ye shall add forty and two cities.” (Num. 35:6) These six cities were assigned to those who had been redeemed or purchased by Jehovah in the place of Israel’s firstborn and who had been assigned exclusively to God’s service. (Num. 3:11-51) A city is a symbol of an organization; and the six cities thus appointed picture the organization of Jehovah’s anointed ones yet on the earth, representing Zion, the holy city, since it is builded up. There being six would not indicate an imperfect refuge, but rather would suggest that such is God’s provision for refuge while imperfect conditions still exist on the earth. There were no bridges or ferries over the Jordan river, and God’s loving-kindness is again made manifest by placing three of the<e cities of refuge on the east and three on the west side of the river. The Levites and the priests (the priests were also Levites, and taken from that tribe) wou;d picture that Jehovah’s kingdom organization had come, and such is the ‘city for which Abraham looked while he dwelt in a tent or tabernacle.—Ileb. 11: 9, 10.
10	The Hebrew word for “refuge”, which is applied only to these six cities, means an “asylum”, as a receptacle into which something might be taken tor protection and safe-keeping. If Jehovah would nm :o
Augvst 1, 1934
WATCHTOWER
223
such provision for one who slew another unawares, and wiio would therefore be helpless against the avenger or executioner, it would certainly seem reasonable that he would provide a similar place of protection for those people on earth who are of good will to be preserved from the sword of the great Executioner which will avenge the world-wide violation of the everlasting covenant pertaining to the sacredness of human life. All the nations have violated the everlasting covenant, and for this reason God will execute his vengeance upon them at the battle of Armageddon, which is the day of the expression of the vengeance of our God. In tiic cities of refuge the fugitive could be hid; and even so in the day of the execution of Jehovah’s vengeance he has provided a place of refuge where certain ones may be hid who learn the truth and who do that which is right.
“ The total number of forty-eight cities were given to the Levites, and, out of that forty-eight, thirteen were given to the priests. (Josh. 21:1-19) Only one city of the priests was made a city of refuge, namely, Hebron, in the hill country of Judea. (Josh. 21:11-13) Doubtless that was the city visited by Alary, the mother of Jesus, when she went there to call upon Elisabeth, the wife of the priest, Zacharias. (Luke 1:39,40) The cities of refuge being given to those of the tribe of Levi, from which tribe the priests were taken, the manslayer seeking refuge was obliged to find protection in those cities. These cities of protection symbolized the organization of those who arc wholly devoted to God and his temple service. There was no other place that the manslayer could find refuge or safety. This is strong proof that the Jona-dab class who seek refuge against the day of vengeance must find it only in Jehu’s chariot, that is to say, in the organization of Jehovah, of which organization Christ Jesus is the Head and great High Priest.
12	The cities of refuge would be set up after the Israelites reached Canaan: “And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye be come over Jordan into the land of Canaan; then ye shall appoint you cities to be cities of refuge for you; that the slayer may flee thither, which killeth any person at unawares.” (Num. 35:9-11) This would seem to correspond to the time when the Elisha-Jehu work begins. The time is also indicated by the words of Moses, to wit: “When the Lord thy God hath cut off the nations, whose land the Lord thy God giveth thee, and thou succeedest them, and dwellest in their cities, and in their houses; thou shalt separate three cities for thee in the midst of thy land, which the Lord thy God giveth thee to possess it.” (Deut. 19:1,2) In 1914 Jesus was given the heathen for his inheritance and was sent forth to cast them out of the place wrongfully occupied. (Ps. 2: 8, 9) In 1919 Jesus brought his faithful remnant then on earth across the antitypical Jordan river and into the “land”, or kingdom condition, giving to them privileges and opportunities with
him to serve, even as Joshua did the Israelites. The priests bearing the ark of the covenant were the first ones to enter the waters of the Jordan, and stood firm on the dry ground in the river until the people had crossed. (Josh. 3:7,8,15,17) Before the Israelites crossed the Jordan river Moses, by the direction of Jehovah, appointed three cities of refuge on the east side of the river. Likewise also before the remnant w<-re gathered into the temple the Lord caused to be delivered his message “Millions Now Living Will Never Die”, meaning, of course, that they must be subject to the conditions announced by the Lord. There also began an announcement that the Elijah work had ended. It was a period of transition from the Elijah to the Elisha work performed by the faithful followers of Christ Jesus.
“UNAWARES”
13	The provision of the law was that these cities of refuge were for the benefit of those who should kill a person unawares. “These six cities shall be a refuge, both for the children of Israel, and for the stranger, and for the sojourner among them; that every one that killeth any person unawares may flee thither.” (Num. 35:15) What is meant by the words “every one that killeth any person unawares”? Satan’s organization on the earth has willfully and deliberately broken the everlasting covenant by wantonly and cruelly killing human creatures. God by his prophit declares his purpose to destroy Satan’s official organization on the earth because of the violation of the everlasting covenant. “The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof, because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant. Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell therein are desolate: therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned, and few men left.” (Isa. 24:5, G) The commercial and political elements of Satan’s visible organization have deliberately planned and promoted cruel wars resulting in the wholesale shedding of innocent human blood. The religious clement of “Christendom”, and particularly those of the clergy, have sanctified those wars and blasphemously declared them to be in harmony with God’s will. All such willfid slayers shall perish at Armageddon. On the other hand there are tho.>e on the earth, and particularly in the realm of “Christendom”, who have worked for and supported the commercial and political systems of oppression; who have served in the armie.s and navies and taken human life; have upheld the commercial and political systems that have greatly oppressed the people; have been associated with religious systems which have sanctified war and have hence been a party to the crime of breaking the everlasting covenant; and those as members of the “strong-arm squad” who have aided in the persecution of the faithful followers of Christ Jesus, and have persecuted tho^c who serve God. During the World War many men participated in these wrongful
230
f3Te WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
doings, and especially in the persecution of God’s people, and did so without malice and without knowledge that they were violating God’s law.
14	The ruling elements in Israel had been guilty of just such wicked things as that described in the foregoing paragraph, and to them Jesus said: “That upon )ou may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel unto the blood of Zacharias son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the temple and the altar. Verily I say unto you, All these things shall come upon this generation.” (Hatt. 23:35,36) The bloodguilty of the official clement of the nation of Israel that connived at and oppressed and killed the servants of God in particular, and oppressed and killed the defenseless people in general, were visited by God’s vengeance. That terrible punishment came upon Israel within a few years after the crucifixion of Jesus, and Peter, filled with' the spirit of God, speaking of that approaching trouble said to the Israelites: “Save yourselves from this untoward generation.”—Acts 2:40.
15	Since the coming of Jesus to the temple there has been great persecution heaped upon the people of God in the land of “Christendom”, and there is bloodguiltiness on the part of those who have participated in this wrongful persecution deliberately. Others have had part therein unwittingly. “Christendom,” and particularly the official part thereof, lays great claim to doing the will of God, while at the same time being guilty of many flagrant crimes. The prophet of Jehovah, referring to such, says: “How is the [professed] faithful city become an harlot! it was full of judgment; righteousness lodged in it; but now murderers. Thy silver is become dross, thy wine mixed with water: thy princes are rebellious, and companions of thieves: every one loveth gifts, and followcth after rewards: they judge not the fatherless, neither doth the cause of the widow come unto them. Therefore saith the Lord, the Lord of hosts, the mighty One of Israel, Ah, I will ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies.” (Isa. 1:21-24) The clergy, and the Boman Catholic hierarchy in particular, have connived with the big commercial and political wrongdoers in robbing and destroying the people; and the above prophecy applies to them, because such are the ones who claim to be God’s kingdom. Again says Jehovah’s prophet: “For I have heard a voice as of a woman in travail, and the anguish as of her that bringeth forth her first child; the voice of the daughter of Zion, that bewaileth herself, that spreadeth her hands, saying, Woe is me now! for my soul is wearied because of murderers.” (Jer. 4:31) “And the remnant took his servants, and entreated them spitefully, and slew them. But when the king heard thereof, he was wroth: and he sent forth his armies, and destroyed those murderers, and burned up their city. ’’ (Hatt. 22: 6, 7) Among both the Jews and “Christendom” there have been those who have had no sympathy with such wrongdoing, yet by reason
of circumstances have been forced into participating in and supporting these wrongdoers, to some degree at least, and are thus of the class that unwittingly or unawares are guilty of shedding blood.
10	Those who have unwittingly or unawares supported these wrongdoers must have some way of escape, otherwise they would fall in the great trouble in the battle of the great day of God Almighty. Jehovah in his loving-kindness has made just such a provision as is needed for their escape, and the cities of refuge pictured that way of escape. Of the six cities of refuge “Moses severed three cities on this side [the] Jordan toward the sunrising”. (Deut. 4: 41-44) Joshua confirmed that selection after he had crossed the Jordan, and also appointed three cities in Canaan. (Josh. 20:7-9) The six cities were a place of refuge for the children of Israel and for the stranger and for the sojourner, thus showing that in the fulfilment of the prophecy the place of refuge would be for those in “Christendom”, and also for those associated with “Christendom” but not a part thereof, who might have need of such refuge and who desire and seek it. “That the slayer that killeth any person unawares and unwittingly may flee thither: and they shall be your refuge from the avenger of blood. These were the cities appointed for all the children of Israel, and for the stranger that sojoumeth among them, that whosoever killeth any person at unawares might flee thither, and not die by the hand of the avenger of blood, until he stood before the congregation.”—Josh. 20:3, 9.
17	If death resulted from a willful act by one using as a weapon an instrument of iron, or by throwing a stone, or with the hand weapon of wood, that is, a club, the one doing the wrongful act which resulted in death was guilty of murder and must die. (Num. 35:16-18) The murderer’s blood must be shed by the avenger or revenger of blood, that being the law of God for punishment in violation of the everlasting covenant. “Whoso sheddeth man’s blood, by man shall his blood be shed: for in the image of God made he man.” (Gen. 9:6) “The revenger of blood himself shall slay the murderer: when he mceteth him, he shall slay him.” (Num. 35:19) But if the killing was by accident or unawares, the manslaycr might flee to the city of refuge for protection. “And they shall be unto you cities for refuge from the avenger; that the manslayer die not, until he stand before the congregation in judgment.”—Num. 35:12.
THE AVENGER
18	Who is “the avenger”, or the one who executes vengeance antitypically upon such wrongdoers? The very language of the law of God makes “the avenger” God’s official executioner. According to the Hebrew for “avenger” the execution of vengeance devolved upon one by reason of kinship, family relationship, such as the relationship of Boaz toward Naomi and Huth, and against the defiling near kinsman. TKa
August 1, 1934
WATCHTOWER,
231
Watchtower of 1925, page 182, paragraph 51, says: “It seems that Satan is the avenger of blood.” Clearly that statement is wrong, and The Watchtower hereby retracts it. It is true that Satan has the power of death, given him when he was appointed man’s overseer, and that he does cause the death of many, even of some of the faithful followers of Christ Jesus. But that does not mean that he is the official executioner of Jehovah, and particularly so far as the cities of refuge are concerned. Satan was never the kinsman of man so that he could fulfil the office of avenger or revenger by reason of being the near kinsman. Satan is a spirit creature; hence that alone would preclude him from filling the place. He was in no wise a kinsman of the Israelites, and holds no commission or appointment in connection with the cities of refuge.
19	The great kinsman of the human race by birth is Jesus, being born of the virgin Mary, and hence he was the kinsman of the Israelites. (Gal. 4:4, 5) The perfect man Jesus bought the human race with his own precious blood and is therefore the Redeemer, and as the Redeemer of man he is clothed with authority from Jehovah his Father to give life to the human race. (Rom. 6: 23; Isa. 9: G, 7) lie is Jehovah’s great official executioner and delivers justice by repaying like with like upon the bloodguilty. “For the Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son; and hath given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man.” (John 5:22,27; Deut. 19:21) Christ Jesus is the Vindicator of Jehovah’s name, and the executioner of all of God’s enemies, and in this execution of vengeance he associates with him those pictured by the “six men” each of which was armed with a slaughter weapon in his hand and used it under the direction of the Lord.—See Ezekiel 9:1,2; Vindication, Book One, page 94.
20	“The revenger of blood himself shall slay the murderer, when he meeteth him.” (Num. 35:19) Jesus Christ, the great Executioner, will certainly meet or overtake all of the bloodguilty ones at Armageddon in the battle of the great day of God Almighty and will slay all such as are not in the cities of refuge. The provision of the law was, “that the manslayer die not, until he stand before the congregation in judgment.” (Num. 35:12) All other manslayers must be executed. The cities of refuge were prepared as a way of escape: “Lest the avenger of the blood pursue the slayer, while his heart is hot, and overtake him, because the way is long, and slay him; whereas he was not worthy of death, inasmuch as he hated him not in time past. That innocent blood be not shed in thy land, which the Lord thy God giveth thee for an inheritance, and so blood be upon thee.” (Deut. 19:6,10) That provision of God’s law foreshadowed far greater things to come to pass after the faithful and approved ones are taken into the covenant for the kingdom. (Heb. 10:1; 12:12-29) The new covenant having been inaugurated, and the faithful being taken
into the covenant for the kingdom, it would therefore follow that the antitypical cities of refuge are now set up and that these are for the benefit of those who come within the terms of God’s loving provision.
21	When Jehu -went forth to vindicate the name of Jehovah ‘his heart was hot’ to accomplish the work assigned him to do. Likewise the Greater Jehu, Christ Jesus, when sent forth to rule amongst his enemies and to vindicate Jehovah’s name, his “heart is hot” within him to accomplish that great work. The gross and flagrant violation of the everlasting covenant by the shedding of human blood must now be avenged, because this is the day of the vengeance of our God and the bloodguilty ones must fall by the hand of the great Executioner. Therefore the Devil ‘knoweth that his time is short’ and that soon the battle of tho great day of God Almighty will be fought. Such will result in the meting out of justice to the murderers and in the vindication of Jehovah’s name. Those who have been unwittingly associated with the devilish work against mankind, and in the heaping of infamy upon the name of Jehovah, and who would now escape to the city of refuge, must hasten thereto. They must get away from the Devil’s organization and take their place with the Lord God’s organization and remain there. For this reason it is written: “Flee out of tho midst of Babylon, and deliver every man his soul; be not cut off in her iniquity: for this is the time of tho Lord’s vengeance; he will render unto her a recompense. Make bright the arrows; gather the shields: the Lord hath raised up the spirit of the kings of the Medes: for his device is against Babylon, to destroy it; because it is the vengeance of the Lord, the vengeance of his temple. ”—Jer. 51: 6,11.
22	For centuries the whole world has been under the dominating control of the wicked one, Satan, and his cruel and wicked organization. The Executioner will completely destroy such at Armageddon. Christ Jesus, the Executioner, is at the temple of Jehovah now for judgment, and God calls upon all the nations to keep silent before him and see and give heed to Jehovah's commandment. It is his time to make announcement of his purpose, and he gives notice and warning. Tho official element of Satan’s visible organization has received notice and warning that this world is Satan's organization and that it will be destroyed and that Jehovah’s witnesses are appointed by him to proclaim these truths and serve such notice. A proclamation of these truths has not comforted the clergy, big business and politicians, but, on the contrary, they bare refused to give heed to the notice and warning and have hardened their hearts. This is particularly true with reference to the clergy clement. This official element with deliberation, premeditation and malice aforethought continues to oppress God’s people and to persecute them for making proclamation of the truth. Furthermore, they do injury to and kill those who are devoted to the Lord. They do injury to the people of good will by constantly trying to keep away
222
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
from them the truth. The official element of Satan’s organization, visible and invisible, are in a conspiracy to destroy the anointed of the Lord and to prevent the proclamation of the truth concerning eJehovah, his name and his purpose. (Ps. 83:1-5) Like Ahab and Jezebel, who suborned witnesses to have Naboth killed and his property stolen, the clergy and their allies now induce others to swear falsely against the witnesses of Jehovah and cause them to suffer, and thus they show malice and cruel hatred. These are such as lie in wait to slay those, against whom they hold malice. Concerning such the law of God is: “But if he thrust him of hatred, or hurl at him by laying of wait, that he die; or in enmity smite him with his hand, that lie die; he that smote him shall surely be put to death; for he is a murderer: the revenger of blood shall slay the murderer, when he meeteth him.’’-Num. 35:20, 21.
23	Not later than Armageddon Jesus Christ, the revenger of blood, will slay the malicious clergy and their allies. It appears that such men, who have professed to serve God but who have willfully served the Devil, shall receive the severer punishment at the hands of the great Executioner. The Lord gives command to the “six men’’, who representatively stand for the invisible part of the organization under Christ Jesus, to go in with their weapons and slay the willful ones and that without mercy: “And to the others ho said in mine hearing, Go ye after him through the city, and smite; let not your eye spare, neither have ye pity: slay utterly old and young, both maids, and little children, and women; but come not near any man upon whom is the mark; and begin at my sanctuary. Then they began at the ancient men which were before the house.’’ (Ezek. 9: 5, 6) The plain declaration of the Lord is that “organized religion’’, which has so greatly defamed his name, and those therein who have participated in the persecution of his faithful people and have defamed God’s name, shall be destroyed without mercy.
24	Who, then, arc the ones that will escape? It is the people of good will that flee into the city of refuge. They were once associated in some respect with Satan’s organization, but now, by reason of learning of the wickedness thereof, and of God’s loving-kindness, they seek refuge in God’s organization, which organization was pictured by the cities of refuge. They forsake Babylon, that is to say, Satan’s organization, and flee unto God’s organization, taking their stand on the side of Jehovah and his kingdom, and henceforth they must have no sympathy with or give support to the wicked organization, but must remain steadfastly on the side of the Lord and be in full sympathy with his organization and the work he is doing.
ELDERS
25	The elders of God’s organization are those who have been brought into the temple and anointed of the Lord, and who are therefore elders in fact, or mature ones in Christ. These shall not shun to declare
the truth of and concerning the enemies of God; and this was foreshadowed by the declaration of God’s law in Moab, to wit: “But if any man hate his neighbour, and lie in wait for him, and rise up against him, and smite him mortally that he die, and flecth into one of these cities: then the elders of his city shall send and fetch him thence, and deliver him into the hand of the avenger of blood, that he may die. Thine eye shall not pity him, but thou shall put away the guilt of innocent blood from Israel, that it may go well with thee.”—Dcut. 19:11-13.
26	The faithful remnant of God’s organization, and who hence arc elders, must not compromise in any way with the deliberate manslayers or persecutors who are of Satan’s organization or try to shield them, nor must they have any sympathy for them as against the execution of God’s vengeance upon them. They not only must be separate themselves from that wicked organization, but must be in full heart accord with God’s determination to execute his vengeance upon them. They must be consistent and pray God that his declared purpose to destroy the wicked shall be carried into operation. Thus they will show their full sympathy and heart devotion to .Jehovah and to his purposes. These faithful ones, therefore, must continue to boldly declare the vengeance of our God, because this is a part of the commission given to his anointed ones.—Isa. 61:1, 2.
27	Throughout the land of “Christendom” there arc millions of people of good and honest heart who do not wish to share the guilt of blood innocently shed. Ignorantly, hence unwittingly and unawares, they have been drawn into Satan’s trap and caused to commit many wrongful deeds against others. In God’s law ignorance thereof is an excuse when one turns his heart to righteousness. In order for these to escape, however, they must show their devotion to God and his kingdom upon coming to a knowledge of his provision for the human race. Like the “elders of his [the manslaycr’s] city”, they must not safeguard the guilty ones, but must be in accord with the Greater Jehu; and when, like Jehu, he calls for the heads of the sons of the antitypical Ahab crowd they must follow the example of the rulers and elders and deliver up the heads. (2 Ki. 10:1-7) This docs not mean that they participate in the execution of any creature, but it docs mean they must not hesitate to declare the truth when the opportunity comes and must not refrain from doing so in order to secrete someone else. The clergy, especially the Roman Catholic hierarchy, howl and complain that Jehovah’s witnesses attack them. Such is wholly untrue. God lays the obligation upon his people to declare the truth, that others might know of God’s purposes. It is the truth that exposes the wicked,-and the truth is declared for the benefit of those who wish to do right.
28	The great Judge, Christ Jesus, is upon his throne at the temple and is dividing the people, and those who desire to be in harmony with God and righteous
August 1, 1934
WATCHTOWER.
233
ness must without equivocation or compromise take their stand on the side of the Lord and let it be known that they are for God and his righteous government at all times. The obligation is now upon Jehovah’s witnesses to instruct the Jonadab class in order that those of good will may act intelligently. Those persons of good will and honest heart have been kept in blindness by Satan and his agents, particularly by the clergy, and until they heard the truth about the Lord and his kingdom, and thus they have unwittingly supported the unholy crowd and committed acts of violence to those who are devoted to Jehovah and his kingdom, as well as to others.
20	But what shall be said about those who engaged in the "World "War and who took human life in battle, and who afterwards came to a knowledge of the truth, made a full consecration to do the will of God, and devoted themselves to the Lord? Do such have any protection in the cities of refuge? It does not appear from the Scriptures that the cities of refuge have any reference to those who become members of the body of Christ. There does not seem to be any reason why they should. There is a wide distinction between such and those who become of the class known as the ‘millions that will not die’, meaning those people of good will who obey the Lord God now but who are not accepted as a part of the sacrifice of Christ Jesus. Before the building up of Zion the purpose of the gospel’s being preached was to take out from the nations a people for the name of Jehovah. In order to be of those who are thus taken out for the name of Jehovah the sinner must first acknowledge his sin before God, trust in the precious blood of Christ Jesus as his redemptive price, and then unconditionally agree to do the will of God by making a full consecration of himself. It is the will of God that those thus taken out for his name shall die as human creatures but live as spirit creatures. The man who fully consecrates himself to do the will of God, and whose consecration is accepted, is justified by Jehovah by reason of his faith in the blood of Jesus and his obedience to God’s law. All the sins of such a one are atoned for by the blood of Christ. When his consecration is accepted he is justified, and by reason of his justification there results to him the right to live as a human creature; and it is that human life that is sacrificed. Thereupon God brings forth such as his spirit son, and all of his past or inherited sins are wiped out. “For he that is dead is freed from sin. Now if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with him: knowing that Christ, being raised from the dead, dieth no more; death hath no more dominion over him. For in that he died, he died unto sin once; but in that he liveth, he liveth unto God. Likewise reckon ye also yourselves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord.” (Rom. 6: 7-11) Paul was one who unwittingly served as a party to the murder of Stephen, as he stated himself: “And wb.cn the blood of thy martyr Stephen
was shed, I also was standing by, and consenting unto his death, and kept the raiment of them that slew him.” (Acts 22:20) But when Paul learned the truth, and fully consecrated himself to do the will of God through Jesus Christ, his sins were cleansed and wiped out and he was made acceptable unto the Lord. The one who is thus brought forth by Jehovah as his son is a new creature in Christ Jesus; as it is written: “Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: old things are passed away; behold, all things are become new.” (2 Cor. 5:17) It is such sons of God as are found faithful at the judgment by Christ Jesus at the time of building up of Zion that arc taken into the covenant for the kingdom, and these become a part of the royal organization of God symbolized by a city. (Rev. 21:1,2) All such are under Christ Jesus, the Greater Moses, and thereafter must be wholly and entirely obedient to Christ if they would live. (Acts 3:23) It is to such new creatures who live in Christ that the scripture is addressed, to wit: “We know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren. Jie that lovcth not his brother abideth in death. Whosoever hateth his brother is a murderer: and ye know that no murderer hath eternal life abiding in him.”—1 John 3:14,15.
80	The refuge or protection of such is in God’s organization under Christ in his sanctuary, in the secret place of the Most High: “He that dwellcth in the secret place of the Most High, shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty. I will say of the Lord, He is my refuge, and my fortress; my God; in him will I trust.” (Ps. 91:1, 2) These form a part of the city and arc not the ones that flee to it after Zion is budded up. For these followers of Christ Jesus in the temple to gain eternal life they must abide in Christ Jesus, faithful, and perform their obligation. (John 15: 5-8) All such are members of the priesthood under Christ.
21	Since the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple and the building up of Zion those found faithful and brought into the covenant for the kingdom form a part of God’s organization. It was after the covenant of faithfulness, which was made in Moab, that the cities of refuge were set up, and this shows that it was after the taking of the faithful sons of God into the covenant for the kingdom that the cities of refuge anti-typically are set up or, rather, made to apply. Prior to the taking of the faithful remnant into the covenant for the kingdom, there were, and since then have been and are yet people of good will who have unwittingly or unawares violated the everlasting covenant. The period of sacrifice for the taking out of a people for Jehovah’s name must end with the completion of Zion ; but what provision is made for such of good will who now devote themselves to Jehovah God? They are in the world ruled by Satan, and they have no sympathy with his wicked rule, and have separated themselves therefrom. They desire to serve God and to do his will. It is important just now to understand what is Jehovah’s purpose concerning them and what is the
234
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
obligation laid upon the faithful remnant in connection with the Jonadabs.
{To be continued)
QUESTIONS FOK STUDY
T 1. For what purpose has Jehovah gathered his saints unto himself? How will these express appreciation of his loving-kindness?
U 2, 3. How will Jehovah’s executioner deal with those who have broken the everlasting covenant? Why is it so important that the temple company now bring these truths to the attention of the people?
If 4, 5. What were the “cities of refuge”? Explain the significance of the fact that this provision by Jehovah was announced to Moses at the time of making the covenant in Moab.
U 0, 7. Show that the provision of cities of refuge, with an-noun-.ement thereof, was prophetic, and whether such prophecy has had fulfilment.
If 8. Describe the provision made for the Levites, and explain the prophetic significance and the fulfilment thereof.
9. To whom were the cities of refuge assigned? What did that represent? Why were there six of these cities, and allocated as they were?
H 10-J2. Explain the prophetic significance (a) of their being called “cities of refuge”, and given to the Levites, (b) Of their being set up after the Israelites reached Canaan.
Y 13. Apply the expression “Every one that killeth any person unawares”.
V 14, 15. Compare the situation to which Matthew 23:35,36 applied with the corresponding situation in “Christendom” at the present time.
U 16, 17. What was foreshown in the fact that the cities of refuge v,ere appointed ‘for all the children of Israel, and for the stiangcr and the sojourner among them’?
f 18, It), Prove the identity of the “avenger of blood”.
20, 21. Explain the situation for which the antitypical “cities of refuge” were provided, and whether these have been set up.
fl 22, 23. lu this respect what is the purpose of the proclamation of truth committed by Jehovah to his witnesses? Show that Numbers 35: 20. 21 clearly finds its application nt the present time. Point out the relationship hereto of Ezekiel 9: 5, 6.
Y 24. Who are the ones that escape and find security in the antitypical “cities of refuge”, and how is this accomplished ?
Y 25-27. Who are prophetically referred to in Dcuferimomy 19: 11, and what is the application of veiso 13 of that chapter?
T 28. Account for the urgent need of wide proclamation now of the message committed to Jehovah’s witne s"i.
7 29, 30. Show wl.other the “cities of refuge” are for those also who have been received into the covenant by s-:i'• 11ii<-<*.
Y 31. When and wheio were the cities of refuge set up, and what is shown thereby?
KINGDOM PROCLAMATION
AT THE inauguration of God’s government upon earth there must be carried on, according to the Scriptures, an advertising or publicity campaign of great scope. The purpose of this announcement of God’s kingdom, and the manner in which such announcement is now actually being given among the people throughout all the world, are of immediate concern to eveiy person of good will.
The anointed ones of the Lord now on earth are commanded to declare the day of the vengeance of God. (Isa. 61:1,2) The vengeance of Jehovah is not expressed against individuals, but against Satan and his wicked organization by which he oppresses and blinds the people, and against the instruments that he uses for that purpose. Jehovah’s purpose is to destroy Satan’s wicked works and his organization, and he is now having the witness given making known that fact to the nations. For this reason he discloses to those of the temple class what constitutes the Devil’s organization. It is seen to be a powerful and dreadfully wicked organization which the Lord alone can and will destroy. lie lays upon his servants the obligation of declaring his purpose to destroy it. Jesus states that after the good news of the kingdom has been declared to the people there shall come upon the nations of earth a time of trouble the like of which was never known and that it will be the last. That will be the expression of God’s indignation against the wicked one and his system. (Matt. 24:21,22) The period of time from the cessation of hostilities of the World War and to the final trouble is reserved specifically for the giving of the witness of and concerning God’s purposes.
Through his prophet Jehovah declares that ho has a controversy with the nations that make up Satan’s organization ami that he will destroy such. Having already ousted Satan from heaven and destroyed his rule there, we may know’ that God will destroy his rule and influence on earth. Such is one of the preliminary works of God's righteous government. (Jer. 25:29-3G) Tn that work of destruction Jesus Christ leads the assault. This he does as the mighty Executive Officer of Jehovah. (I’s. 110:5,6) Christ alone is the symbolic “winepress” that crushes the life out of the evil organization. (Isa. 63: 3-5) The part in this great work that is performed by the faithful followers of Christ on earth is that of process servers. They serve notice by telling the rulers and peoples of earth of Jehovah’s purpose through Christ to destroy the evil organization. (1 John 3:8) Of course, Satan knows that the great fight is approaching, but he is so self-centered that he believes he will win that fight. Knowing that the time is short for him to prepare for it, he hastens to gather the nations and rulers of earth into a condition for the great battle, in which great battle Satan’s organization will fall, never to rise again; and the name of Jehovah God shall be everlastingly exalted.—-liev. 12: 12; 16: 13-16.
The faithful remnant of the followers of Christ Jesus now on earth are ambassadors of God and his King. These are in the W’orld to represent the Lord. To some it may seem to be inconsistent for these ambassadors to be in the world and yet proclaiming the truth concerning what is about to befall the world. It may be argued that ambassadors are in a country only when both countries involved are at peace and
August 1, 1934
WATCHTOWER-
235
that when war is declared the ambassador withdraws; whereas God’s government is not at peace with Satan’s organization. Such is the rule that obtains in the divisions of the government controlled by Satan. Such is not the rule of the Lord. The Scriptures show that the Lord’s ambassadors are sent to the rulers when hostilities exist. Satan’s organization is hostile to God’s organization and God has declared his purpose to destroy Satan’s organization. Christ is God’s Ambassador to bring reconciliation between the people and God because hostilities do exist. The members of the body of Christ are ambassadors participating in that work of reconciliation because the people are hostile to God. In no other way can the words of the apostle Paul be properly understood: “Now then we are ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us: we pray you in Christ’s stead, Be ye reconciled to God.’’ (2 Cor. 5:19, 20) The ambassadors of the Lord are now in the world but not of it. They are authorized to declare in denunciatory terms that which God’s Word says concerning his purpose of manifesting his indignation against the evil system which Satan has builded up. This system being an oppressor of the people, God will relieve the people therefrom and wills that they shall be so told. Paul spoke of himself as an “ambassador in bonds’’, and his bonds were placed upon him by Satan’s organization. (Eph. 6:20) All the ambassadors of Christ on earth would now be in bonds except that God has put his hand over them and by his power shields them until the work committed to them is done. When that work of proclaiming his name and purposes is done, then God will take the ambassadors away.
While these ambassadors of the Lord are in the world they have much tribulation, even as Jesus foretold. (John 16:33) Their tribulation is caused by the opposers of the message they are bringing and the work they are doing. These faithful ones, however, like Paul, “rejoice in tribulation’’ because such is a token to them from God that they are his anointed saints. (Phil. 1:28,29; Rom. 12:12; Acts 14:22) Those of the remnant class have entered into the joy of the Lord because they sec that the time has come for God to vindicate his holy name, to overthrow the oppressor, and to bring peace and righteousness to the earth through his anointed King. When, in A.D 1914, at the end of the long period of waiting, Jesns received the command from his Father to arise and take action against the enemy, that was a time of great joy to Christ the Lord. When he came to his temple in 1918 and found some whom he approved because of their faithfulness, he invited them to enter into his joy. Those who since that time have seen and appreciated that the kingdom is here and that the time has come to vindicate Jehovah’s name, and who continue to love the Lord, have gone forward to their work abounding in the joy of the Lord.
Jehovah God has provided music for the new-born government and his faithful witnesses who delight to
sing that music. The Psalms of the Bible are poems set to music. Aside from the Psalms there is very little poetry in existence that is at all worth while. the kingdom or government psalms are addressed to the “Chief Musician’’. It seems clear that the Chief Musician is that section of the anointed class the members of which have entered into the joy of the Lord, who forget self, who are active in showing forth the praises of the Lord, and who logically take instructions from the Psalms and profit thereby. Though all others seem to forsake the Lord, those trust him implicitly and delight to do his will. They sing: “The Lord God is my strength and he will make my feet like hinds’ feet, and he will make me to walk upon mine high places.’’ (Hab. 3:17-19) The hind is an animal so sure-footed that it can climb to the very steepest part of the mountain crag without fear. Likewise that faithful remnant class composing God’s witnesses are exalted by him to high places; but because of their humility and trust wholly in the Lord, they do not fear and never lose their heads.
These kingdom psalms, or government music, plainly imply that at the beginning of the institution of God’s government there must be carried on an advertising publicity campaign of great scope. The singing thereof is a poetical way of telling that the faithful remnant must be active in representing the kingdom interests on earth and that they will do so with joy, thus proving their love for God and his kingdom. (1 John 5: 3) These poems, provided for the official music of God’s kingdom, aid Jehovah’s witnesses today to a better understanding of the work that the Lord is now having done in the earth.
It was the established custom, and therefore the law of Israel, that when a king was placed upon a throne, the people, led by the priests (the anointed ones), should clap their hands, thus indicating their joy. Record is made of this in Second Kings 11, verses 9 to 12, for the benefit of those now upon whom the ends of the world have come. (1 Cor. 10:11) With that custom in mind, and applying it to the time when God sets his King upon his holy throne, the poet wrote:
“0 clap your hands, all ye people [particularly God’s people] ; shout unto God with the voice of triumph.’’ A shout denotes confidence in God’s certain victory. And why is this shout given ? ‘ ‘ For the Lord most high is terrible; he is a great King over all the earth. He shall subdue the people under us, and the nations under our feet. . . . God is gone up with a shout, the Lord with the sound of a trumpet”; meaning that God has begun his work with the shout of his people. It was the priests that blew the trumpets, foreshadowing the anointed ones proclaiming the glory of his name. “For God is the King of all the earth: sing ye praises with understanding.” This shows that the praises are sung by those who have an understanding of God’s purpose. “God sittelh upon the throne of his holiness. The princes of the people
23S
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
are gathered together, even the people of the God of Abraham: for the shields of the earth belong unto God: he is greatly exalted.” The ‘‘princes” here are willing-hearted ones or volunteers; and therefore, because they have the faith of Abraham, these constitute the faithful remnant class who joyfully declare the praises of Jehovah. The “shields” mentioned here
is Christ the King upon his throne, earth’s rightful Ruler. Shields refer to rulers or protectors. (Ps. 47:1-9; see Iios. 4:18, inargin) Shielded by the power of earth’s rightful Ruler, Jehovah’s witnesses still on the earth take great delight in faithfully exalting the name of Jehovah and advertising his kingdom under Christ.
SATAN’S COUNTERFEIT OF THE TRUE
THE student of prophecy will find that every part of Goil's great organization has been counterfeited and duplicated by Satan, so far as it has been possible. It is apparent that Satan’s purpose has at all times been to defy Jehovah God, mock and ridicule him, bring his name into disrepute and reproach before all creation, and turn all creation away from the great God. A comparison between the two organizations will here be found of interest.
The true should properly be considered first. Almighty God: lie is the Creator, the Father, and, to use the Scriptural term, the “husband” of Zion, and is holy. (Isa. 54:5) Zion is the name of the woman symbolizing God’s organization; it is the mother, the wife that gives birth to that which is holy and is approved by Jehovah. The Seed: It is the anointed of God, Jesus Christ being the Chief thereof, to carry out God’s purposes.
Now consider the kai.se. Here we view first Satan, the fai.se and mimic god: He is the creator and father of Babylon; the husband of that old “whore”, as the Scriptures call it; and he is the father of the wicked ones. Babylon: That is the woman symbolizing the Devil’s organization; the mother of Satan’s organization; the wife of Satan; the harlot and “mother of harlots” organization. The seed of Satan and Babylon is Satan’s anointed rulers, that is to say, those whom he authorizes and uses to carry on the visible rule of this wicked organization on earth, and particularly the religious leaders.—John 8:42-44.
In the first great prophecy, which was made in the garden of Eden, the Lord Jehovah God said: “And I will put enmity [hatred and hostility] between thee [Satan] and the woman [God’s woman, his organization], and between thy [Satan’s] seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel.” (Gen. 3:15) That prophecy must be fulfilled, and is now in course of fulfilment; but the great climax is not yet, but in the future. The two seeds are now developed and made manifest. The hostility not only exists, but is also made manifest.
In the twelfth chapter of that wonderful book of symbolical pictures and tableaux, The Revelation (12: 3), is this written: “And there appeared another wonder in heaven ; and behold a great red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and seven crowns
upon his heads.” The other great sign or wonder suugested or implied in this text just quoted is sem at the same time and is the great wonder or sign mentioned in the first verse of the same chapter. The first sign or wonder is the woman ready to give birth to the man child; the second is the great red dragon ready to devour the man child. Both of the signs existed long before, but both appeared at the same time to those who were watching as Jesus had advised them to watch.—Hatt. 24:42.
These two great signs or wonders are discerned after the opening of the temple in heaven, and are discerned by those who are devoted to Jehovah and who are privileged to be brought into the temple condition. It was in the year nineteen hundred and eighteen that the temple was opened in heaven; and after that time that the true followers of Christ on earth discern' d the wonders or signs. The first duty of those seeing the signs is to call the attention of their fellow Christians thereto, and then to tell these truths to all who have a desire to hear. These, signs are conclusive proof of the presence of the Lord and of the beginning of his kingdom, and of that which opposes his kingdom; and the truth concerning the same becomes of vital importance to everyone who would know the truth.
Many professed Christians have failed to see cither of the great signs or wonders. They fail to realize that Jehovah God has an organization. They do not see that the Devil has an organization, and therefore think it wrong to say anything about Satan and his organization and the agencies which he uses. Evidently such have been lulled into a sleep or seinieomatose state, and have therefore not been awake to the unfolding of the divine purpose. Jesus prophesied that there would be just such a class of professed Christians on earth at this time, and he counsels such to ‘anoint their eyes with eye salve [of light and truth], that they may see’. (Rev. 3:18) Failing to do so, these are evidently not permitted to enter the temple condition.
That such a condition of lukewarmness of professed Christians would exist in the very last days of the church’s earthly experience, is made certain, because Jesus the great Prophet of God so stated. It is the hope that the truth here set forth may aid some such lukewarm or sleepy ones to awake and avail themselves of the great privileges that the Lord has afforded them.
August 1, 1931
WVTCHTOWER.
237
Now it dearly appears to those who are thoroughly awake and devoted to the Lord that the first great sign or wonder described by the Lord Jesus in his prophetic utterances is God’s organization, marking the beginning of the reign of Christ Jesus. It also appears that the other great -wonder or sign is the Devil’s organization, putting forth all its power and manifesting all its viciousness to destroy the “seed” of God’s organization and to bring further reproach upon Jehovah’s name.
That Satan began the forming of his organization in the day of Nimrod, “the mighty hunter before the Lord,” which was not long after the great flood of Noah’s time, the Scriptures clearly show. God caused the records of Babylon, Egypt and Assyria to be made in his Word for the very purpose of aiding and enlightening his people at the time of the end of the world, where we now are. (Rom. 15:4; 1 Cor. 10;11) Therefore it is now God’s due time for the understanding of the meaning of those records concerning the three great world powers just mentioned. It will not do to say that what is recorded in the Scriptures about these world powers is ancient history with which we have nothing to do. The fact that the sign or wonder is revealed to men only after the Lord builds up Zion in these modern limes is proof that now is the time when God would have his people to carefully examine that ancient history and learn its meaning. That history is made prominent in the divine record concerning Babylon, Egypt and Assyria, manifestly for the purpose of enabling the student to see the hideousness and wickedness of the Devil’s organization at and after the time when the“great red dragon” sign or wonder appears.
The Devil will make a strong effort to cause many to misunderstand what is here said, because it exposes him and his way of wickedness. Every thoughtful person should expect that very thing. Satan’s methods have ever been fraudulent and marked by lies and deception, and are yet. lie is the deceiver of men, the slanderer of all who try to do right, the opposer of God and all righteousness, and the de-vourcr of everything that would bring honor to Jehovah God’s name.
Satan will attempt to induce some to believe that what is here said is said to cause rebellion of the people against the respective governments of earth. That is not the purpose of what we say here. The people could accomplish nothing by rebellion or revolution. The people arc now tied hand and foot and are powerless. They are in complete bondage to the Devil and his organization. There is no possible way for the people to free themselves. As the Israelites were in bondage in Egypt, so now are all the peoples of earth in bondage, to the Devil’s organization. God will set them free in his good way and time, as the Scriptures describe.
The sole purpose of calling attention to the Devil’s organization is that the people may flee from it and
turn themselves wholly to the Lord God so as to have his blessings.
The masses of the human race are held in bondage to the Devil’s organization, but they are blind as to what is holding them. Without doubt many of the officials or rulers of the nations of earth honestly desire to see a better condition established amongst the people. Many honest endeavors are put forth by such men to better the government and the people, but God’s time has come when the people and the rulers must know that there is no power that can bring relief and blessings except the power of Almighty God. It is therefore important for us to see and appreciate God’s organization, and at the same time to see and understand the power and wickedness of Satan’s organization.
The strongest nations on earth today jointly designate? themselves as “Christendom”, because they claim that their religion is the “Christian religion”. Other nations, which make no pretense of worshiping God and Christ, but worship idols, are called “heathen”. There are two great organizations existing, to wit, God’s organization and Satan's organization. To which organization do the nations of the earth today belong? Surely all fair and honest persons would want to determine this question in the right way, because the vital welfare of all the people is involved. It could be of no lasting advantage to anyone to blind himself to the truth. Let the facts be dispassionately and honestly weighed, and then let the question be answered according to the truth.
The religion of the nations called “Christendom” is claimed to be Christian. But is it? To be a Christian one must be a true follower of Christ Jesus, and must recognize, serve, worship and obey Jehovah God. lie must take God’s Word as the truth, because the great Prophet Christ Jesus stated that God’s Word is the truth. (John 17:17) The majority of the religious leaders of so-called “Christendom” today deny the truth of the Bible, and deny that the blood of Jesus furnished the purchase price to redeem man from the bondage of sin and death. The very basis of Christianity is the great ransom sacrifice of Jesus Christ and his kingdom, both of which are the provision of the great Jehovah God. There is no other means of salvation, as the Word of God plainly states. (Acts 4:12) Every modernist preacher on earth denies that God created man perfect, that he fell because of sin, and that the sacrifice of Jesus was to provide redemption for man ; and yet these men claim to be Christians and are the leaders of the religion of Christianity.
There cannot be two classes of leaders in God’s organization, because God is not the author of confusion. There are two, and more, classes of leaders in “Christendom”, namely, the Modernist and the Fundamentalist, the Christian Scientists so called, and others. The fundamentalists, without exception, teach that
238
fflie WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
every man has an inherently immortal soul which therefore cannot die, and that when that which is called death ensues, the soul continues to live cither in bliss or in torment. Such is based upon Satan’s lie, and Jesus declared him to be the father of lies. (Gen. 3:4; John 8:44) Every fundamentalist leader denies that the blood of Jesus was shed that every man might have an opportunity for life, and denies that God will give every one an opportunity for such relief and the gift of life on earth.
Jesus Christ, whose name “Christendom” adopts, restated his Father’s commandment, “Thou shalt not kill,” and specifically applied that commandment to all true Christians. He further taught that the man who hates his brother is a murderer. During the World War practically all clergymen, modernists and fundamentalists, taught and instilled into the people the spirit of hatred, and urged them to kill one another. There were two sides in that great war, and the clergymen of ‘' Christendom ” and the principal ones of their flocks were about equally divided on the respective sides; yet all of them urged the killing of their fellow men on the opposite side. Surely this could not be the spirit of God’s organization.
Jesus refused to have anything to do with the politics of the world. He was not of the world, even though he was in it. He overcame the world and told all his followers that they must overcome the world. (John 16:33; 8:23; 18:36-38) The reason he assigned was and is that Satan is the invisible ruler or god of the world. (John 12:31; 14:30) His true disciples, authorized witnesses and representatives of God, told the followers of Jesus that they must keep themselves separate and distinct from the world and devote themselves to telling the truth about God’s King and his righteous kingdom.—2 Cor. 6:17,18; Jas. 1:27.
Furthermore, they taught that he who claims to be the follower of Christ and who makes himself a part or friend of the world is an adulterer spiritually and the enemy of God. (Jas. 4:4; 1 John 2:15) All the clergy of all the denominations, both Catholic and Protestant, participate in worldly politics and diligently seek to control the political clement of the governments of earth called “Christendom”. All of them had to do with the carrying on of the World War. Such course is contrary to God’s organization. It is the practice of Satan’s counterfeit organization.
LETTERS
JEHOVAH HAS KEPT HIS PROMISE
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Greetings in the name of Jehovah. We have just received your letter of June 11 regarding the Portable Phonograph and 12 records. We feel sure this wiU prove to be a wonderful means of getting the message to the people, and we are today taking advantage of the opportunity to obtain one of these machines, and we arc delighted that the dear Lord is making it possible for us to obtain such an effective weapon; for they are effective weapons, as our report with a Transcription machine will show.
This report is of the series of the seven lectures given in Harlingen, Texas. This town has always been a church-ridden town, and we found it hard to place much of the literature there. We obtained the Fair park for a place to give the lectures. At the conclusion of the seven lectures with the Transcription machine we had 557 attendance, placed 51 bound books, 233 booklets; and 13 of those in attendance were baptized yesterday, after the last of the series was given. There will be another baptizing in a few weeks, and there will be at least 6 more at that time.
We have also started a little study class in Harlingen, using for our study the Dividing the People booklet. The attendance at this study will range from 15 to 20. This place is just getting over the effects of the hurricane of last year. Everybody is hard up, and we feel sure this Portable Phonograph, which can be taken into the home where the people can hear, will be a wonderful means of spreading the message of the kingdom.
Dear brother, it is useless for us to try to explain our gratitude to the dear Lord, and also to yourself, for providing us with these means of service. With us Jciiovah has certainly kept his promise as stated in Malachi 3: 10.
We sincerely trust that the Lord will continue to use you; and know, dear brother, we are whole-heartedly with you in this beautiful and wonderful work. To us the name of Jehovah is the most important in the universe, and we rejoice in knowing he will soon vindicate his name.
With love in Jehovah’s name,
F. B. Sergeant, N. C. Sergeant, Pioneers.
JEHOVAH’S PROVISION OF GOOD
Dear Brother Rutherford:
I finished reading the book Preparation; my heart is so full of gratitude that I feel I just must express my thanks to the heavenly Father for this another expression of his loving provision of good for those who love him. I also desire to thank you for the gift, which I deeply appreciated. Surely this book is the best yet, and throws a clear light on many points heretofore obscure. After reading Preparation surely there is no room for doubt as to what is the full duty of those who are in line for the kingdom, and none of Jehovah’s witnesses will hesitate to press the battle to the gate.
I humbly thank Jehovah for the privilege of service daily. In my several years of pioneer service I have had much joy and many expressions of his loving care over me. Daily I pray for Jehovah to bless and to continue to use you to feed the flock of God with food convenient.
With Christian love,
Your brother in the King's service,
J. J. Owen pa, Nigeria.
ALL THANKS TO JEHOVAH
Dear Brother Rutherford:
It is Sunday and we are “laying by’’ in the sage brush for a little needed rest. Our territory is in the Cascade mountains, the northeastern corner of California. Not just as young in years as we used to be, but happy and glad to have a little share in kingdom work.
We want to thank you for the credit of twenty-five dollars for each of us, as given to help defray expenses to the recent Los Angeles convention. This amount was a great help to us. And we wish to say “Thanks’’ for the book Preparation, which has revealed so many comforting prophecies to the Lord’s people.
We know you aro busy in kingdom work constantly, and we wish to speed your work rather than hinder you by asking you to read a long-winded letter of eulogy. But we want to share with you a little surprise letter, i.e., a letter of appreciation. This letter is from a man in Surprise valley and is full of surprises till the signature of the sender. We hope you
Avuttst 1,1934
WATCHTOWER.
239
'•tin. spare time enough to read it, and that you will enclose llua letter in self-addressed envelope; for we would love to bn w- thia letter returned to us again. It is like a precious gem toumd in a desert.
were on our way to Surprise valley (in Modoc county, California) for the fifth time in the last ten years, when we rwtiuved this good letter from Brother ——. Reminds us of the- ten lepers that were healed by oar Savior: only one relumed to thank him. In this case we render all thanks to Jeinovah for his truth and for the blessings and privileges we harm as Jehovah’s witnesses. We are happy to sliare in this Btwwed privilege with you; and may the Lord continue to bless •ath keep you.
Sincerely,
Bro. and Sa. C. Bodtcher, Ftoneers.
• • • •
Mr., and Mrs. C. Bodtcher,
Dk.zx Friends:
Have been wanting to find out where you were ever since you. were here last summer. We wanted to see more of you then, butt knew you were busy, and we were also, but here not long ng<r X wrote to the Watch Tower for your address and got it riirtii after you were here. I sure went into action and got all thirteen of Judge Rutherford’s books, also the Watchtower and Gulden Age magazines, and last winter I got the new book I’r—j/aration and the new Year Book, every one a jewel. I haw bought and given away over 150 of the little booklets:
100 Dividing the People and 50 of the Eecape to the Kingdom. And no man can tell me we haven't been blessed for it
You know I told you wo had a mortgage on all our stock to the B.F.C. Well, I sure took that oft in a hurry last fall. What stock we have left, which is a plenty, 45 cattle and 168 sheep, is ours. Our land is still mortgaged to a private party. We have plenty of feed for ours, but this drought is going to be terrible yet. Now the reason I am telling you all this is that if you hadn’t brought us the blessed word of Truth, where would we be now! Crazy, I guess. As it is, and as it has been ever since you were here, we are comforted and simply do not worry. We sure want to see you both again and are sure hoping you can come up this summer. Come here to us if you come, but write anyway.
We sure can see things coming together now. I must read my books over again. I loaned most of them out and I just simply have to go and get them when I want them. I want to try and do more witnessing as I can. I have been doing some of it on a horse. Our car is laid up, and has been for three years in November. So you can see we have tried to make ends meet and it cannot be done, and now to know the Truth and see what is coming is surely grand. I had never thought of such a thing nor heard of such a thing until you told me last summer, and I tell you, we thank you. We are for Jehovah and his anointed. Bless them alh Let us see you now before long, but write anyway.
Surely your friend,
(Continued from page 140)
Br-noklyn WBBR Su 10:15am
Su 6:30pm Mol0:30arn
Tn 10:30am	Tu	6:30pm
^Ve 10:30am	We	6:30pm
Th 10:30am	Th	6:30pm
Fr 10:30am	Fr	6:30pm
BnTalo	WGR Su 10: OOain
Kimura	WESG Su 10:15am
Freeport WGBBSu 9:00am
Tu 7:00pm Th 7:06pm iLmlson F. WGLC Su 10:45am J.Lanestewn WOCL Su 9:30am Ni-w York WBNX Su 2:30pm NrwYork WOVSu 4:30pm Saranac L. WNBZ Su 10:15am
Tu 4:15pm Th 4:15pm S-rracuse WSYR Su 10:30am Tipper L. WHI)LSulO:15ara
Th 11:30am
WK Pl'ns WFASSu 6:00pm Ifo 1:00pm Sa 9:00am
NORTH CAROLINA
Asheville WWNCTh 5:30pm Charlotte WSOC Su 10:15am Greensboro WBIG Su 9:45am KuJeigh WPTF Su 9:45am
NORTH DAKOTA
G'3 Forks KFJM Su 5:00pm We 5:00pm Fr 5:00pm
OHIO
Akron	WADC Su 1:45pm
We 10:45am
Akron WJWSu 5:30pm We 11:30am
Cleveland WUK Su 7:00pm
Tu 3:15pm Fr 6:30pm Cleveland WJAY Su 9:45am Columbus WAIUSul0:00am ____________ Th 7:45pm Columbus WBNSSu 9:45am
Mo 1:15pm We 1:15pm Fr 1:15pm
Daytan WSMKSu 1:30pm
Mt. Orab WTIBD Su 4:30pm We 4:30pm Fr 4:30pm
Toledo WSPDSu 9:30am
Sa 8:15am
Youngst’nWKBN Su 10:00am We 4:00pm
Zanesville WALR Su 10:00am We 4:15pm
OKLAHOMA
Elk City KASA Su 1:15pm Ponca City WBBZ Su 10:00am
We 9:00pm
Shawnee KGFF Mo 8:45pm We 8:45pm Fr 8:45pm
Tulsa KVOOSu 9:15am
OREGON
KlamathF. KFJI Mo 8:15pm Marshfield KOOS Mo 1:30pm Medford KMED Su 10:00am Th 4:00pm
PENNSYLVANIA
Erie WLBW Su 10:45am Glenside WIBG Su 1:15pm Johnstown WJAC Su 4:30pm Phil ’a WC AU Su 12:00 nn Philadelphia WIP Su 6:45 pm Pittsb ’gh KQV Su 10:30am
We 1:45pm Fr 1:45pm Reading WEEU Su 3:45pm
We 3:45pm Wash’ton WNBOSu 9:45am W ’msport WRAK Su 5:30pm York WORK Su 3:00pm
PHILIPPINE ISLANDS
Manila KZEG Su 7:00pm Th 7:00pm
SOUTH CAROLINA
Charleston WCSCSu 1:00pm We 7:00pm Fr 7:00pm
Greenville WFBC Su 10:00am Spart’b’g WSPASu 6:30pm
SOUTH DAKOTA
Pierre KGFX Su 1:00pm
Tu 4:00pm Th 4:00pm
Watertown KGCR Su 9:15am
We 8:45pm Fr 8:45pm
TENNESSEE
Cha’nooga W DOD Su 1:15pm
Th 8:00am
Jackson WTJS Su 1:30pm
We 5:30pm • Fr 5:30pm Knoxville WROLSu 7:00pm Memphis WMCSu 4:30pm Memphis WRECSu 9:00am
TEXAS
Amarillo KGRSSu 9:00am Austin KNOW Su 10:00am Beaumont KFDM Su 10:00am
Tu 7:45pm
Corpus Chr. KGFISu 9:00am
We 6:45pm Fr 6:45pm
Dallas KRLD Su 10:30am
Dublin KFPLTh 8:00pm Fr 8:45am
El Paso KTSMSu 1:15pm
Ft. Worth KT AT Mo 5:15pm
We 5:15pm Fr 5:15pm
Galveston KLUF Su 1:45pm We 8:00pm
Houston KXYZ Su 10:00am 3. Angelo KGKL Su 1:45pm Th 8:45am
S. Antonio KTSA Su 10:45am WichitaF. KGKO Su 12:30pm Th. 8 f 45pm
UTAH
Ogden KLOSu 3:15pm
We 5:00pm
Salt L. City KSLSu 9:45pm
VERMONT
Rutland WSYB Su 10:00am
Th 5:30pm
St Albans WQDM Su 1:00pm
VIRGINIA.
Ch’lottesv.WEHC Su 10:45am
Danville WBTMSu 9:15pm
Lynchb’g WLVASul2:45pm Norfolk WTAR Su 12:30pm Petersb’g WPHRSu 6:45pm
We 10:00am
Richmond WRVASul2:15pin
Roanoke WDBJ Su 12:30pm We 5:00pm
WASHINGTON
Aberdeen	KXRO Su	1:15pm
Bell’ham	KVOS Su 10:00am	
	Th	5:30pm
Seattle	KJRSu 10:00am	
Seattle	KVL Mo	6:45pm
Tu 6:45pm We		6:45pm
Th 6:45pm Fr		6:45pm
	Sa	6:45pm
Spokane	KFIOSu	9:15am
Spokane	KGA Su	6:00pm
Tacoma	KVISu	2:45pm
Walla Walla KUJSu		7:45am
	Su	1:30pm
Wenatchee	KFQSu	1:00pm
	We	7:00am
Yakima	KITSu 10:00am	
	Th	7:00am
WEST VIRGINIA
Bluefield WHISSu 9:00am
Fr 8:00am
Cha’ston WOBU Su 4:00pm Fairmont WMMN Su 12:45pm Hunt’ton WSAZ Th 4:00pm Wheeling WWVA Su 10:00am
WISCONSIN
La Crosse WKBH Su 12:00 nn
Madison WIBA Su 10:05am
Mani’woe WOMT Mo 7:00pm Th 1:00pm
WYOMING
Casper KDFN Su 10:30am Th 8:45pm
WATCHTOWER.
RADIO SERVICE
The good news of the kingdom of Jehovah is broadcast each week or oftener by these and other stations at time shown.
[Current local time 13 shown In each instance.]
AUSTRALASIA
NEW SOUTH WALES
Albury 2-AY Tu 8:45pm
Goulburn 2-GN Su 7:30pm
Gunncdah 2-MO Su 7:05pm
Lismore 2-XNWe 7:].5pm
Newcastle 2-I1D Su 9:30am
Su 7:15pm Su 11:40pm
Sydney 2-UE Su 9:15am
\V ’gaW ’ga 2-WG We 9:30am
We 7:45pm
QUEENSLAND Brisbane 4-BC Su 10:15am Mackay 4-M K Su 11:15am Maybor’gh 4-MU Wo 9:45pm Rockh’pton 4-KO We 10:00pm Townsville 4-TO Wo 8:00pm
TASMANIA
Launceston 7-LA Fr 10:15pm
VICTORIA
Ballarat	3-BA Su 12:45pm
Bendigo	3-BO Tu 8:00pm
Hamilton	3-HA Su 6:45pm
Horsham	3-HS Su 7:00pm
Melbourne	3-AW Su 12:15pm
Mildur a 3 MA Su 7:15pm Sale 3-TRSu 6:3<>pm Swan Hill 3 SII Su 7:15pm
Wangaratta 3-WR Su 8:15pm
WEST AUSTRALIA
Kalgoorlie 6-KG Su 7:45pm
Perth 6-ML Su 7:00pm
BELGIUM
Hainaut BONNE Sa 5:30pm (330 m) ESPERANCE
CANADA
ALBERTA
Calgary CFCN Su 5:45pm
NOVA SCOTIA Sydney CJCB Su 9:00pm
ONTARIO
Hamilton CKOC Su 10:30am Su 1:30pm Su 8:15pm
CHINA
Shanghai XMIIA Su 9:45am
CUBA
Caibarien CmIID
Spanish Su 7:00pm
Havana CMK Su 11:30am
Spanish Su 9:00pm
Santa Cl ’a CMHI Su 11:35am
Spanish Su 11:05am
ESTHONIA
Reval RADIO- Su 3:30pm (296.1m) TALLINN
FRANCE
Beziers RADIO-Th 8:00pm £220.1 m) BEZIERS
Bordeaux RADIO- Mo 7:45pm (237 m) SUDOUEST
Fecamp RADIO-
(206 m) NORMANDIE
French Tu 8:00pm
Paris RADIO L L Fr 8:15pm (370 m)
Paris RADIO- Su 12:00 nn
(312.8 m) VITUS
Th 7:30pm Sa 7:30pm
Toulouse RADIO-We 7:15pm (385.1m) TOULOUSE
MEXICO
Mexico XECW
Spanish Th 10:00pm
UNITED STATES
ALABAMA
Birm 'ham WAPI Su 12:45pm
Birni’ham WBEC Su 10:00am
We 4:30pm
Dothan WHET Su 1:30pm M’tgoinery WSFA Su 3:45pm Muscle S. WNRASu 6:00pm
We 8:00pm Fr 8:00pm
ALASKA
AnchorageKFQD We 9:30pm
KctchikanKGBU Mo 7:15pm
Th 7:15pm Sa 7:15pm
ARIZONA
Bisbee KSUN Su 4:00pm
Wo 4:00pm Fr 4:00pm
Jerome KCRJ Mo 5:15pm
Wo 5:15pm Sa 5:15pm
Spanish Th 4:30pm
Prescott KI’JMSu 5:45pm
We 5:45pm Fr 5:45pm
Tucson KGAR Su 7:00pm
We 5:4opm Fr 5:45pm
Yuma KUMA Su 6:15pm
Spanish Su 6:00pm
ARKANSAS
Fay ’villo KUOA Su 12:45pm
We 11:45am Fr 4:30pm
HotSp’gs KTHSSu 5:00pm Little R’k KARK Su 9:00am Little R’k KGHISu 7:00pm
We 5:45pin Fr 5:45pm
Little R ’k KLRA Su 10:30am Paragould KBTM Su 10:00am We 11:30am
Texarkana KCMC Su 6:45pm
CALIFORNIA
El Centro KXO Su 10:00am Eureka KIEM Su 10:30am Fresno KM J Su 3:45pm Hollywood KNX Su 9:15pm Long B’ch KGER Su 10:45am
Los Angeles KTM Su 9:30am
Su 8:00pm Th 8:00pm
Oakland KLS Su 11:15am We 2:45pm Fr 2:45pm
Oakland KROW Su 10:15am Su 6:15pm Mo 8:15pm
We 8:15pm Sa’mento KFBKSu 9:30am San Diego XEBC Su 11:45am
We 7:45pm
S.F’cisco KT AB Su 9:30am Sa 8:30am
Stockton KGDM Su 9:30am We 7:15am Fr 1:15pm
COLORADO
Col ’o Spr. KVOR Su 10:30am
We 5:30pm Sa 4:30pm
Denver KFELSu 7:00pm
Grand J’n KI’X.T Su 1:30pm
Greeley KFKA Su 6:45pm
Lamar KIDW Su 7:15pm
We 2:40pm Fr 2:40pm
Yuma KGEK Mo 12:45pm We 12:45pm Fr 12:45pm
CONNECTICUT Bridgeport WICC Su 10:00am
DELAWARE Wilm’ton WDELSu 6:15pm
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA Washington WOL Su 6:00pm
FLORIDA
Miami W1OD Su 12:15pm
Miami WQAMSu 5:15pm
Orlando WDBO Su 12:45pm
Pensacola WCOASu 1:00pm We 7:00pm
GEORGIA
Athens WTFISu 9:45am
Atlanta WGSTSu 5:45pm
Atlanta WJTLSu 2:15pm
Augusta WRDW Su 3:00pm
Th 7:45pm
Columbus WRBLSu 9:30:nn
LaGrangeWKEU Su 3:00pm
Wo 3:00pm Fr 10:00am
Macon WMAZSu 4:00pm
Rome WRGA Su 12:30pm Wo 8:45pm Fr 8:45pm
Savannah WTOCSu 1:00pm
HAWAII
Honolulu KGMB Wo 12:05pin
Fr 7:15pm
IDAHO
Boise KIDO Su 10:30am Wo 8:45pm
Idaho Falls KID Mo 10:00am
Nampa KFXD Su 11:00am
Mo 7:45pm
Pocatello KSEISu 2:00pm
Su 9:00pm
Twin Falls KTFI Su 10:45am Su 4:45pm
ILLINOIS
Decatur W JBL Su 10:00am
Fr 6:30am
Harrisb ’g WEBQ Su 6:00pm
Mo 10:30pm Fr 10:00pm
La Salle WJBC Su 10:00am
Quincy WTAD Su 12:30pm We 1:00pm
Rockford WROK Su 10:00am
Su 10:00pm We 10:30pm
Sp ’gfield WCBS Su 12:30pm
Sa 11:15am
Tuscola WDZ Su 12:45pm
INDIANA
Hammond WWAE Su 11:00am Ind’apolisWKBF Su 10:00am Th 1:00pm
Muncie WLBC Su 1:30pm Fr 7:30pm
IOWA
Des Moines WHO Su 10:30am
KANSAS
Colleyville KGGF Su 1:45pm
Th 8:00pm
LOUISIANA
Monroe KMLD Su 10:45am
Shrevep’t KWEA Su 10:15am
MAINE
Bangor WLBZ Su 9:45am
MARYLAND
Baltimore WBALSu 3:15pm
Cuinberl’dWTBO Mo 1:15pm
We 1:15pm Fr 1:15pm
Hagerst ’n WJE J Su 10:15am
MASSACHUSETTS
Babson P. WBSO Su 12:30pm
Boston WNAC Su 10:00am
Sp’gfield WMAS Su 10:30am
Worcester WORC Su 10:30am
MICHIGAN	
Calumet WHDFTu Detroit	WJRSu Jackson W1BM Su KalainazooWKZO Su We	6:15pm 9:45am 6:30pm 9:45am 2:00pm
MINNESOTA F’gusFallsKGDE Su 10:00am Moorhead KGFK Su 7:30pm We 5:15pm Fr 5:15pm	
MISSISSIPPI Hattiesb ’gWPFB Su 1:30pm Wo 7:45pm Laurel WAMLSu 1:00pm Meridian WCOC Su 10:00am We 6:45pm Miss. City WGCM Su 9:45am We 8:45pm	
MISSOURI Columbia KFRU Su Wo Kans.C’y KWKC Su Tu	6:15pm 7:15am 2:00pm 7:00am
MONTANA
Billings KGIIL Su 12:30pm
Kalispell KGEZSu 9:00am
NEBRASKA
Kearney KGFW Su 10:00am Lincoln KFAB Su 9:30am Lincoln KFOR Su 10:15am Scottsbl’f KGKY Su 10:15am
We 5:45pm Fr 5:45pm
NEVADA
Reno KOH Su 10:30am
NEW JERSEY
Newark WNEW Su 10:00am
NEW MEXICO
Albuq’que KOB We 5:45pm
Roswell KGFL Su 5:15pm
We 4:30pm Fr 4:30pm
NEW YORK
Auburn WMBO Su 6:30pm
Sa 2:15pm
Bing'mtonWNBF Su 7:15pm
(Continued on page tS3)
soww.
iXiA^sca
©vaBxrsfe.v.i
(Othman,of tte&ightT
Jsaiah
You LV
Semi-Monthly
No. 16
AUGUST 15, 1934
CONTENTS
are my witnesses saitii Jehovah that I am God Isa. 4342
His Kindness (Part 2) __________
Notice________________________
Seeking Refuge________________
Satisfaction__________________
Applies When!_________________
Others________________________
‘Miy Be Hid’..................
Instruction __________________
Method of Study_______________..
REDEMPTION BY A RANSOM _________
Job’s “ Friends’’_______________
Tabernacle of the Law Covenant Service Appointments ____________
“Righteous Ruler’’ _____________
The Kingdom Praise Period _______
Public Lectures by Transcription Transcription Machines__________
..243
.. 241
246
247
24 S
24!)
251
251
256
242
212
J
THE WATCHTOWER.
Published Semi-Monthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N. Y., U. S. A.
OFMOESS
J. F. Buthebford President W. E. Van Ambubgk Secretary "And all thy cliildren shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.”- Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of lifo to his creatures; that tho Logos was the beginning of his creation and his active agent in tho creation of all things; that the Logos is now tho Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed Tilth all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive OHieer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created tho earth for man, created perfect man for the caith and placed him upon it; that man wilfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce tho rar.com or redemptive price for all mankind; licit God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Cir.-Nt Jesus is the Chief O. ieer tlicreof and is tho rightful King of tho world; that tho anointed and faithful followers of Christ J,\>iis are children of Zion, li.nnbeis of Jehovah’s organization, and are liis witn<';s'’S whose duty and privilege it is to testify to tho supremacy of Jehovah, dech-.ro his purposes toward mankind as cxpie’ced in the Bible, r.nl to bear the fruits of tho kingdom before all who Will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
TBATthe RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can como only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ which has now begun; that tho Lord’s next great act is tho destruction of Satan’s organization and the esta:>-lishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under tho kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall bo restored and live on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling tho people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah's witnesses. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely freo and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation, for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his Beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in tho light of ths Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Brice
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Cheat Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 7s. American remittances should lie made by Express or 1’ustal Money Order, or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African an.I Australasian remittances should to made direct to the respective branch cilices. Remittances from countries other- than tho^o mentioned may bo made to tho Brooklyn oCice, but by Intcniatitnial Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British........... .... 31 Crav cn Terrace, London, W. 2, England
Canadian ....... <r> Irwin Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, C.Jimia Australasian . . 7 l;erc.,fo;.l Road, Strathfield, N. S. IV., Au-lralin South African .... Boston House, Cape Town, South Africa Weare address tho Society in every case.
{Translations of this journal appear tn several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription pii.-o may have Tho Ti'atchioircr tree upon written application to the publishers, mu<10 onco each jear, stating tho reason for so requesting it. Wo arc glad to tints aid tho needy, but the written application onco each year is re.tnirod by tho postal regulations. Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will bo sent only when requested. Change of address, when remtested, may ho rx-.eetnl to appear on address within one month. A renewal biank (carrying notice of expiration) v.i.'l be sent with the journal one month before tha subscription expire?. Entered as Second Clans Mail Matter at Brooklyn, N. Y., Bottoflec.
Act of March 3, Jr'A>.
“RIGHTEOUS RULER”
Another new booklet 1 The two radio lectures “World Control’’ and “ Flee Now’’, wiih an excellent introduction thereto, bound together under one cot er, this cover bearing a most inspiring <1< sign. Even Jehovah’s witnesses should not fail to read this booklet, not to speak of the Jonadab diss, it may be had for 5c a copy by all such. The beginning of the distribution thereof to the general public is announced elsewhere.
THE KINGDOM PRAISE PERIOD
This nine-day service period, September 29 to October 7 inclusive, begins the new service year of 1934-193.'. It will bo euith-wide in its scope, and it is expected that more lands where some of Jehovah’s witnesses or Jonadabs are located will receive a witness during this period than dining any previous like peiiod. In tho English-speaking countries Jehovah’s witnesses and the Jonadabs will specialize on phu mg tho new booklet, lti:;ktcov.s liuler. In countries of another language the blanch c.'.'-e in charge will duly announce the booklet to-be distiibu’ed there. And, impoilant! don’t forget repoiting your work for Hie period, promptly at the close thereof, to tho respective oiiiee Imviug supervision over the witness in your part of the field.
PUBLIC LECTURES BY TRANSCRIPTION
Jehovah’s blessing has been markedly upon the use of the pottable tiamwription wtiehine. He has plainly ir.nntfistcd that this machine meets the need of the hour, when the euei.-y, under Gog, is seeking to curtail the use of the radio by God's anointed and when'the people’s ears are eager to hear, not man’s message, but God's. The tiar.scription machine has increased the power of Jehovah's witnesses afield to preach His truth manyfold, so that the de.-.ire for tho literature is stimulated and study classes of many interested hearers are being formed. Besides moro than COO sueti machines in the United States alone, great numbers are now being effectively used m countries near and afar. For more information,. write the Society.
TRANSCRIPTION MACHINES
The Society has made arrangements to construct and assemble portable transciiption machines at our own factory at 117 Adams Street. These machines will be somewhat different m construction from those previously furnished. They will be spring-wound, and operated from a 6-volt wet-cell battery. Every machine will be furnished complete with the battery and a battery charger, so that it can be kept up to its full strength. We are pleased to announce that this machine can be offered at $100, complete, to brethren in the United States.
AND HERALD OF CHRIST’S PRESENCE
Vol. LV	Auoost 15, 1931	No. 1«
HIS KINDNESS
“How precious thy lovingkindness, 0 God; therefore the sons of men under the shadow of thy wings seek refuge: they abundantly relish the fatness of thy house, and out of the full stream of thine own pleasures thou givest them to drink. For with thee is the fountain of life, in thy light we see light.”—Ps. 36: 7-9, Itoth.
PART 2
JEHOVAH’S loving-kindness is extended to all who diligently seek to know and to do his will. He extends his kindness to men who believe on the Lord Jesus Christ. (John 3:16) Jesus Christ is God’s provided way of life, but not all men who get life will become spirit creatures. There are other sheep which arc not of the “little flock”. (John 10:16) It is the latter, or the “other sheep”, that, after the coming of Christ Jesus to the temple for judgment, he addresses in these words: “Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.” (Matt. 25:34) The battle of the great day of God Almighty is rapidly approaching, and such conflict will result in the greatest slaughter of human creatures ever known, because the time is at hand when ‘the whole earth shall be devoured’. There arc many creatures of good will who have unwittingly and unawares done violence to the faithful witnesses of Jehovah God, but God’s loving-kindness has made provision for those who turn to him, and this provision is illustrated by the cities of refuge.
2	Men went to the World War and violated the everlasting covenant by shedding human blood, but many of them did so because they were forced by the ruling powers of Satan’s organization to do so, and they did it in ignorance of the fact that they were violating the everlasting eovenant. There they saw the duplicity and hypocrisy of the clergy who claimed to be followers of Christ Jesus, and servants of God, and yet who not only participated in the war but viciously urged upon others the killing of human creatures. Such men were shocked by the conduct of the clergy, and when they returned from the war and heard of the truth of God’s provision for the human race through Christ Jesus they had a desire to know and to do the will of God. They hated wickedness and with an honest heart sought to find the right way. Others have supported the wicked and oppressive organization which governs this world and which has done much violence to men, including the witnesses
Of Jehovah. Others have been connected with religious organizations that have cruelly persecuted God’s faithful people in a manner similar to that wrong committed by Saul of Tarsus. Others as members of the police force, or strong-arm squad, have reluctantly done the bidding of the clergy and have committed acts of violence against God’s anointed people, but, learning the truth, they have shown anxiety to take a different and right course. Those who thus honestly change their course of action and seek the Lord in his appointed way, find him.
3	The antitype of the cities of refuge is Jehovah’s organization, and he has made provision for the protection of those who place themselves fully on the side of his organization and who have not willfully and maliciously violated the everlasting covenant. “Willfully and maliciously” means to knowingly do a wrongful deed with a wicked motive in the heart and in utter disregard of the rights of others. For instance, clergymen have connived at the persecution and killing of Jehovah’s witnesses and have done so knowing that such men and women were harmless and were proclaiming the Word of God. The motive of such clergymen was malicious because they desired to get such witnesses out of their way. Others have assisted them in wrongdoing but have done so ignorantly and without malice. God’s law concerning such was stated to the Israelites, and antitypically applies to others now, to wit: “These six cities shall be a refuge, both for the children of Israel, and for the stranger, and for the sojourner among them; that every one that killeth any person unawares may flee thither.” —Num. 35:15.
4	Now, since the coming of the Lord to the temple, those in “Christendom” and who form no part of “Christendom”, but who arc of good will and have a desire to serve God and his righteous government, must find a haven or place of refuge in the city (that is to say, the organization) that is wholly devoted to Jehovah and his service. Jehovah has laid upon his witnesses at the present time an obligation concerning this
243
241
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
class who desire to do right, and that obligation cannot be side-stepped or ignored. That obligation is to carry to the people of good will the message of the kingdom informing them of God’s provision made for those who diligently seek to know him and to serve him. By and through his great High Priest, Christ Jesus, Jehovah commands that his witnesses must preach this gospel of the kingdom before the final end comes. They must give'notice and warning to the people, that those of good will may act intelligently and in order that they may boar their own responsibility before Ged.
6	The cities of refuge were occupied by those of the tribe of Levi: “And when he that doth flee unto one of those cities shall stand at the entering of the gate of the city, and shall declare his cause in the ears of the elders of that < ity, they shall take him into the city unto them, and give him a place, that he may dwell among them. And if the avenger of blood pursue after him, then they shall not deliver’ the slayer up into his hand; because he smote bis neighbour unwittingly, and hated him not beforctime.” (Josh. 20:4,5) It was the duty of the Levites in the cities of refuge to give information, aid and comfort to those seeking refuge. Likewise it is the duty of the anti-typienl Levites, from which the priesthood is taken, to give information, aid and comfort to those who now seek the Lord’s organization. This they must do by giving them a mark in the forehead, that is to say, giving them intelligent information as to what they must do in order to have the Lord’s favor. God through bis prophet Ez •kid especially commands that the priestly class must go through The land and thus put a “lav” or mark upon the foreheads of those who are seeking the way of the Lord. It is this class of people who are thus marked, and who thereafter come into and abide in the city, that are spared and taken th rough the great tribidat ion.—Ezek. 9:6; Zeph. 2: 3.
“That the people of Ged’s remnant have a special obligation toward tho.w of good will thus seeking refuge from the avenger and who committed wrong unwittingly, it is written: “Then the congregation shall judge between the slayer and the revenger of blood according to these judgments: and the congregation shall deliver the slayer out of the hand of the xvvenger of blood, and the congregation shall restore him to the city of his refuge, whither he was tied: and he shall abide in it unto the death of the high priest, which was anointed with the holy oil.’’—Num. 35:22-25.
7	Therefore those who refuse or fail to go among the people and call upon them at their homes and give them the life-giving kingdom message from the Lord, and those who hinder, oppose and discourage the ones who are thus obeying the Lord in carrying the message of truth to the people, show an unloving and unjust spirit that would band over the Jonadab class without mercy to be executed by the executioner at Armageddon. Failure or refusal to assume and carry out this re-ponsibility will not go unnoticed by the Lord, because he has enlightened his anointed ones and
they must obey. “If thou forbear to deliver them that arc drawn unto death, and those that are ready to be slain; if thou sayest, Behold, we knew it not; doth not he that pondereth the heart consider it? and he that keepeth thy soul, doth not he know it? and shall not he render to every man according to his works?’’ (Prov. 24:11,12) “A true witness delivercth souls: Jjnt a~3ecmtful witness speaketh lies.’’—Prov. 14:25.
NOTICE
s The priestly class, meaning the anointed remnant now on earth, must minister unto the people, that the people may have notice and warning, and thereby cause each one to bear his own responsibility before the Lord God. Jehovah’s witnesses must prepare the way before those who mayr desire to seek refuge. “Thou shall prepare thee a way, and divide the coasts of thy land, which the Lord thy God giveth thee to inherit, into three parts, that every slayer may flee thither.” (I)cut. 39:3; Josh. 20:3,9) The pr>-vision of the law concerning the city of refuge exactly harmonizes with the commandment of 1he Lord as s< t forth in Isaiah’s prophecy, which is addressed to the remnant directing them to prepare the. v.ay of the people. “Go through, go through the gates; prepare ye the way of the people; east up, cast up the. highway; gather out the stones; lift up a standaid for the people.” (Isa. 62:10) This is also fulls support'd by the prophecy of Ezekiel (9:4). These prophecies specifically apply to the remnant at the present time and show their obligation toward the Jonadabs.
“When God sent Moses and Aaron to Egypt they first served notice upon Pharaoh, and after the ninth plague had been called down upon Egypt, and before the infliction of the punishment by killing the firstborn of Egypt, the elders of Israel were directed by Jehovah to give special instruction to all the families of Israel; and that foreshadowed the instruction that must now be given to those who have good will and heart toward Jehovah, and who have a desire, to know and to do what Jehovah God has commanded. In antitypical fulfilment of what happened in Egypt notice and warning to the ruler’s of the world have already been given. Nine, of the plagues have been antitypieally fulfilled, and now, before the falling of the vengeance of God upon the firstborn and upon the whole world, foreshadowed by the tenth plague, the people mint have instructions and warning. Such is the present work.of Jehovah's witnesses.
SEEKING KF.FUGE
10	The fact that tire provision for refuge was made for the stranger as well as for Israelites shows that Jehovah’s loving-kindness tuts made provision for those outside of his organization that they may si-ek and find refuge by associating themselvis with his organization, that is, be wholly devoted to him; b.it those who will avail themselves of such ix fuge mu.vt first be informed about it and then comply with the
August 15, 1934
fffie WATCHTOWER.
2-15
rules the Lord has laid down for their guidance. God’s law required that if one committed manslaughter accidentally or unawares or unwittingly, and if the slayer was not an enemy of the slain person, then the congregation should judge between the slayer and the avenger or next of kin; that is, they should try the ease and determine whether or not the slayer might flee to their city and find refuge there. "And he shall dwell in that city, until he stand before the congregation for judgment, and until the death of the high priest that shall be in those days: then shall the slayer return, and come unto his own city, and unto Iris own house, unto the city from whence he fled. ’ ’—Josh. 20:6.
11	If the decision was that the slaying was without malice and was accidental or unwittingly committed, then the slayer should find protection in the city of refuge and must remain there until the death of the high priest. Then though the congregation found the slayer not guilty, and entitled to the protection of the city of refuge, that was not sufficient for him to go free, but he must go into the city of refuge and remain there until a change took place in the office of the high priest. At Ute death of the high priest the slayer might return with safety to his own place or residence. This would clearly seem to teach that the Jonadab class, having sought and found refuge with God’s organization, must remain in the chariot or organization of the Lord with the Greater Jehu, and must continue in heart sympathy and harmony with the Lord and his organization and must prove this proper heart condition by cooperating with Jehovah’s witnesses until the office of the high priest class yet on the earth be, finished. Thus the people of good will must do if they would have their lives spared during the battle, of the great day of God Almighty and be of the "millions" class that shall not die.
12	The Lord Jesus Christ is the great High Priest, and the faithful members of his royal house are counted in as members of that priesthood. (Rev. 1:6; 20: 6; 1 Pet. 2: 5-9) The anointing oil of God’s spirit has been specially poured out on all of Jehovah’s witnesses in these latter days; and the remnant being thus anointed, they are made members of the royal priesthood.
13	This anointing or ‘pouring out of the spirit upon all flash’ has taken place since the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple, and since then the "young men" who are of the priesthood have had a clearer vision of Jehovah’s purposes concerning them. (Joel 2: 28,29) These are the days in which the Jonadab class has come into existence, and those who are of the Jonadab company have fled to Jehovah’s organization. As long, then/as the anointed members of the royal priesthood, meaning the anointed remnant, live on the earth and continue to preach this gospel of the kingdom, the Jonadab company must keep in company and in harmony with Jehovah’s anointed and aid them in their work; otherwise the great Avenger will overtake them.
14	It must be kept in mind that the things pertain
ing to the law which God gave to the Israelites were shadows of greater things to come. (Ileb. 10:1) The law concerning the manslayer who did such slaying unwittingly or unawares provided for his protection only within the bounds of the city of refuge, and the bounds or borders of the city were the suburbs which surrounded the city. (Num. 35:2-5) If the avenger should find the slayer out of the bounds of the city of refuge, then he could slay him with impunity and the avenger would be entirely free from wrongdoing. "But if the slayer shall at any time come without the border of the city of his refuge, whither he was fled; and the revenger of blood find him without the border's of the city of Ids refuges, and the revenger of blood kill the slayer; he shall not be guilty of blood." —Num. 35:26,27.
15	This prophetic provision of the law finds its fulfilment in the present day. Jehovah has graciously provided for those of good will who now seek him, and who are not of the spiritual class. If after receiving these good things from the hand of the Lord any man is found exercising too much personal liberty, that is to say, not keeping within the bounds of Jehovah’s merciful provision made for him at the present time; not taking into consideration that he does not yet possess the right to life, but treats the favor of Jehovah lightly, indifferently, or ignores it, he loses the protection which Jehovah has provided for him. Ho must continue to appreciate the certainty and nearness of Armageddon, at which time Satan’s organization will be destroyed, and also the fact that soon the priestly company shall pass from the earth, and that then the Jonadab class may receive the gift of life through Je sus Christ if they continue steadfast on the side Gf the Lord and righteousness. Having once taken his stand on the side of the Lord and tasted the good things of God’s arrangement, and learning of God’s gracious provision for those of the Jonadab class, he cannot again turn to the beggarly elements of Satan’s organization and at the same time have the Lord’s protection.—Ezek. 18:24,26.
13	Those who have onee sought and found refuge on the Lord's side and who turn again to unrighteousness will die justly. The executioner of Jehovah is entirely justified in slaying such, and his hands are clean, because he carries out Jehovah’s orders. No one in the universe can ever justly say that the slauglit' r at Armageddon will be barbarous, unjustified or unrighteous. On the contrary, it will meet the requirements of God’s law concerning the saeredness of human life. The value and importance of the warning of the people now is emphasized by the words of Jehovah announced through his prophet: "Then whosoever heareth the sound of the trumpet, and taketh not warning; if the sword come, and take him away, his blood shall be upon his own head. He heard tho sound of the trumpet, and took not warning, his blood shall be upon him: but he that taketh warning shall deliver his soul. When I shall say to the righteous,
246
Tfie WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N.Y.
that he shall surely live; if he trust to his own righteousness, and commit iniquity, all his righteousnesses shall not be remembered; but for his iniquity that he hath committed, he shall die for it.”-Ezek. 33:4,5,13.
11	Those of the Jonadab class have heard the sound of God’s trumpet and have heeded the warning by fleeing to God’s organization and associating with God’s people, and there they must abide if their protection continues. In these times of peril no man can find a place of safety except in the place which has been provided by the Lord. Why is one in danger of death who has placed himself on the Lord’s side and who then departs therefrom and returns to Satan’s organization? Because he has learned that Jehovah alone can give life, and that he. will give to man by and through Christ Jesus, and he has learned that there is no other way of getting life; and having learned these good things, he must show his appreciation thereof by faithfully abiding with the Lord and serving him. “Because he should have remained in the city of his refuge until the death of the high priest; but after the death of the high priest the slayer shall return into the land of his possession.’’ (Num. 35:28) Such do not come within the provisions of the new covenant, and life cannot be granted to them until the last member of the priestly class has finished his earthly course. “The death of the high priest” means the change of the last members of the royal priesthood from human to spirit organism, which follows Armageddon. Says the law, ‘After the death of the high priest the slayer may return to his own’; such meaning that those of the Jonadab class after the death of the high priest may find safety on the earth by being obedient to the laws of the Lord Jesus Christ, the great Ruler of the eartlu
’•Christ, the great Avenger and Executioner, will not spare any of the Jonadab company that get outside of Jehovah’s safety arrangement made for them in connection with his organization. This conclusion is supported by the treatment that Solomon administered to Shimoi, who had cursed and thrown stones at King David with a murderous intent of slaying God’s anointed. (2 Sam. 16:5-13) Solomon advised Shimei that he eould find refuge or a sanctuary for his life within the city of Jerusalem, but that he must remain there. Shimei agreed to this provision for his safety and swore that he would abide within the borders or bounds of the city. Later ho violated his agreement by going without the city to accomplish his own selfish purpose, and for this he was promptly executed by order of King Solomon. (1 Kings 2:36-46) Now the Grcater-than-Solomon is upon his judgment seat, and judgment of the nations is in progress. Some of the Jonadabs, like Shimei, may in the past have cursed, persecuted and sought to destroy the faithful ones of the royal priesthood, God’s anointed. During the World War and since that time Jehovah’s faithful servants on earth have been persecuted and maltreated by some who have since that
time come to know the truth and who have sought refuge in the Lord’s organization. These have now become men of good will, or of the Jonadab company. For such to now venture outside of their own haven of refuge would mean disaster at the hand of Jehovah’s great Executioner. Hcmbers of the Jonadab class will not be permitted to run ahead of Jehovah, upon the theory that, having once accepted the truth, they may henceforth be entirely safe regardless of whatsoever course of action they may take. They must abide by Jehovah’s law and must await his due time to fully deliver them and give them life. They must be thankful now for the provision Jehovah has made for their protection and show their gratitude and appreciation by doing what the Lord God has commanded.
SATISFACTION
19	Jehovah has provided the only way for the satisfaction of his law, and no change therein can be made. No one by reason of his position or influence or wealth, or for any other reason, shall be made an exception to the provision of God’s law. God’s provision concerning this matter is stated by the prophet: “Moreover, ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a murderer, which is guilty of death; but he shall be surely put to death.” (Num. 35: 31) Doubtless there arc many who have thought that their wealth and influence will serve to deliver them and make them safe in the time of great tribulation; but they are certain to suffer a complete disappointment. “And I will bring distress upon men, that they shall walk like blind men, because they have sinned against the Lord; and their blood shall be poured out as dust, and their flesh as the dung. Neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in the day of the Lord’s wrath; but the whole land shall be devoured by the fire of his jealousy: for he shall make even a speedy riddance of all them that dwell in the land.” —Zeph. 1:17,18.
20	The man of self-importance who is haughty and austere and who thinks to have protection by reason of his own high standing, or financial or other ability, will find no favor whatsoever before the avenger. “All hands shall be feeble, and all knees shall be weak as water. They shall also gird themselves with sackcloth, and horror shall cover them; and shame shall be upon all faces, and baldness upon all their heads. They shall cast their silver in the streets, and their gold shall be removed: their silver and their gold shall not be able to deliver them in the day of the wrath of the Lord: they shall not satisfy their souls, neither fill their bowels; because it is the stumblingblock of their iniquity.” (Ezek. 7:17-19) The sword of Jehovah wielded in righteousness at Armageddon, and that alone, will satisfy divine justice. God is no respecter of persons.
21	Those who have taken their stand on the side of the Lord and hence are called Jonadabs cannot with safety turn again to the world, which is Satan's or
August 15, 1934
£F6e WATCHTOWER.
247
ganization, nor can they find any other way of safety, except by complying strictly with the Lord's law. This is foreshadowed by the words of the law, to wit: “And ye shall take no satisfaction [ransom, R.V.] for him that is fled to the city of his refuge, that he should Come again to dwell in the land, until the death of the priest.” (Num. 35:32) Jehovah's law cannot be amended, nullified or set aside, and this the Jonadab company must recognize. They are bound by the law of Jehovah, and hence must not seek liberties outside of his organization, which is the city of refuge. Neither they nor any of their human relatives or friends in their behalf can buy their way out from under the bloodeuilt that weighs down upon the whole world and which must be wiped out at Armageddon. There is no way to buy the blessings of life with the right thereto. It is only after Armageddon and after the blood of the antilypical “goat of the sin offering that is for the people” is applied to the great mercy seat in heaven that the way of justification to life on earth will be opened. It follows, then, that the city of refuge offers protection until the last member of the royal priesthood dies and passes from earth, and then the millions class will be in line to receive the gift of God through Jesus Christ.—Lev. 1G: 15 ; Hom. G: 23.
22	In this connection let it be noted that since it is written, “Ye .shall take no satisfaction,” the priestly company of God’s organization shall take no bribis in behalf of the Jonadab class. Upon the priest is laid an obligation to adhere strictly to God’s unchangeable law, and hence to warn the people of good will of their own responsibility. The mere keeping of man’s law or standards of right laid down by man will not be sufficient. The Jouadabs must be obedient to Jehovah’s requirements, and they must be submissive to God’s arrangement by honestly abiding in and supporting his organization until the end of the earthly ministry of the priesthood. Then Christ will act no more as a sacrificing priest, but as the great priest ministering life to the world. This cannot take place until the day of vengeance is past. The work of the royal priesthood after the older of Melchizedek is not a work of restitution, but is a work of giving life to those who obey him, Christ J'?sus. Then will be the fulfilment of the words of Jesus, the groat Life-giver, to wit: “Verily, verily, I say unto you, If a man keep my saying, he shall never sec death.” ('John 8:51) “Whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die.”—John 11:26.
23	One of the divinely assigned reasons for Armageddon is that “the earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have . . . broken the everlasting covenant”. (Isa. 24:5) The penal terms of the everlasting covenant must be enforced. “So ye shall not pollute the land wherein ye are; for blood it defileth the land: and the land cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it.” (Num. 35:33) Innocent blood wrongfully spilled, whether by the unwitting
slayer or by the deliberate murderer, pollutes the land, and there is but one way of cleansing it. Money or other bloodless ransom price, such as offered by Cain, will avail nothing for the shedder of human blood. Blood must literally flow at Armageddon to wash away the defiling which now stains the' whole earth. The blood of Christ docs not atone for the deliberate breaking of tlie everlasting covenant unless the one breaking that covenant fully repents, exercises faith in the shed blood of Christ Jesus by fully consecrating himself to do Jehovah’s will, and then commits himself wholly to God and to his service.
24	The ciij' of refuge dues not violate the divine decree of justice. The slayer who unwittingly or una-waics spills human blood, before he can tire to the city of refuge, must know about it and have faith therein and act accordingly. Tho.-.e who now exerehe faith in the shed blood of Jesus Christ and devote themselves to the Lord ;;s an evidence of their faith, but who are not accepted as a part of the sacrifice of Chri-.t Jesus, find refuge in Cod’s orminizoi imi until the time arrives for Christ’s slicd blood to wake full satisfaction for the sins these have commits d mid until the time for the bh-;'ir>s of life to begin, h here-fmc the responsibility of the nmn.daeer who did Midi slaying unwittingly or unawares does imt cease during the time he abid.es in the. city of refuge, that is to say, of God's organization. The fact that lie is compelled to wait there until the death of the high piie-:t shows that he is a fugitive and that his protection depends upon his abiding with the High Pri'wt, Christ Jesus, but that the innocent blood of the great High ITi-. d shed for the sins of humankind atones for the sins of the one who has found reiuge in God’s organiza-tion. The blood of Christ Jesus, therefore, atoms for the blood of the Jonadab class who continue in that proper attitude of heart and devotion to the Lord until the due time to cleanse them. They dw by so doing that they are in heart, harmony with the Lord and are wholly out of harmony with the breakers <.f the everlasting covenant, and that they would nut intentionally break God’s law*.
APPL’.nS WHEN?
25	The Israelites were God’s chosen people, ami the land of promise wherein they were caused to n-.ids* after crossing the Jordan was typical of tiw dv.e’.ling-place of the Lord. God put his name upon Jern-::lem ; hence that typically was his dwelling-place. In the law given to the Israelites just before entering Cm :mn God said to them: “Defile not therefore the land which ye shall inhabit, v.herein I dwell: for I tlie Lord dwell among the children of Israel.” (Num. 1’5:31) This provision of the law serves to slmw at what time this “city of refuge” provision or a trap gement must nntitypically apply, which is, to wit, after the birth of tlie man eliibl. that is, after Jesus is placed upon his throne. (Ilev. 12: 5) Therefore it is after
248
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
1914, at which time God enthroned the great King and sent him forth to rule. It is then that the holy city, the new Jerusalem, which is Jehovah God’s organization, descends out of heaven. It is that holy city which is the abiding place of Jehovah. (Ps. 132:13) The time is when “the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God”. (Rev. 21:2,3) It is when God is in his holy temple, representatively by his duly constituted Judge, Christ Jesus. (Hab. 2:20; John 5: 22,27) The prophetic picture of the city of refuge could have no application prior to the beginning of the reign of Christ in 1914.
OTHERS
20 But what shall be said about others who have not unwittingly or otherwise committed murder, but who since the coming of the Lord Jesus to the temple of Jehovah have heard the truth and taken their stand on the side of Jehovah and associated themselves w’ith his organization? The fact is that at some time all have been mixed up with the Devil’s organization, in this, that they have been under that organization and cither directly or indirectly supported it. Those who rendered aid, comfort and support to the willful murderer or manslayer, to the extent of such support, aid or comfort are parties to the crime of breaking the everlasting covenant. When the Lord eame to the temple and caused the message to be delivered, “The world has ended; millions now living will never die,” people of good will who heard that message of truth and believed it, and who have since taken their stand on the side of the Lord and given kind and loving support and consideration to those whom they recognize to be servants of the Lord God, have thus shown their kindness toward the Lord Jesus Christ and his followers. To such the scripture applies, to wit: “Blessed is he that considereth the poor; the Lord will deliver him in time of trouble.^The Lord will preserve him, and keep him alive; and he shall be blessed upon the earth: and thou wilt not deliver him unto the will of his enemies.” (Ps. 41:1,2) The “poor” here mentioned are not merely those who are destitute of food and raiment, but are those who are poor in spirit, meek and lowly of heart. The man Jesus was chiefest amongst such when he was on earth. (Matt. 11:29) To his faithful followers Jesus said: “Blessed are the poor in spirit; for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. ” (Matt. 5:3) It is to these Jesus was commissioned to preach, and it is to the same class that the body members are commanded to preach the gospel. (Luke 4:18; Isa. 61:1-3; Pss. 40:17; 72:2,12, 13) Such are the people of God taken out for his name and concerning whom the apostle authoritatively wrote: “As sorrowful, yet al way rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, and yet possessing all things.” (2 Cor. 6:10) These are the “poor” ones to whom the people of good will have
shown kindness and have shown it because such were believed by them to be representing the Lord.
27	The facts show that since 1918 there have been many good people who have shown kindness and consideration to Jehovah’s witnesses, and who have rendered them aid and comfort. To those who out of the goodness of their hearts have shown kindness and consideration to God's anointed people he says: ‘The Lord will preserve you and keep you alive, and you shall be blessed on the earth.’
28	This is exactly in harmony with the judgment pronounced by Jesus. Now Christ Jesus is at his temple for judgment, where he is accompanied and served by his holy angels, and the nations are gathered before him; and this is the time in which “he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divid-eth his sheep from the goats”. (Matt. 25:31, 32) Those people of good will, that is, the Jonadab class, are the sheep of the ‘other flock’ which Jesus mentioned, when he said: “And other sheep I have, which arc not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.” (John 10:16) Christ Jesus is now doing the separating work, and there are those of the ‘other flock’ which are now being brought into the fold of his organization. These arc taking their stand on the side of the Lord, having been marked as Jehovah has directed. They identify themselves with God's organization. They have sought refuge in his city. To those who have thus taken the Lord’s side and rendered faithful service to him, and who abide in his organization and who show kindness to his anointed because they arc his anointed, Jesus soon will say: “Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.” And these shall go away into eternal life. Such will be their portion when the day of God’s vengeance is overpassed and peace and blessings have come to stay.
•MAY BE HID’
20 All who have taken their stand on the side of Jehovah must abide in his organization under Christ, if they would live. There is no exception to this rule. If those now in the temple should go out they would die because disobedient. (Acts 3: 23) The city of refuge was not for the anointed of God, but such city of refuge pictured or foreshadowed Jehovah’s kind and loving provision made for those who should come to the Lord after the temple class is selected and anointed. It is written in the prophecy: “Gather yourselves together, yea, gather together, 0 nation not desired.” (Zeph. 2:1) God’s “holy nation”, that is to say, the anointed of Jehovah, are not desired by the world, and all of those of the Jonadab class who have joined themselves to the chariot of Christ, that is, his organization, are likewise undesirable ones with the world. Hence the words of the prophet last above quoted refer to all such, who have identified them
AvUfST 15, 1934
WATCHTOWER.
249
selves on the Lord’s side. Then all of these are told that before God’s wrath is expressed at Armageddon they must seek meekness and righteousness. "Seek ye the Lord, all ye meek of the earth, which have wrought his judgment; seek righteousness, seek meekness ; it may be ye shall be hid in the day of the Lord’s anger.” (Zeph. 2:3) Mark this scripture says: “Ye . . . which have wrought his judgment.” The judgment mentioned here is Jehovah’s judgment or decree, that is to say, his judicial determination which is the expression of his purpose. The anointed temple class have wrought or worked according to God’s judgment and announced purpose. The Jonadab class, by taking their stand on the side of Jehovah and connecting themselves with his organization, getting into his chariot, have also wrought the Lord’s judgment or purpose. All of these must be meek, that is to say, they must be teachable, and hence must study the Word of God, which is food convenient for them. All such must seek righteousness, that is to say, must be diligent to conform themselves to the laws of God, which arc righteous. All those who pass through the great tribulation of Armageddon must be bid by Jehovah, otherwise they could not be shielded from that terrible trouble that will come upon the world. That means, then, that all in the organization of Jehovah, including the anointed and all connected therewith, such as pictured by Jonadab, must now ‘study to show themselves approved unto God, and be workers that need not be ashamed’. The Lord God has abundantly provided spiritual food for them, and of this they must partake for their own welfare.
INSTRUCTION
*’ The prophetic picture of the city of refuge was written in the Scriptures aforetime for the instruction and comfort of the remnant, that they might see and understand the will of God concerning them and that they might be sure to be on the right side and have their hopes made brighter. (Rom. 15:4) God said to the Israelites on the plains of Moab concerning the cities of refuge: “So these things shall be for a statute of judgment unto you, throughout your generations, in all your dwellings.” (Num. 35:29) Necessarily this means that they must keep the law of God in mind, and hence must, study it. This is the day or time of judgment of the house of God and also the judgment of the nations, and in this judgment the remnant share in the work of the “judgment written”. (Ps. 149: 9) It therefore follows that the remnant must be informed concerning God’s judgments and must inform one another as to what is the will of God concerning them. Hence it is necessary for them to continually feed upon the truths which God provides for them. The anointed remnant on earth are of the priestly order, and God’s law required that the priest must teach Jehovah’s law to the people. (Mal. 2:7) Therefore there is an obligation laid upon the remnant, who are Jehovah’s wit
nesses, to study and inform themselves, and also to aid and to teach those of the Jonadab class to understand the truth. The obligation is laid upon the priestly class to give this infonnation to those who are now being invited into and who are entering the chariot. An obligation is laid upon the Jonadab company to inform themselves by studying the Word of God, because they must continue to seek meekness, that is to say, to be teachable and be taught, and they must continue to seek righteousness, that is to say, to learn of and walk in the way that God has appointed for them. Such are the conditions precedent to receiving God’s protection in the time of great tribulation. Hence they must perform these conditions ; otherwise they would not be hid in the day of Armageddon.
81 The name “Jehovah’s witnesses” applies specifically to God’s anointed ones who have been taken out of the world and made witnesses for Jehovah, and these alone bear the new name. The Jonadab class are of those who ‘hear’ the message of truth and who must say to those in their hearing: “Come. And let him that heareth say, Come. And let him that is athirst come. And whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely.” (Rev. 22:17) Those of the Jonadab class must go along with those who are of the antitypieal Jehu company, that is, the anointed, and announce the message of the kingdom, even though they are not the anointed witnesses of Jehovah. The question is propounded, and The Watchtower is asked to answer, Should a Jonadab be made a member of the service committee and appointed as a leader of study meetings?
32 Be it noted that the obligation is laid upon the priestly class to do the leading or reading of the law of instruction to the people. (Mal. 2:7) Therefore, where there is a company,of Jehovah’s witnesses, that is, the anointed ones, the leader of a study should be selected from amongst the anointed, and likewise those of the service committee should be taken from the anointed. If the company be made up entirely of Jonadabs, and none of the anointed present, then one of the Jonadabs may properly preside at a meeting where studies are being conducted. Mark this, that Jehu invited Jonadab to “come with me, and see my zeal for the Lord”. (2 Ki. 10:1G) Jonadab was there as one to learn, and not one who was to teach. He saw that Jehu had and manifested a burning love and devotion or zeal for Jehovah’s cause, and from that he learned that he too must have a zeal for the Lord, that is to say, he must serve Jehovah God because it is right to serve him, and not merely to selfishly receive the blessings at Jehovah’s hands. The official organization of Jehovah on earth consists of his anointed remnant, and the Jonadabs who walk with the anointed are to be taught, but not to be leaders. This appearing to be God’s arrangement, all should gladly abide thereby.
250
ffile WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
*3 Should a Jonadab vote in the selection of a service committee? The answer is No; for the reason that since the service committee and the leaders of studies are to be those of the anointed company, the anointed alone should participate in the selection of the same.
81 Should a eTenadab consecrate himself to the Lord and be baptized ? Answer: Most assuredly it is proper for a Jonadab to consecrate himself to do the will of God. No one will ever get life without doing that. Water immersion is merely a symbol of having made a consecration to do God’s will, and that would not be out of order. Let those who are brought to a knowledge of the truth rejoice in whatsoever place the Lord puts them. No one is to sclfishlj’ seek a place. If the Lord assigns him to a duty he should be glad to serve there, and all should dwell together in peace and harmony.
METHOD OF STUDY
33 The time is now here for the instruction of the Jonadab or "‘millions” class, which mean one and the same thing. A method of instruction is here outlined as :t suggestion which seems to be in harmony with the will of the Lord. At a meeting of the remnant and Jonadabs together the transcription machine may be used to reproduce a lecture, and during which lecture no one should he on tlie platform. At the conclusion of the transcriptioii record one of the anointed, previously chosen as the leader of the meeting, should take his place on the platform and conduct a study on the same subject matter as that treated in the transcription lecture. For instance, the transcription record is “Who Is Jehovah?” Let the leader be prepared in advance with questions on this same subject, with proper Scriptural reference, and with Scriptural answers to the questions, which questions may be read and any anointed one in the company’ called upon to give the answer, or the answer may be given from the printed literature, or in harmony therewith, by the leader. Questions also may be propounded by the Jonadabs or anyone present, which questions should always pertain to the subject matter under consideration. In this way the hour can be very profitably spent, whether the meeting be held in a hall or in the home of someone interested in God’s Word. Such studies are now essential and particularly for the benefit of those of the Jonadab company, that they may learn what is the will of God concerning them.
80 Let everyone who loves the Lord God and the Lord Jesus Christ busy himself in serving the Lord and in making known his kingdom. This is the time the."witness work must be given. Bear in mind that the enemy is fatally bent on destroying God’s organization on earth, and divine protection will be given only to the faithful. Therefore let all of God’s organization dwell together and walk together in peace and harmony. Let all strife and fault-finding be put aside. Those who indulge in fault-finding and murmuring and strife will be adversely judged by the Lord. (Jude
15-21) All of the temple class must be at harmony and in unity in Christ and with each other, and therefore must dwell in peace. Anyone who claims to be of the temple company and who causes disturbances or strife gives evidence that he is not of the temple. God’s anointed organization is represented by “Zion”. The term “Jerusalem” applies generally to Jehovah’s organization, and to which organization the Jonadab class have attached themselves. The great Judge, Christ Jesus, tlie beloved Son of God, is now carrying on his judgment in dividing the people and bringing on his side those who love God and love righteousness. The priestly class, in particular, must take the lead in peace, unity and harmonious action. All who accompany them must be at peace one with another and serve the Lord faithfully. “For there are set thrones of judgment, the thrones of the house of David. IVay for the peace of Jerusalem; they shall prosper that love thee. Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces. For my brethren and companions' sakes, I will now say, Peace be within thee. Becan- e of the houso of the Lord our God I will seek thy good.”—Ps. 122: 5-9.
QUESTION’S FOIi STUDY
H 1. To whom docs Jehovah extend his loving-kindness, and when?
f 2-4. Explain why some who havo violated the everlasting covenant may ileo anti find safety in tho “city of refuge’ while others may not. How is such flight accomplished? Point out the obligation in this respect now laid upon Jehovah's witnesses.
f 5, 6. Describe the procedure upon arrival of a slayer at the city of refuge. Apply the prophetic picture.
f 7. Apply Proverbs 24:'ll, 12 and 11: 25.
Y 8. Compare Deuteronomy 19: 3 and Isaiah 62: 10. To whom is each addressed, and how do these ‘prepare the way’ ug there directed?
t 9. How, in connection with tho tenth plague upon Egypt, was the present work of Jehovah’s witnesses foreshadowed?
Y 10-13. Explain tho provision and requirement that, having fled to the city of refuge, “he sliall dwell in that city, until ho stand before the congregation for judgment, ami until the death of the high priest.”
f 11-17. Show that tho provision set forth in Numbers 35: 26,27 finds its prophetic application at the present time. Uwn-pate this (including the judgment expressed in verw 28) with tho rule stateri in Ezekiel 18: 24,26 and 33: 4, 5.13, f 18. How does King Solomon’s dealing with Shimei find prophetic application now?
f 19, 20. Explain tho meaning and the purpose of the rule stated in Numbers 35: 31, and, with other scriptures, how this will affect those in positions of power or influence in the affairs of the world.
21, 22. Referring to Numbers 35: 32: What is the counsel therein contained, and. for whom, and why, is it provided?
23, 24. Why is Armageddon necessary? What, then, is tlie purpose of the “city of refuge”, and of the announcement of sueh provision?
1 25. With scriptures, point out the time when this “city of refuge” arrangement has its antitypical application.
J 26-28. With scriptures, identify the “poor” referred to in Psalm 41:1. Who is “he that considereth the poor”? and how is he “blessed”? How docs this scripture, together with verse 2. have fulfilment? Point out the harmony therewith of fulfilment of tho parable of the sheep and the goats and of Jesus’ words of John 10:16.
f 29. What is tho “nation” referred to in Zephaniah 2: 1? By whom is it not desired, and why? Apply the inEiruetian given in Zephaniah 2: 3.
f 30. Bor whom and for what purpose was the prophetic pic
Augvst 15, 1934
WATCHTOWER.
251
ture of the "city of refuge” recorded! Point out the present privilege and obligation expressed in Numbers 35: 29, Psalm 149: 9, and Malachi 2: 7.
V 31-33. With scriptures, explain the relationship of "Jehovah’s witnesses” and the "Jonadab” class in connection with study meetings, selection of a service committee, and announcement of the message pf the kingdom.
? 34. Should a Jonadab consecrate and be baptized, and whv! T 35. What method may well be used for instruction of the Jonadab class!
? 36. What, then, is now the privilege, responsibility and obligation of every one who loves the Lord God and the Lord Jesus Christ! Why are careful attention and diligent devotion thereto now so urgent!
REDEMPTION
IT IS the autumn of the year twenty-nine (A.D.). Now we find the man Christ Jesus on earth at thirty years of age, a perfect man and at the legal age required for the work before him. Why had ho come to earth? God had promised to ransom the human race. Several hundred years before he had inspired his prophet Ilosea (13:14) to utter this prophecy: “I will ransom them from the power of the grave; I will redeem them from death: 0 death, I will lie thy plagues; 0 grave, I will be thy destruction: repentance shall be hid from mine eyes.” The law of God as given to the Jews required a perfect man’s life to provide the ransom. Jesus said that he came to give his life a ransom.—Matt. 20:28.
"Ransom” means, literally, ‘something to loosen with; a redemptive price.* Stated in other phrase, it means the price or value which can be used in loosening or releasing something that is in bondage, restraint or imprisonment. Necessarily the ransom price must be equivalent to, or exactly corresponding with, that which justice requires of the thing or person in bondage.
The right to live as a human creature was required by the judgment against Adam in the garden of Eden. This judgment of God took away Adam’s right to live because of his willful disobedience to the law of God. That which would provide a ransom price must be the right of another perfect human creature to live. The perfect man Jesus possessed exactly that thing, namely, the right to live on earth as a man.
The redemption of man from death and its effects, and deliverance therefrom, is the expressed will of God. (1 Tim. 2:4) Jesus came to do the will of God, as it was written of him in the Psalms (40:7, 8), saying: "Lo, I come: in the volume of the book it is written of me, I delight to do thy will, 0 my God: yea, thy law is within my heart.”
God having promised to ransom man, now he had provided a way to carry out his promise by his Son’s willingly becoming a man. "And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross.” (Phil. 2: 8) Jesus willingly submitted to death, because it was the will of God to thereby provide the ransom price.
Now the question, Why must Jesus die? may be answered briefly. The perfect man Jesus, while he remained alive, could not provide a ransom price. He must now convert his perfect human life into an asset
BY A RANSOM
of value, which asset would be sufficient to release man from judgment and from the condemnation resulting from that judgment. Ue must lay down his human life that the value thereof might be presented to divine justice instead or in place of that which Adam had forfeited, to the end that Adam and his race might have an opportunity to live. Otherwise stated, Jesus must make his human life and the right thereto a legal tender for the payment of Adam’s debt.
"Legal tender” means currency, money, measure of value, which the law requires and receives in satisfaction of debts or obligations.
"Merit” means value gained. By "the merit of Christ Jesus” we mean the perfect humanity of Jesus and all the rights incident thereto converted into value or an asset, which is legal tender for the payment of man’s debt.
To illustrate this point: Take a man, whom we will call John for convenience, who is languishing in prison to satisfy a fine of a hundred dollars, because of his inability to pay that fine. John’s brother Charles is willing to pay the fine, but he has no money with which to pay. Charles is strong and vigorous, has time to work and is willing to work; but his strength and time and willingness will not pay the debt for his brother John. Smith desires someone to work for him, and has the money with which to pay. Charles engages himself to work for Smith, and earns a hundred Collars in cash and receives it. Thereby Charles has icduced his time, strength and vigor into a money value, which has purchasing power, and which is legal tender for the purpose of the payment of John’s obligations. This money may be properly called merit, because of its purchasing value or redemptive value. Charles then appears before the court which entered the judgment against his brother, and offers to pay the hundred dollars which the law demands of John. This court accepts the hundred dollars and releases John. John is thereby judicially released from the judgment; and his brother Charles has become his ransomer, or redeemer.
Adam in the day of his creation was the son of God. It was judicially determined by Jehovah that due to the violation of God’s law Adam should forfeit his life in death, which judgment would mean the eternal death of Adam and all of his offspring unless he and they should be redeemed. As Adam possessed the power to beget children before this judicial determina
252
THE WATCHTOWER.
UliOOKLYX, N. Y.
tion, all of Adam’s offspring being yet in his loins came under the effects of the judgment. Ue is now held in restraint in death to meet the requirements of the divine law. The entire human race is in a similar condition, resulting from the original sin of Adam.
Jesus, the perfect man, the Son of God, was designated by the Lord God as “the Son of the man”; this title implying that he, being the only perfect man that has lived on earth since Adam, was entitled to everything that belonged to Adam, namely, life and all the blessings incident thereto. Jesus had the power to produce a perfect race of people, and was in every respect the exact equal of Adam before Adam sinned. It was the will of God that Jesus should redeem Adam and his posterity. Jesus was willing to pay Adam’s debt and redeem him; but the i>erfcct, righteous human creature Jesus could not accomplish that purpose while living in the flesh, for the same reason that Charles could not use his strength, time and energy to pay the debt of his brother John, but must first reduce these to a purchasing value.
Jesus must reduce his perfect humanity to a measure of value (which measure of value we call merit), which value or merit constitutes legal tender for the payment of the debt of Adam and his offspring, furnishing the price sufficient to judicially release them all. To provide this ransom price Jesus must die. But to present the value of it before Jehovah he must be alive and have access to the court of Jehovah.
At the Jordan river the perfect man Jesus presented himself in consecration to do the will of Jehovah and was baptized; and it was God’s will that Jesus should there lay down his life in death, but that he should not forfeit the legal right to life as a man. It was the will of God that Christ Jesus should be raised out of death a divine creature, and as such should take up that merit or right or value of his perfect human life and use it as an asset or legal tender in harmony with the divine will; namely, to judicially release mankind and to provide life for the human race. Why do we not use the expression ‘‘legally release” instead of ‘‘judicially release”? Because the Lord could not provide for an illegal release of the human race, inasmuch as he must be just. We here use the term ‘‘judicially release” because that means that the release is done in a judicial capacity or manner, by the one having authority to release.
This argument is in harmony with the statement of Jesus, when he said: ‘‘The thief cometh not but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they [the people, the human race] might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly. I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. . . . As the Father knoweth me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down my life for the sheep. . . . Therefore doth my Father love me, because 1 lag down mu life, that I might take it again. No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself [that is, willingly], I have power to lag it down, and
I have power to take it again. This commandment have I received of my Father.”—John 10:10, 11, 15, 17, 18.
For whom did Jesus die? This question must be answered from the Scriptures. Everyone should desire to know the truth. ‘‘Thy word is truth,” said Jesus in his prayer to God. (John 17:17) It would seem strange that God would provide for his blessing to extend to a few, and not grant a similar privilege to all. The .Scriptures answer: “For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the world through him might be saved.”—John 3:10,17.
The apostle Paul discusses the matter; ami writing (as we know) under inspiration, he declared it to be the will of God that by virtue of the ransom price all men should be redeemed from death and that then each one must be given a knowledge of God’s arrangement, to the end that each one may have the opportunity to exercise his free moral agency and accept or reject the offer of life that comes through the ransom sacrifice.—Ileb. 2:9; Horn. 10:13-15.
The same apostle again proves that Je sus was a perfect man and not a spirit person, and that he was made perfect in order that he might redeem the hitman race. His argument reads: “But v>e sec Jems, who was made a little lower than the angels, for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honour; that he by the grace of God should taste death, for every man.”—I kb. 2: 9.
But how could a man, even though perfect, redeem the human race by merely dying? If he remained dead he could not carry out the redemption ami deliverance, because a dead man can do nothing. The great court entering the judgment against man, and the, place at which the ransom price must be presented, is the court of Jehovah. Of course, Jehovah could have appointed somebody else to present to him the value of the. sacrifice of the perfect man Jesus, but it did not please him to do this. It was his purpo'-e that Jesus should be both the ransomer and the deliverer of the human race; and he could not be the deliverer if he remained dead. It was therefore necessary for Jesus to be resurrected.
The question may be asked: If Jesus was put to death as a man, and the value of his sacrifice as a man must be presented in heaven, how could a man appear in heaven and present that ransom price? The ansv.er is: He could not, for the reason that no man has recess to the spiritual realm. A human creature is confined to earth. Jesus died as a man, but his Father Jehovah raised him out of death a spirit creature. About this the apostle Peter plainly says: “Because Christ also suffered for sins once, the righteous for 1 lie unrighteous, that he might bring us to God; being put to death in the flesh, but made alive in the spirit.” —1 Bet. 3:18, ll.V.
JOB’S "FRIENDS”
THE conversation of Job and his three “comforters”, recorded in the Bible book of Job, has long been an unsolved puzzle. A complete understanding of that record may now be had.
Job, though suffering greatly, maintained his faith in God, but he discerned that the three so-called “friends” were not in fact his friends. Turning upon Eliphaz he said: “To him that is afflicted pity should he shewed from his friend; but he forsaketh the fear of the Almighty. My brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook, and as the stream of brooks they pass away.” (Job G: 14,15) Job then expressed his desire for more knowledge, that he might take the right way. “Teach me, and I will hold my tongue; and cause me to understand wherein I have erred.” (Job G: 21) Then with reproof to Eliphaz he said: “How forcible are right words! but what doth your arguing reprove ? Do ye imagine to reprove words, and the speeches of one that is desperate, which are as wind? Yea, ye overwhelm the fatherless, and ye dig a pit for your friend. Now therefore be content; look upon me: for it is evident unto you if I lie. Return, I pray you, let it not be iniquity; yea, return again, my righteousness is in it. Is there iniquity in my tongue? cannot my taste discern perverse things?” Continuing, he said: “When 1 say, My bed shall comfort me, my couch shall ease my complaint; then thou sparest me with dreams, ami territivst me through visions; so that my soul ehooseth strangling, and death rather than my life. I loathe it; 1 would not live alway: kt me alone; for my days are vanity.”—Job 6:‘25-30; 7:13-16.
The response of Job to the hypocritical speech of Eliphaz stirred the ire of the contentious Bildad, and he speaks to Job with even stronger words of rebuke. He also had come under the guise of a comforter, yet as the representative of the enemy Satan, whose purpose was to induce Job to curse God ; and he proceeded to carry out the purpose of his father Satan. It will bo remembered that Satan had caused the death of Job’s seven sons and three daughters. (Job 1:0-13, IS, 19) “Thon answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said: How long wilt thou speak these things? and how long shall the words of thy mouth be like a strong wind? Doth God pervert judgment? or doth the Almighty pervert justice? If thy children have sinned against him, and he have cast them away for their transgressions; if thou wouldest seek unto God betimes, and make thy supplication to the Almighty; if thou wert pure and upright; surely now he would awake for thee, and make the habitation of thy righteousness prosperous.”—Job 8:1-6.
Then Bildad 'denounced Job as a hypocrite and an evildoer. He did not advise Job to seek wisdom at the hand of God, but to seek knowledge from other men like unto himself whom he called the “fathers”. “For inquire, I pray thee, of the former age, and prepare thyself to the search of their fathers: shall not
they teach thee, and tell thee, and utter words out of their heart? Behold, God will not cast away a perfect man, neither will he help the evil doors.”—• Job 8:8,10, 20.
■That speech of Bildad was exactly in line with that given to suffering men by the clergy or religious leaders of “Christendom”, so called. Whether the clergy know it or not, the purpose of Satan their father has at all times been to induce honest men to denounce Jehovah God. The clergy do not cite the people to the study of God’s Word; but as Bildad said to Job, so they say to the people: ‘Give consideration to what the fathers of the church have had to say. Shall they not teach thee and tell thee and utter words out of their heart?’ They well know that these «o-<w>.lifd “fathers” in the church have been teaching false doctrines and misrepresenting God. The Devil well knows it, and he continues to keep those false things before the people.
Job replied to Bildad (Satan’s representative), and in so doing lie spi aks of the greatness of Jclmv.ih G <1 and of the inability of man to present his ov»n euv.-.o before the Lord. “Behold, he taketh away, v.ho can hinder him? who will say unto him, What doo.t iliou ? If God will not withdraw his aneer, 1 he proud luip.ws do stoop under him. How much Jess shall I answer him, and choose out my words to reason with him? Whom, though I were righteous, yet would 1 not answer, but I would make supplication to my Judge.” --Job 9:12-15.
Job then announces that he is unable to present his cause to Jehovah and bring about a reconciliation, and speaks of the necessity of a go-between to bring about man’s reconciliation to God. “For he is not a man, as I am, that I should answer him, and no should come together in judgment. Neither is there any daysman betwixt us, that might lay his hand upon us both.” (Job 9:32,33) Be it noted that none of the professed friends of Job even intimate the necessity of a “daysman”.
In the thirty-third verse, just quoted, the word “daysman” is in the margin rendered “umpire”. The Itotherhum translation, margin, renders it “arbiter”, and Letscr renders it “one who can decide between us”; showing that Job thus prophetically spoke, by God’s grace, concerning God’s great Judge, Christ Jesus. (John 5:22,27) Like the three professed friends of Job, the clergy do not tell the people the necessity of such a righteous J udge.
Then Job cries unto God. lie again contend; that he is not a wicked person. To be wicked means that one has been enlightened by the Lord and then has deliberately repudiated that light and turned against God. Job knew that lie. had not been wicked. “I will say unto God, Do not condemn me; shew me wherefore thou contendest with me. That thou inquires! after mine iniquity, and searchest after my sin? Thou
253
254
STe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
knowest that I am not wicked; and there is none that can deliver out of thine hand. Remember, I beseech thee, that thou hast made me as the clay; and wilt thou bring me into dust again? If I sin, then thou markest me, and thou wilt not acquit me from mine iniquity. If I be wicked, woe unto me; and if I be righteous, yet will I not lift up my head. I am full of confusion; therefore see thou mine affliction.”— Job 10:2,6,7,9,14,15.
Job, like many another suffering man, was seeking information. His three professed friends, like the clergy, failed to give it because, in both instances, they did not represent the Lord God.
The venom in Zophar, the other professed friend, stirred him to take part in the debate, in support of his two companions. Job had dared to call in question the assumed wisdom of these representatives of Satan. He readily perceived that they were not speaking the truth. His reply made the representatives of Satan mad. In this connection call to mind how often the honest men have refused to believe the boasting words of the clergymen or religious leaders, and have thereby brought down upon their head the vicious attack of these false prophets. "Then answered Zophar the Naamathite [to Job], and said, Should not the multitude of words be answered! and should a man full of talk be justified? Should thy lies make men hold their peace! and when thou mockcst, shall no man make thee ashamed! For thou hast said, My doctrine is pure, and I am clean in thine eyes. But oh that God would speak, and open his lips against thee; and
that he would shew thee the secrets of wisdom, that they are double to that which is! Know, therefore, that God exactcth of thee less than thine iniquity de-serveth. ”—Job 11:1-6.
Zophar then tells Job that he cannot find out anything about God. He supports his two allies and frauds in holding out that they are the ones who are wise and competent to direct men in the way that they should go. In substance their doctrine was that if Job would clean himself up from his iniquity, then he would have the blessings of God. The clergy or religious leaders have throughout the age taken the same position that the professed friends of Job took, by telling the people that if they would lead a clean life, as they called it, and support the church and the political or ruling powers, they could save themselves. In other words, they have told the people that salvation means to conform oneself to the rules of the church. They have entirely ignored God’s provision of redemption through the blood of Christ and the blessing of the obedient ones of mankind with life everlasting on earth. They have contended that to develop character like unto themselves and their allies is all that is needed. They have not recognized that of necessity all men should endeavor to lead a clean life, and that such is their duty as honest men.
The purpose of Satan in moving the three so-called “friends” of. Job to torment the suffering man with their words, and thereby to induce him to curse God and mar his own integrity, steadily failed. Jehovah’s word was thus being vindicated.
TABERNACLE OF THE LAW COVENANT
JEHOVAII GOD has made the way to life so plain to the honest seeker for divine truth that there is left no room for doubt. When God’s due time comes for all men to see that blessed way, even the fool will have no excuse to err therein. For many centuries Satan, by use of false and fraudulent teachers and teachings, has turned the people away from God and blinded their minds to the truth; and only a small proportion of mankind have ever understood God’s purpose. (2 Cor. 4:3,4) Jehovah has not prevented the Devil from so doing, but he has rewarded those who have diligently and humbly sought to know and to do the Lord’s way.
The modernist, who is wise in his own conceits, posing as a great teacher of the people, says that it is foolish for men to believe that the blood of Jesus has anything to do with the human race’s getting life. But mark what Jehovah has said, namely: “ I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent. Where is the wise? where is the scribe? where is the disputcr of this world? hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this world ? For after that in the wisdom of God,
the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe.”—1 Cor. 1:19-21.
But now by the grace of God the due time has come when the flood of his truth and light shall sweep away the blinding falsehoods in order that the people may see the right way. Every sane man realizes that he is imperfect. He desires life and happiness. By observation and experience he has seen but sorrow, suffering and death. The great handicap of man is due to sin. Jehovah says to the man who has an honest desire to learn and to know the truth, “Como now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord: Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall cat the good of the land. ’ ’—Isa. 1:18,19.
A man must be willing to know the Lord’s way and be obedient thereto, and not follow the wisdom of some self-constituted savants or pious-speaking clergymen. The Holy Scriptures were given by inspiration of God “for instruction in righteousness; that the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished unto
August 15, 1934
WATCHTOWER-
255
all good works”. (2 Tim. 3:16,17) They were not written by selfish men to juggle with, to misrepresent and use for commercial purposes. God nowhere invites a man to reason upon the theories of men, but he asks us to reason upon Uis Word.
It will be remembered that the passover lamb was slain by Closes and the Jews in Egypt, which land pictured the wicked world of which Satan is the invisible ruler. The term “world” means the organization of men into forms of government under the supervision of an invisible ruler. The governing part of humanity, which constitutes the visible world, is made up of the financial, political and ecclesiastical elements. The clergymen, as a general rule, claim to be a part of the world; and they work in conjunction with the financiers and politicians. Jesus Christ, whom the passover lamb foreshadowed, was slain in this wicked world. For this reason he said to Pontius Pilate, the Roman governor: “My kingdom is not of this world”; and again, he said to his disciples: “Ye are not of the world,” “even as I am not of the world.” (John 18:36; 15:18,11); 17:14) When the passover Iamb was slain in E-rypt, and the Israelites had marched to safety beyond the Red sea, that picture of the deliverance of mankind from Satan’s organization was complete. Thereafter God made preparations to make, and did make, another picture illustrating or foreshadowing a step to be taken that leads to life everlasting.
At the time of the inauguration of God’s law covenant with the Israelites Jehovah commandeel Closes to come up into Mount Sinai in Arabia. Moses obeyed and remained in the mountain forty days and nights. Jehovah there informed Moses of his purpose to have the sacred tabernacle built. The Lord then instructed Moses concerning the material which he should receive from the people for the building of the tabernacle.
“And Moses spake unto all the congregation of the children of Israel, saying, This is the thing which the Lord commanded, saying, Take ye from among you an offering unto the Lord: whosoever is of a willing heart, let him bring it, an offering of the Lord; gold, and silver, and brass, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats’ hair, and rams’ skins dyed red, and badgers’ skins, and shittim wood, and oil for the light, and spices for anointing oil, and for the sweet incense, and onyx stones, and stones to be set for the ephod, and for the breastplate. And every wise hearted among you shall come and make all that the Lord hath commanded.”—Ex. 35:4-10.
It is interesting to note that Jehovah did not coerce anyone to furnish .material or labor to build the tabernacle. All that must be done willingly. The Lord defined wisdom on the part of man, when he said: “And every wise hearted among you shall come, and make all that the Lord hath commanded.” Wisdom means the use of the knowledge one has, in harmony with the will of God. Jehovah there began to teach the
Israelites. The lessons given were not only for their benefit but for all who came after them. “For the Lord giveth wisdom: out of his mouth cometh knowledge and understanding. Discretion shall preserve thee, understanding shall keep thee.”—Prov. 2:6,11.
Those who had faith in God and who loved him obeyed. “And they came, every one whose heart stirred him up, and every one whom his spirit made willing, and they brought the Lord’s offering to the work of the tabernacle of the congregation, and for all his service, and for the holy garments. And they came, both men and women, as many as were willing hearted, and brought bracelets, and carrings, and rings, and tablets, all jewels of gold: and every man that offered, offered an offering of gold unto the Lord.”—Ex. 35:21,22.
God could have obtained all this material some other way, of course; but by permitting the Israelites to bring it as an offering it was a service for them which resulted in their blessing. Nor was the serxice confined only to the few, because it is written that the women and men brought part and the rulers the other part. Everybody who loved the Lord served. From this, every one who loves the Lord may ler.rn a ks^-n. “And the rulers brought onyx stones, and stones to be set, for the ephod, and lor the breastplate.”—Ex. 35:27.
There was a great deal of work in connection with building the tabernacle. Some who were qualified had to do beautiful wood-carving. Others, expert in tlie working of gold, silver and brass, did that; white still others wove the curtains, each otic to his or her own particular work. It will be observed in the study of God’s purpose that to every man whom he has enlightened God has offered the opportunity to do some work or service in his name, and the wise-hearted h; vo availed themselves thereof and received a bles.-iug.
After much laborious effort the material for lite tabcmaclc was all brought, the work being done according to God's command; and then he gave Mo. t r direction concerning its erection: “According to ail that the Lord commanded Moses, so the children of Israel made all the work. And Moses did look upon all the work, and, behold, they had done it as the Lord had commanded, even so had they done it: ami Moses blessed them.”—Ex. 39:42, 43.
A full year had elapsed from the time the children of Israel were delivered out of Egypt until the tabernacle was completed and set up.
“And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, On the first day of the first month shalt thou set up the tebcr-naele of the tent of the congregation. And thou shalt put therein the ark of the testimony, and cover Urn ark with the vail. And thou shalt bring in the table, and set in order the things that are to be set in order upon it; and thou shalt bring in the candlc.-lk-k, and light the lamps thereof. And thou shalt set the altar of gold for the incense before the ark of the testimony,
255
WATCHTOWER-
Brooklyn, N.Y.
and put the hanging of the door to the tabernacle. And thou shalt set the altar of the burnt offering before the door of the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation. And thou shalt set the laver between the tent of the congregation and the altar, and shalt put water therein. And thou shalt set up the court round about, and hang up the hanging at the court gate.
“And thou shalt take the anointing oil, and anoint the tabernacle, and all that is therein, and shalt hallow it, and all the vessels thereof: and it shall be holy. And thou shalt anoint the altar of the burnt offering, arid all his vessels, and sanctify the altar: and it shall be an altar most holy. And thou shalt anoint the laver and his foot, and sanctify it. And thou shalt bring Aaron and his sons unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and wash them with water. And thou shalt put upon Aaron the holy garments, and anoint him, and sanctify him; that he may minister unto me in the priest’s office. And thou shalt bring his sons, and clothe them with coats: and thou shalt anoint them, as thou didst anoint their father, that they may minister unto me in the priest’s office: for their anointing shall surely be an everlasting priesthood, throughout their generations. Thus did Moses: according to all that the Lord commanded him, so did he. And it came to pass in the first month in the second year, on the first day of the month, that the tabernacle was reared up.’’—Ex. 40:1-17.
The anointing of the tabernacle and all that was therein and used in connection therewith, as afore-stated, means that the tabernacle and its furnishings
and all those who served were there by the direction of Jehovah, and by him officially designated to serve in their respective places and perform their respective functions. Each and every part must perform its official duty in the picture which the Lord God was preparing to make, in order to foreshadow the outworking of his purpose.
It was there, in that divinely ordained and arranged tabernacle, that the most detailed picture was enacted with living actors to foreshadow the great sin-offering. “Then verily the first [or law] covenant had also ordinances of divine service, and a worldly [divinely ordered] sanctuary. For there was a tabernacle made; the first, wherein was the candlestick, and the table, and the shewbread; which is called the sanctuary [the Holy]. And after the second vail, the tabernacle which is called the Holiest of all; which had the golden censer, and the ark of the covenant overlaid round about with gold, wherein was the golden pot that had manna, and Aaron’s rod that budded, and the tables of the covenant; and over it the cherubims of glory shadowing the mercy-seat; of which we cannot now speak particularly. Now when these things were thus ordained, the priests went always into the first tabernacle, accomplishing the service of God. But into the second [tabernacle] went the high priest alone once every year, not without blood, . . . Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which are the figures of the true; but into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God for us.’’—Hcb. 9:1-7,24.
SERVICE APPOINTMENTS
T. E. BANKS
Claremore, Okla. Aug.	31.	Sept. 1
Muskogee, Okla......Sept	2,3
<Jroweburjj, Kans. ____"	6, (I
Topeka, Kans..........”	7-9
Kansas City, Mo.......”	11,12
Des Moines, Iowa_______"	13,14
Waterloo, Iowa .._____Sept. 15,16
Davenport, Iowa	”	18,19
Chicago, III.”	21-23
St. Ixtuis, Mo..........”	25, 26
Centralia, Ill........."	27,28
Indianapolis, Ind.	”	29, 30
G. H. DRAPER
W. J. THORN
Old Town, Me. ........Sept.	1 Boston, Mass................Sent. 16,17
Hallowell, Me............A	2	Brockton, Mass....n 19,26
North Jay, Me. __________”	4	Duxbury, Mass. ..._.....”	21
Auburn, Me_______________”	5	Plymouth, Mass...........”	22
Lewiston, Me. ___________”	6	Taunton, Mass. --------- '	23
Portland. Me. __________”	8, 9 Fall River, Mass. ....... ”	25
Biddeford, Me. __________”	11	New Bedford, Mass. ...."	26,27
Lawrence, Mass. _________”	12	Newport, U. I, ---------------  28
Lowell, Mass. ............ ’’	13-15	Providence, IL I. ........	29.30
Topeka, Kans. ______Sent.
Cummings, Kans. _____"
Ixruisburg. Kans. ___”
Ottawa, Kans. ______  ”
Emporia, Kans....... '•
Westphalia, Kans. ___■’
Mound City, Kans. ___”
Bronson, Kans....._... ”
Iola, Kans.	11
2-5 6
7
8
9,10
12
13
14
15.10
Pittsburg, Kans. ...... Scammon, Kans. ..... Galena, Kans.
Parsons, Kans. _______
Coffeyville, Kans. ... Arkansas City, Kans.
Wintield, Kans. Wichita, Kans. . Douglass, Kans.
SejtUJ.W 21 ._ ” 22,23 ... ” 25, 26 , ” 27,28 ... ”	29
Sept. 30, Oct. 1 .....Oct. 2
G. Y. M’CORMICK
Salt Lake City, Utah Sent. Ogden, Utah __________"
Lovelock, Nev.
Reno. Nev.......
Loyalton, Calif. Rocklin, Calif. ____ "
9,10 12-14
15 16
18 19
Lincoln, Calif....Sept.
Placerville, Calif...’’
Sacramento, Calif. .... '*
Stockton, Calif. ______’
Oakland. Calif. ......."
San Francisco, Calif.	”
20
21
22. 23 25,26
27. 28
29,30
Columbus, Ga.
Vienna, Ga. _____
Fitzgerald, Ga. , Ocilla, Ga. ______
Albany, Ga. — Hilton, Ga. _____
Cairo, Ga.........
Thomasville, Ga. Valdosta, Ga.....
W ay cross, Ga. „
J. C. RAINBOW
8. H. TOUTJIAN
Sejtt. 2,3
"	5
... ”	7
... ”	8
... ”	9
...”	11
... “ 12,13 ... ”	14
._ ”	15
St. Marys, Ga. ______Sept.
Jacksonville, Fla. ___”
New Smyrna, Fla.______”
Sanford, Fla.....—
Orlando, Fin. _____	"
Titusville, Fla.______”
Melbourne, Fla.	”
Okeechobee, Fla. _____”
Pahokee, Fla.....—... ”
Lake Worth, Fla. _„...Odt.
16 18-20
21
22
23,24
25
27
28
29,30 2
Chicago, Ill.-----
Roseland, Ill_____
Watseka, III.-----
Bradley, Ill. „___
Aurora, III. -----
Downers Grove, Ill.
■Sept.
H »
1-9
11,12
13
14
15,16
18,19
Geneva, III. ______-.Sept. 20, 21
Dundee, Ill. _________A	22
Marengo, III. ---------”	23
Belvidere, Ill. _______”	25,26
Rockford, III......_...”	27,28
Freeport, Ill. ________"	29,30
J. C. WATT
Tippecanoe Cy, Ohio Aug. 30, 31
Piqua, Ohio ________Sept. 1,2
Sidney, Ohio .UuW.O.MlM	4
Ansonia, Ohio ........”	5, 0
Wapakoneta, Ohio______	7, 8
Lima, Ohio _________Sent.	9,10
Convoy, Ohio___________"	12
Cecil, Ohio .......... "	13
Montpelier, Ohio______**	14
Tecumseh, Mich.	**	15
WATCHTOWER.
Published Semi-Monthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N. Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F.Buthertobd President ~W. E. Van Amburgh Secretary "And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.”-Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is tho only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of lifo to his creatures; that tho Logos was tho beginning of his creation and his active agent in tho creation of all tilings; that the Logos is now tho Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and tho Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created tho earth for man, created perfect man for tho earth and placed him upon it; that man wilfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without tho right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH'S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is tho Chief Officer thereof and is the rightful King of tho world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty nnd privilege it is to testify to tho supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in tho Bible, and to bear the fruits of the kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, hns ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings, of the peoples of earth enn come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization nnd tho establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under the kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall be restored and live on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
HIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses. It arranges
systematic Bible study for its readers and supplies'other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for tho kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his Beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of tho Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1X0; Gbeat Britain, Acsthatasia, ani> South Aitmca, Is. American remittances should bo made by Express or Postal Money Order, or by Bank Draft Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should bo mado direct to the respective branch offices. Remittances from countries other than those mentioned may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British .......... 31 Craven Terrace, London, IV. 2, England Canadian , ...... 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Australasian . . "I Beresford Bead, StratbOcld, N. S. W., Australia South African .... Boston House, Capo Town, South Africa pleaso address tho Society In every case.
(Translation* of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible -who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay tho subscription price may have The IVatchtoicer free upon written application to the publishers, made once each year, stating the' reason tor so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid tho needy, but iho written application once each year is required by the postal regulations. Notice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will bo sent only when requested. Cbamto of address, when requested, may bo expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carryinq notice of expiration! will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires. Entered as Second Class Hail Matter at Brooklyn, H. Y., Postoffice.
Act of March 3, 1379.
THE KINGDOM PRAISE PERIOD
This nine-day service period, September 29 to October 7 inclusive, begins the new service year of 1934-1935. It will be enrth-wide in its scope, and it is expected that more lands where some of Jehovah’s witnesses or Jonadabs are located will receive a witness during this period than during any previous like period. In the English-speaking countries Jehovah’s witnesses and the Jonadabs will specialize on placing tho new booklet, Righteous Ruler. In countries of another language the branch office in charge will duly announce the booklet to bo distributed there. And, important! don’t forget reporting your work for the period, ptomptly at the close thereof, to the respective office having supervision over the witness in your part of the field.
RADIO AND THE PRINTED WORD
All witnessing parties and all individuals who engage in the witness work should mention the radio station in their vicinity that is broadcasting the watchtower programs. This often proves a means of opening tho way to place the books in the hands of the people. ' Have in mind that the chief purpose of the radio is to cull the people’s attention to the truth ami then furnish the opportunity for them to get a wider understanding of the message concerning the government of Jehovah by rending what is being printed.
Every one who now participates in the field work in territory served by broadcasts of the watchtower program may have a share in telling the people that this unique service is available each week. Workers report that distribution of the radio folder (supplied by the Society) is proving to be a convenient and effective method of giving continual public notice of this program while engaging in the house-to-house witnessing.
“RIGHTEOUS RULER”
Another new booklet! The two radio lectures "World Control ’ ’ and ‘ ‘ Flee Now ’ ’, with an excellent introduction thereto, bound together under one cover, this cover bearing a most inspiring design. Even Jehovah’s witnesses should not fail to read this booklet, not to speak of the Jonaciab class. It may be had for 5c a copy by all such. The beginning of the distribution thereof to the general public is announced elsewhere.
NOTICE OF ANNUAL MEETING
Pursuant to the provision of law and the charter of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, notice is hmeby given that the annual business meeting of the said Society will be held at Pittsburgh, North Side (formerly Allegheny), Pennsylvania, at 10 o’clock a.m., Wednesday, October dl, 1934, at which the usual annual business will be transacted.
Vol. LV	September 1, 1934	No. 17
WICKED SPIRITS
“For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places.’’—Eph. 6:12.
PART 1
JEHOVAH GOD, the Creator of heaven and earth, is the Creator of all things good. He has never created a wicked thing, because he is holy and all his works are perfect. (Deut. 32:4) The wicked are these who willfully violate God’s law. When a creature becomes wicked, the responsibility for so doing cannot be laid to .Jehovah. If the creature yields to sinful temptation or influence and turns to wickedness, that cannot be charged to God, for the reason, it is written, that God tcmpls no man. (Jas. 1:13) All the ways of Jehovah God arc right and righteous. God hates wickedness, and he has definitely fixed the destiny of the wicked. “The transgressors shall Ite destroyed together; the end of the wicked shall be cut off.’’ (I’s. 37: 38) There arc wicked spirit creatures r.nd wicked human creatures, and the end of all such is destruction. (Ps. 145:20) Angels arc spirit creatures, whom Jehovah God created perfect, pure and holy, and all such as have willfully followed the Devil have become wicked. While the judgment of Jehovah plainl.v shows that the wicked shall suffer destruction, that does not mean that the creature is destroyed as soon as or within even a short time after he becomes wicked. Satan is a wicked spirit long ago adjudged guilty and sentenced to death, but God has permitted him to remain for a certain purpose. The Scriptures also show that there arc other spirit creatures long ago condemned by the judgment of Jehovah God for destruction but who are permitted to live until God’s due time to execute them. Such wicked angels have exercised power and influence over man and continue to do so. Following the birth of the “man child” there was a great war in heaven in which Satan and other wicked angels fought on one side against the Lord Jesus Christ, and all such wicked ones were east down to the earth. In this connection it is written: “Woe to the inhabiters of the earth, and of the sea! for the devil is come down unto you, having great wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a short time.” —Rev. 12:5-12.
2	That Satan and his wicked angels at the present time do exercise great influence over the rulers of the
259
earth and bring much woe upon the people there cannot be the slightest doubt, since the evidence is abundant on every hand. Many persons consult these wicked spirit creatures, being entirely ignorant of their origin, what is their purpose, and what will be their end. The men and women who do consult them through mediums are induced by the seductive influence to indulge in many wrongful practices to 1he reproach of Jehovah’s name. Heretofore much has been said and written about wicked angels and their power over men, but now, in the day when the Lord has gathered his faithful ones unto himself, and inaugurated toward them the new covenant, and brought them into the covenant for the kingdom, it should be expected the Lord in his loving-kindness would give to his faithful ones greater light concerning the wicked angels, opening to these faithful ones a better understanding of the Scriptures. We must keep in mind the fact that the apostle authoritatively wrote: “For whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope.” (Rom. 15:4) Therefore it must follow that a proper understanding of these scriptures concerning the wicked angels would bo helpful to the remnant at. the present time. They must understand, if they are to aid the Jonadab eompans-to have a better understanding. In addition thereto God by his apostle makes it clear to the faithful remnant that they are continually assaulted by his horde or host of wicked ones and that they must put on and keep on the armor of protection which Jehovah in his loving-kindness provided for them.
EPITOME
3	Both Jude and Peter tell of angels that became wicked and arc reserved for destruction. Peter also speaks of certain “spirits in prison”, to which Jesus preached. Who are these wicked angels? When and how did they become wicked'? Who are the ones to whom Jesus preached? and arc the ones in prison the same as the ones who are reserved for the judgment of destruction? What is the present state of habita-
260
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N.Y.
tion of these wicked ones? It seems that it would be profitable in the consideration of these questions to first set out a brief epitome or abstract of what follows and then try to set forth the Scriptural argument in support of the same; hence the following:
* There are two separate and distinct classes of angels or spirits mentioned in the sixth chapter of Genesis. One of these classes is designated in the Authorized Version as “giants”; in the Revised Version as neph-ilim (verse 4). Nephilim means “fellers”, bullies or tyrants. Those wicked ones joined Satan in his rebellion and have operated with him since in his wicked endeavors to reproach Jehovah God and to turn all creation away from God. They are the ones mentioned at 2 Peter 2:4 and Jude 6. They have fought since the days of Eden against those who have tried to be righteous. They are alive and are the mortal enemies of the saints. They will fight on Satan’s side in the battle of Armageddon and suffer complete defeat.
8 In the second verse of the sixth chapter of Genesis are mentioned “the sons of God”. These are angels that were once holy and in the service of Jehovah God but' did not join Satan in his rebellion, but afterwards yielded to his subtle and wicked influence, Itecame disobedient, resulting in their losing the privilege and opportunity of serving Jehovah, and have since been imprisoned; they are alive and are the ones mentioned in 1 Peter 3:19, 20; and there is some hope of their recovery.
’ In considering the scriptures hereinafter discussed it will be well and profitable to keep in mind the two separate and distinct classes of angels above mentioned and their relation to each other arid to the human race. The remnant and the Jonadab class will both find this matter of peculiar interest at the present time. It is undoubtedly the will of God that a witness concerning these unseen powers and the influence that they exercise over the human race must now be given, and that all who love the Lord must put forth their best endeavors to have a part in this witness work.
THE REBELLION
’ Lucifer, at the time of the creation of man, was a member of God’s organization, appointed and anointed to office. It was his privilege and duty to serve, support and praise Jehovah and render complete obedience to him, and he was fully equipped for that purpose. It is writtenthat Jehovah said of Lucifer: “Thou art the .anointed cherub that covereth; and I have set thee so: thou wast upon the holy mountain of God.” (Ezek. 28:14) This is proof that Lucifer was a part of Jehovah’s organization and appointed and anointed to perform certain duties. It seems quite clear from the Scriptures that Lucifer was the chief officer over a certain division of God's organization, having under him other spirit creatures or angels, and that his organization particularly related to man on the earth. Lucifer rebelled against God and corrupted his sanc
tuaries “by the multitude of thine iniquities; in the unrighteousness of thy traffic, thou hast profaned thy sanctuaries”. (Ezek. 28:18, A.R.V.) That would mean, that at the beginning of his official term his organization or dwelling-place was devoted to, God and righteousness, but that he willfully became wicked. This would also mean that others joined him in his treasonable course, thus corrupting the dwelling-place of Satan and those in his immediate organization. That Satan has a company of angels that operate with him other scriptures quite clearly prove. That company of wieked angels fought with Satan at the time Christ Jesus cast Satan and his host out of heaven and down to the earth, and their operations are now confined to things pertaining to the earth. (Kev. 12:9-12) At the beginning they were creatures of God, but they rebelled and became the ‘seed of the serpent’, Satan. The Lord Jesus Christ announces Jehovah’s judgment concerning this wicked company led by Satan. (Matt. 25: 41) Satan is tyrannical in the extreme, and those spirits operating with him arc wicked tyrants. From the time of Eden Satan was a murderer, and those who joined him in his rebellion against God doubtless participated in the murder of Abel, and they arc also murderers and have continued to commit murder since.
—.John 8:44.
8 God by his prophet Daniel describes Satan’s wicked organization under the symbol of a terrible image. The head of that image was of gold, picturing Satan himself and showing that ho. originally received his authority from Jehovah. The breast and arms of that image were silver, picturing the princes or assistant rulers under Satan and who form a part of his invisible organization that is wicked; and as it is written that there is “another third kingdom”, of copper, “which shall bear rule over all the earth” (Dan. 2: 31-3.9), this statement of Daniel, and which is corroborated by other scriptures, proves conclusively that the wicked angels under Satan have had dominion or rule over the governments of the earth from the beginning and have exercised the same in a tyrannical manner. The Scriptures make it clear that Satan is the god or invisible ruler of this world; which means that he is the most powerful among all the wicked spirit creatures and that the other wicked ones operate under him, and that the entire organization fights against every' one who is on the side of Jehovah.—2 Cor. 4: 3, 4; Eph. 6:12.
8 Among those of his wicked organization is the one termed by the Scriptures “Gog”, Satan’s chief offie«'r, whom doubtless he appointed to correspond to Christ Jesus as the chief officer of Jehovah. This host of wieked ones occupied a place known in the Scriptures as Magog. (Ezek. 3S-.2-6) (See Vindication, Book Two, page 311.) Jesus referred to Satan as the “prince [or invisible ruler] of this world”. (John 14:30) Since Satan is called Beelzebub, which means prince or chief one of devils, it follows that there are many other like ones, that is to say, wicked angels or spirits.
September 1, 1934
tte WATCHTOWER.
261
—Matt. 10:25; 12:24; Mark 3:22; Luke 11:15, 18, 19.
10	These texts here cited, together with the words of Ephesians 6:10-12, prove beyond all doubt that there is a host of wicked angels or spirit creatures; that Satan the Devil is the chief one of that wicked company; and that all of such are the enemies of God and the mortal enemies of every one who seeks to do God’s will.
11	From the very time of Eden God pronounced his judgment of destraction against Satan and his host or “seed”. (Gen. 3:15) Later through his prophet Moses God tells why he did not immediately execute that judgment and destroy Satan and all of his wicked host. 11 is purpose is to permit Satan and his host to go the very limit in opposition to God and in their effort to turn all creation from Jehovah and to prove Jehovah to be a liar; and then in his own due time God will completely destroy such wicked ones and thus demonstrate his own supreme power. Before their destruction, however, Jehovah will have his faithful and loyal witnesses give testimony to his own great name and to bo witnesses before both men and angels. In proof of God’s purpose it is written concerning Satan: “But for this cause have I allowed thee to remain, in order to show thee my power; and in order that they [my witnesses] may proclaim my name throughout all the earth.” (Ex. 9:16, Lceser) It is Satan and his wicked host, invisible to human eyes, that have wrongfully influenced and corrupted the visible rulers of the earth and made the ruling powers of the earth a part of the .wicked organization that oppresses the human race. This visible part of Satan’s organization is pictured by the prophet Daniel as the “legs of iron” and the ‘feet of iron and clay’, (Dan. 2:33) The entire organization under Satan is pitted against Jehovah God; and in due time “the stone”, meaning Christ Jesus, who is made the head of Jehovah’s capital organization and his chief executive officer, will completely destroy that wicked organization of Satan, both visible and invisible.—Dan. 2: 44, 45.
12	From the day of the rebellion in Eden until now it has been the Devil and his host that have opposed God and all who have become a part of God’s organization; and the time for a final show’-down between the hosts of wickedness and God’s righteous organization is now at hand, and hence it is to bo expected that Jehovah -would give his faithful saints on earth a clearer vision of the matter than they have had at any previous time. It is certain that Satan and his host would long ago have destroyed all who have put themselves on the side of Jehovah, had not God exercised his power in behalf of those who love him; and thus he has held back’ the wicked ones, restraining them and preventing the destruction of his faithful witnesses. It was that same wicked crowd that persecuted Jesus when on earth and brought about his death, which Jehovah permitted; but at the same time he completely thwarted the purpose of the enemy by rais
ing Jesus out of the death and giving him the highest place in his own great organization.—Phil. 2: 9-11.
“SONS OF GOD”
13	In Jehovah’s universal organization there were many holy angels devoted to his service and \yho were never a part of Lucifer's company, and who did not participate with Lucifer in his rebellion. All of such faithful angels are the “sons of God”, because they received their life from Jehovah. (Job 38:7) Approximately 1,500 years had passed since the rebellion in Eden. Adam and Eve in that time had children and grandchildren, and the human race was continuously on the increase; and here begins the account concerning the debauchery of the human race. “And it came to pass, when men began to multiply on the face of the earth, and daughters were born unto them, that the sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair; and they took them wives of all which they chose.” (Gen. 6:1, 2) It will be observed that the second verse above quoted says nothing about the wickedness of the angels, the “sons of God”, nor that such “sons of God” were wicked at the time they materialized as men. It could not be said that the ones here called “the sons of God” were any part of Satan’s organization at that time, if ever. All who had allied themselves with Satan the Devil were then, and arc, ‘the seed of Satan the Serpent,’ and hence the sons of Satan. This is proof that the ones here called the “sons of God” are entirely a different class or company from the ones that joined Satan in his rebellion. The fact that 1,500 years after the rebellion angels were called the “sons of God” shows that they had been all of that time serving Jehovah God. They were spirit creatures or angels having life from Jehovah God, and, continuing in his service, they arc designated as “the sons of God”,
14	The chief objective of Satan from and after his rebellion wras and has been and still is to turn all creation against Jehovah. There is nothing said in the record about the ones mentioned above as “the sons of God” as making any attempt to turn others away from Jehovah God. The Scriptures show that Satan is a sly, wily and seductive foe. Uis name Serpent discloses that he is the arch deceiver amonest all creatures, and his name Satan clearly means that he uses deception in his work of opposing Jehovah. We know that the Devil uses deception and fraud to entrap the human creatures who become negligent of their duty tow’ard God, and it is entirely reasonable that Satan employed a like manner of fraud and deceit in turning the spirit “sons of God” away from the Great or. It was a part of his wicked scheme to defraud angels as well as men and to induce them to go contrary to God's law. ‘The daughters of men were fair,’ and the “sons of God” saw these and observed that they were attractive. By fraud and deceit Satan first entrapped the beautiful Eve, which furnished Adam an excuse to join the Devil; and now’ 1,500 years thereafter he
262
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N.Y.
uses the beautiful daughters or granddaughters of Eve to entrap others, even the "sons of God". Those angelic "sons of God" had power to materialize in a human organism, and doubtless did materialize. There is no evidence that by materializing they violated God’s law, because the Scriptures show that long after this, in the days of Abraham, angels materialized and appeared as men. (Gen. 19:1, 15; 18:1*15) While they did not materialize at the command of Jehovah, nor were they sent as his messengers, yet their sin docs not appear to be that of materialization. Appearing in human form they would necessarily be handsome end attractive men that would be pleasing to the women of that time. The Scriptures do not say that they were giants, and it would not bo at al) reasonable to conclude that they materialized as giants, but that they materialized as attractive men. "The sons of God . . . took them wives of all which they chose." The result of this marital relationship between the "sons of God" and the daughters of meh resulted in greatly increased wickedness amongst the human race, and this of itself is conclusive proof that Satan was the prime mover in bringing about this condition.
WICKEDNESS
15	Adam became a wicked man, and at the end of 1,500 years almost, all of the offspring of Adam had become wicked and brought reproach upon Jehovah’s name and vexed him. Abel, Enoch and Noah arc the only ones mentioned up to this time as having maintained their integrity toward God. It appears that probably all mankind had turned away from God at the time here mentioned, except Noah and the immediate members of his household. Noah had been on the earth for several hundred years; hence the account here in Genesis was "in the days of Noah". The inference must be drawn that wickedness had continued to increase amongst men. "And Jehovah said, My spirit shall not strive with man for ever, for that he also is flesh: yet shall his days be a hundred and twenty years." (Gen. 6: 3, d.R.V.) The words here used, "Sly Spirit," mean Jehovah himself, that being another way of saying "I the Spirit". If, however, the pronoun "I" had been used it would not have set oft' so forcefully the tremendous contrast between "Spirit" the Creatorand "flesh", that is, human creatures. Jehovah is The Spirit, the Almighty; and man, being flesh, is vastly weaker and inferior to Jehovah. Since Adam had become a sinner, Jehovah had been striving with humankind, and very few of them had maintained their integrity toward God. It appeared that Satan was succeeding admirably in turning the human race away from Jehovah.
10	The Hebrew for the English word "strive” is doon and is a primitive root meaning "to rule", and, by implication, "to judge" (as an umpire); also "to strive" or do as adversaries do at law or in litigation. During all those fifteen centuries Jehovah had been judging men as to their integrity. From Adam
to Noah inclusive was ten generations of men, symbolic of earthly' completeness; and in all that time Noah was the third man, as the divine record discloses, to prove his integrity toward God, Abel and Enoch being the two other men. There was no need for Jehovah to prolong the controversy for ever as though man could continue to strive with his Creator and Judge in the same manner that he strives against an adversary at law. Since the time of Enos men had been ‘calling themselves by the name of the Lord’, but manifestly that was done for the purpose of bringing reproach upon God’s name, in the same manner as many men today call themselves Christians but openly bring reproach upon the name of God and Christ. It is cpiite evident that, since the marriage of the "sons of God" with the daughters of men, wickedness had increased, and hence the statement by the great Spirit. "My Spirit shall not always strive with man, for that he also is flesh." Flesh or human creatures were not. holding integrity toward God. God’s announcement is, in effect, that flesh is not to forever insult the name of Jehovah. In contrast between Jehovah and creatures it is written: "Now the Egyptians arc men, and not God," and they also are "flesh, and not spirit". "All flesh is grass." (Isa. 31:3; 40:6) Man could not therefore go on for ever mocking God the great Spirit. Provoking God shows that man did not have, the correct appreciation of what man is as compared with the great. Creator.
17	The. presumption is that the fathers of the daughters consented to their daughters’ marrying the materialized spirit creatures, reasoning that such a course would make the human race great as compared with God and give them a belter standing with the Almighty. It would be the Devil that would instill just such a thought into the minds of men, his purpose being to mock God and bring reproach upon his name. Such a course of action was abominable in the sight of Jehovah, because it was gross wickedness. Says Jehovah through his prophet: “The grass witbereth, the flower fadeth: because the Spirit of the. Lord bloweth upon it: surely the people is grass. r”hc grass withcr-eth, the flower fadeth: but the word of our God shall stand for ever."—Isa. 40:7, 8.
18	Why should Jehovah God, the Spirit, always strive with man and permit man to reproach his name? In substance God here says: ‘I am Spirit, and man is flesh; and I can instantly blot him out of existence; yet his days [of grace, Leescr] shall be one hundred and twenty years.’ This seems clearly to say, in substance, that for fifteen centuries man had been out of harmony with his Creator, yet now God would suffer or permit man to go on another one hundred and twenty years before he would bring about the destruction of the human race. That statement concerning the hundred and twenty years referred to wicked men, and not to Noah, because Noah, who was then alive and walking with God, continued to live, on earth for 350 years after the flood. Why, then, should God suf
Scttembee 1, 1934
WATCHTOWER.
263
fer sinful man with no integrity toward Jehovah to continue 120 years longer? Manifestly for the same reason that Jehovah permitted Pharaoh, as a special representative of the Devil himself, to remain for a time, and for the same reason that God has permitted the Devil to continue until now; that is to say, that ‘Jehovah might exhibit his power and cause a witness to be given in the earth to his name’. (Ex. 9:16, Lee-' scr) It was during that 120 years that Jehovah did cause a great witness to be given to his name, and at the end of that 120 years he brought about the complete destruction of the world, which destruction foreshadows the destruction of the world at Armageddon. In this manner Jehovah shows that he had timed the destruction of the world by the flood of waters and that he would allow ample time before that destruction to serve notice on men and on their superhuman sons-in-law, the incarnated “sons of God”. In that day before the flood men lived for many years, and 120 years could easily lie allowed by the Lord before bringing upon the world the execution of his judgment and still inelude the generation then living at The time of this expression of his determination to destroy the world. The 120 years here mentioned in no way whatsoever Axes the age limit of man, nor did the matter have anything to do with the length of time Moses Jived; but rather the 120 years here mentioned definitely fixed the time when God would bring the flood u[»on the earth. It appears from the record that the declaration of Jehovah concerning the 120 years of further grace was made before Noah was 500 years old and before he begat his three sons.—Gen. 6: 9, 10.
It has been said that the nephilim in the earth were the same as the “mighty men” and that these were destroyed in the flood. There is no Scriptural support for such a conclusion. The scripture is definite that it was “the sons of God” that took them wives from the daughters of men, and this statement is conclusive proof that the nephilim were not the ones who married the daughters of men. The nephilim, being giants, would have been entirely out of proportion in size to have human creatures for wives. That the nephilim did materialize as human creatures there is no doubt, because the Scriptures say they were in the earth. Doubtless the nephilim were the very ones, together with Satan, who induced the “sons of God” to leave their proper place in the service of Jehovah and seek pleasure with the daughters of men, and this they did to turn those “sons of God” away from Jehovah that they might receive the disapproval of Jehovah and at the same time bring greater reproach upon his name. These “giants” or nephilim materialized and were on the earth, but “the sons of God” married the daughters of men, and this the reeord clearly shows, to wit: “There were giants in the earth in those days; and also after that, when the sons of God came in unto the daughters of men, and they bare children to them, the same became mighty men, which were of old, men of renown.” (Gen. 6: 4) It was after
those giants first appeared on earth that the “sons of God” and the daughters of men had children, as shown by this text. These “giants” or nephilim were probably called “fallen ones” or ‘fallen angels’ because they had fallen entirely away from God, and for the further reason that they were “fellers” or ones who fell upon others and treated them in a tyrannical manner. According to a recognized authority, “nephilim” means those who fall (upon others), that is, “fellers.” (Strong) Without a doubt Gog was among that crowd of wicked spirits or nephilim, and this lends support to the conclusion that Gog may yet materialize in human form and lead the visible forces of the Devil in an assault upon God’.sorganization._( Vindication, Book Two, page 311) It is certain that the nephilim are not the same as the “sons of God” mentioned in the Genesis account, for at least two reasons: (1) they were on the earth before the materialization of the “sons of God”; and (2) these nephilim or giants were not the sons of God, but the seed or sons of 1hc Devil. Other scriptures hereinafter considered fully support this conclusion. By the marriage of the “sons of God” with the daughters of men, children were bom, and “the same became mighty men, which were of old, men of renown”. Those “men of renown”, the offspring of the “sons of God”, were not called nephilim, but arc termed, according to the Hebrew text, gibborim. In the great deluge that came upon the earth the gibborim or “mighty men” were destroyed, but there is no Scriptural evidence that either the “sons of God” or the nephilim, described in the Genesis account, were destroyed. On 'he contrary, the evidence shows that they are yet alive.
20	It may be suggested that there were nephilim on the earth after the flood, because the spies returning from Canaan reported that they saw giants (nephilim) : “And there we saw the Nephilim, the sons of Anak, who come of the Nephilim: and wc were in our own sight as grasshoppers, and so wc were in their sight.” (Num. 13: 33, A.li.F.) But the answer to that is this: the word nephilim means “giants” or “tyrants”, and it is expressly stated in this scripture that the giants who were there seen were the sons of Anak (meaning “long-necked”; hence a giant). Anak was a human creature; but this could not refer to the same class of giants or nephilim as mentioned in the Genes's account. The nephilim who materialized on the earth before the flood are not said to be sons of any man, which, of course, they could not have been, since they were materialized spirits. The giants seen in Canaan were human creatures, and Caleb drove them out of Hebron.—Josh. 15:13. 14.
21	The nephilim mentioned in the Genesis account were a part of the Devil’s organization that had operated with him since the rebellion. By materializing as human creatures they would induce the “sons of God”, mentioned in Genesis 6:2, who had up to that time been loyal to Jehovah, to materialize and to indulge in marital relationship with the daughters of
264
Tfo WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
men. These spirit creatures, “the sons of God,” having previously been in Jehovah’s service, now by taking human wives and having children by them thus left their proper service of Jehovah in heaven, proba-bty at the time not willfully intending to be disloyal to God, but being induced to believe that they could render a service to man and help him up and at the samp time do this to the glory of God. While the Genesis record is silent as to whether or not God prohibited them from marrying human wives, yet God’s law later on given to the Israelites shows that such a course was contrary to his will.—Lev. 19:19; 20:15, 16.
22	In Jude it is written: “The angels which kept not their first estate [principality, margin], but left their own habitation [their proper dwelling (place), Rath.], he hath reserved in everlasting chains, under darkness, unto the judgment of the great day.” (Jude 6) This scripture has heretofore been applied to the conduct of the “sons of God” mentioned in Genesis 6:2; yet other scriptures relating thereto show that such a conclusion is not supported. The words of Jude clearly apply to the nephilim, and not to the “sons of God”, that is to say, to those giants that materialized on earth and who arc a part of Satan’s organization from the time of the rebellion. It is the nephilim that are included in the judgment of Jehovah for destruction, together with Satan, because they are Satan’s angels and are a part of his organization.
21	The mere fact that the “sons of God”, after they had materialized, intermarried with human women would not mean that they were directly a part of Satan’s organization or that they were even in sympathy with Satan’s organization. Satan and his allies, the nephilim, would cause these “sons of God” to indulge in false reasoning which led them into an unwise course, bringing them into difficulties like unto that mentioned by the apostle Paul concerning men who leave the service of God and take wives: “But he that is married careth for the things that are of the world, how he may please his wife. And this I speak for your own profit; not that I may cast a snare upon you, but for that which is comely, and that ye may attend upon the Lord without distraction. So then, he that giveth her in marriage doeth well; but he that giveth her not in marriage doeth better.” (1 Cor. 7: 33, 35, 38) “The sons of God” would not be at liberty to marry human wives, because that would take them away from God’s service, but, falling to the subtle influence and false reasoning of Satan, they doubtless adopted a line of reasoning like that of the “great multitude” (Rev. 7:9-17) or “prisoner” class (Isa. 42:6, 7; 49: 9; 61:1), who reason that they can mix with the world and at the same time serve God. Many men and women have consecrated their lives to God and have, contrary to his will, mixed up with the world, reasoning that they could do so and at the same time serve God and uplift the world; but such a course docs not result in uplifting the world and does no honor to Jehovah, and this same class he has designated as “ pris
oners” because they are held in restraint by having mixed up with the world. (Ps. 79:11; 142: 7) Doubtless the “sons of God” were induced by Satan to reason along the same line; thus they were entrapped. In the days of Noah the human race was very wicked, even as there is now great wickedness upon the earth. The “prisoner” or “great multitude” class now reason that they can disregard God’s Word of truth and stay in the religious systems, which are a part of the Devil’s organization, and thus serve God and man. These are described by the Lord in Psalm 107:10-20. Satan, working through his earthly agents, is the one who gets the “great multitude” into this trap; and this supports the conclusion that it was Satan and his materialized allies or agents, the nephilim, that induced the “sons of God” to take the wrong course and fall into Satan’s trap.
24	The children born to the human women and the “sons of God” are called in the Scriptures “mighty men” in the time of the old world before the flood. The same word is used to describe Nimrod, who was said to be a “mighty” (gibbor, Hebrew; powerful) man before the Lord. (Gen. 10:8, 9) These offspring of the union of the daughters of men with the “sons of God” became “men of renown” amongst men, but clearly not before the Lord, for the reason that the Bible account has not preserved the names of any of these men of renown; hence they were not renowned before Jehovah. They had no integrity toward God, but were abominable in his sight, being both mongrels and monstrosities, who made names for themselves because of their wickedness. In like manner Nimrod became famous amongst men. That mongrel race, called “men of renown”, were not nephilim, as the record clearly shows, and, being mongrels and monstrosities, they could not produce their kind.
25	The Genesis record docs not definitely mention the wickedness of the nephilim, for the manifest, reason they were desperately wicked from the time of the rebellion at Edon and were under judgment from that time forward. Be it also noted that the divine record does not mention the wickedness of the “sons of God” but does emphasize the wickedness of man. “And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually.” (Gen. 6:5) Satan, following his fixed policy, had turned man away from God and had used men and their daughters to corrupt the “sons of God”, who for a long time had been loyal, and the ‘wickedness on the earth’ mentioned is specifically applied to man, and it was concerning man that the Lord said he would not longer strive with him. Jehovah cites this wickedness as a reason for his change of course of action toward men. It was the human race that the Devil had turned away from Jehovah, and now Satan executes his wicked scheme by using human creatures to entrap spirit creatures and turn them away from Jehovah and get them out of his organization.
September 1, 1034
tte WATCHTOWER.
265
26	Because of this great wickedness amongst flesh creatures it is written: “And it repented the Lord that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at his heart.” (Gen. 6: 6) The Hebrew word here for “repent” is also translated as follows: “Be comforted, receive comfort, comfort, case (oneself).” For example, note the following scriptures: “Therefore raith the Lord, the Lord of hosts, the mighty One of Israel, Ah, I will ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies.” (Isa. 1:24) “Thus shall mine anger be accomplished, and I will cause my fury to rest upon them, and I will be comforted: and they shall know that I the Lord have spoken it in raj- zeal, when I have accomplished my fury in them.”—Ezck. 5: 13.
” This does not mean that God regretted that he had made the earth and made man upon it. There would have been no necessity for regrets, because he eould have destroyed Satan and Adam at the very moment of the rebellion. Jehovah himself being wholly devoted to righteousness, it grieved him at heart that man had taken the wicked course; hence God's heart reeded to be eased or comforted and would receive it, not from what some creature might do, but from his own course of action toward those who had brought reproach upon his name. Il is decision was to avenge er vindicate his name, and this he would do by the destruction of those who had united with Satan's organization and had willfully reproached his name.
2S Satan and his wicked allies had misused and perverted the lower animals of the earth, instilling in them the devilish spirit, and God declared his purpose to destroy both man and beast. “And the Lord said, I will destroy man, whom I have created, from the face of the earth; both man, and beast, and the creeping thing, and the fowls of the ait; for it repenteth me that I have made them.”—Gen. 6:7.
28The words “destroy” and “created” here used arc in complete contrast and disclose the meaning of God’s repentance, that is to say, that God the Creator, who had extended his loving kindness toward his creatures, now turned to Destroyer of both man and beast that had been turned by the Devil into wickedness. Thus God ehang, d his course, or repented, the word “repented” meaning “to change his course of action”. Be it noted that no mention is here made of the nephi-lim or of the “sons of God”, which shows that their case is to be dealt with by Jehovah elsewhere. That which is here said with reference to destruction applies to the things on the earth, and Noah was the exception. “But Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord.” (Gen. 6:8) If the word “repented”, as here used, means that God had made a mistake in making man, then why preserve Noah? Jehovah here shows that his purpose is ultimately to destroy all the willfully wicked, and shows that his favor is given only to those who are obedient to him. “Surely he scorneth the scorncrs; but he giveth grace unto the lowly.” (Prov. 3:34) “Be clothed with humility: for God
resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the humble.” —1 Pet. 5:5.
30	God having decreed according to the Genesis account that 120 years should elapse before he would destroy the creation on earth, and Noah having obtained favor in God’s sight, God then gave to Noah a good woman for a wife, and during the last 100 years before the .flood she bore Noah three sons. “The earth also was corrupt before God, and the earth was filled with violence. And God looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was corrupt; for all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth.”—Gen. 6:8-12.
31	Men on earth, with the exception of Noah and his household, were extremely wicked, corrupt, and filled the earth with violence, which condition was hateful to God. “Him that loveth violence, his soul hateth.” (Ps. 11.-5; Ezek. 7:10, 11; 8:17) Note that the text says: “All flesh has corrupted his way upon the earth.” This does not say, nor does it mean, that man had corrupted his nature, but his way.
32	The time having come for God to execute his vengeance upon the wicked ones, he made Noah his witness and directed him to hear testimony to others, and this foreshadowed how God at the present time sends forth his anointed to bear witness to his name and his purpose before he brings destruction upon Satan’s organization. The fact that God did not even mention the ncpliilim and the “sons of God” in this decree of destruction, but confined it to “all flesh”, shows that man himself is responsible for his wicked course willfully taken. “z\nd God said unto Noah, The end of all flesh is come before me; for the earth is filled with violence through them: and, behold, 1 will destroy them with the earth.” (Gen. 6:13) This would bring an end to the long period of Jehovah's striving with humankind. Jehovah then instructed Noah to build the ark, and, as it is written, “by faith Noah, being warned of God concerning things not seen as yet [such as rain, waterspouts, or storms), moved with godly fear, prepared an ark to the saving of his house: through which he condemned the world, and became heir of the righteousness which is according to faith.” (Ileb. 11:7, zl./f.P.) The building of the ark displayed Noah’s faith, and hence condemned the world. The construction of the ark was a powerful form of preaching or bearing testimony; but Noah would also explain to those people about him why he was building the ark, and thus he would bear testimony by word of mouth. Therefore the human family and the “sons of God”, as well as their offspring, would thus be the recipients of Noah’s testimony, and by this means Noah was made a ‘theater for both men and angels’, even as Jehovah’s witnesses now on earth are witnesses both to the unseen and to the seen ones concerning God’s purpose to destroy the world at Armageddon. (1 Cor. 4:9, margin) The carrying of Noah over the flood, and his delivery thereafter, was like the resurrection from the dead, and that was a forceful sermon to the angels concerning Jehovah’s
266
^©-WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N.Y.
power. Thus by the ark and by Noah and the flood Jehovah displayed his power before creation and caused his name to be made known throughout the world. Even so now God has commanded his faithful witnesses to bear testimony to his name and that God will by and through his kingdom completely vindicate his name in the destruction of everything and every creature that opposes his purpose and reproaches his holy name.
83 The Scriptural proof therefore clearly shows a distinction between the “nephilim” and the “sons of God” which later married human wives. Also that the “men of renown”, the offspring of this union of materialized spirits with daughters of men, are clearly distinct from both nephilim and “sons of God”. There would be no reason to keep alive these monstrosities, and they were destroyed in the flood.
3* The question, then, is, What became of these “sons of God” at the time of the flood, and what is their present condition? And what relationship, if any, do they bear to the violence now on the earth? The elear statement of the apostle in Ephesians 6:12 is that the ones making war upon the saints consist of a host of spiritual wicked ones. Is it the nephilim or these “sons of God” mentioned in Genesis, one or both classes, that are associated with Satan in their opposition to Jehovah’s anointed?
(To be continued)
QUESTION’S FOR STUDY
U 1, 2. Jehovah having created all things good, account for the •existence of wicked spirit creatures and of wicked human creatures and for their not having been cut off at the time they became wicked. Why is it now so timely for the Lord’s faithful ones to have greater light concerning these wicked ones?
U 3-6. What do Jude and Peter say concerning angels that became wicked, and God’s judgment therefor} Identify the “giants” and the ‘‘sons of God” mentioned in Genesis 6:2, 4. What has been their condition or activity, end what is Jehovah’s judgment concerning them!
jf 7-10. What do the Scriptures show as to Lucifer’s position and relationship in God’s organization, his course of action
and associates therein, and the outcome of such course! From Daniel’s prophecy and Paul’s statements point out further proof of dominion and tyranny exercised by wicked angels under Satan. What further in this connection is shown in Ezekiel 38: 2-6, in Jesus’ references to Satan, and in Paul’s letter to the Ephesians!
f IL 12. In view of God’s statement at Genesis.3: 15, account for the fact that even to the present time Satan and his wicked host have continued in their opposition to Jehovah, flow lias their wrongful influence been visibly manifest? Why have they not succeeded in destroying God’s faithful witnesses! '
If 13. Distinguish between the ‘‘sons of God” mentioned in Genesis 6: 2, 4 and the ‘seed of the serpent’ referred to in Genesis 3: 15.
f 14. Show that Serpent and Satan are significant names for Lucifer since his rebellion.
t 15-18. By Noah’s day to what extent had Satan succeeded in his wicked efforts! Account for and explain the statement recorded at Genesis 6: 3. What was Jehovah’s purpose there in deferring and definitely fixing the time for bringing about the destruction of the human race?
T 19,20. Explain whether the nephilim, the ‘‘giants” and the “sons of God” that took wives of the daughters of ni’.i we-e identical, and whether it was these that were la: er destroyed in the flood. Harmonize with this the statement recorded at Numbers 13: 33.
f 21-24. Apply the words of Jude 6. Were the “sons of God” blamable for and in theii materialization and in indul ;• ing in marital relationship with the daughters of men, mid why! What is meant by the reference to their offspring as “mighty men, which were of old, men of renown”!
K 25. The statement that “God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth” sheds what further light ns to the responsibility for the condition upon tho earth at that time!
If 26,27. With other scriptures, explain Genesis 6: 6.
28,29. According to the scriptures in point, what creatures were included in the decree of destruction recorded nt Genesis 6:7! flow do the words ‘ ‘ destroy ’ ’ and “ created ’ ’ there used serve to indicate the meaning of God’s farther statement, “It repenteth me”!
K 30-32. How was the earth “corrupt” and “filled with violence”, necessitating God’s destroying all flesh! Explain what was foreshadowed by the conditions described ami the decree declared in Genesis 6: 11-13. What is the meaning of Paul’s statement at Hebrews 11: 7!
T 33,34. What, then, does the Scriptural proof show as to the identity of or distinction between (a) the nephilim and the “sons of God”, and (b) the “men of renown” and both the nephilim and the “sons of God”! What are some of the questions that here call for further consideration of this subject!
RESURRECTION AND SIN-OFFERING
EARLY Sunday, the first day of the week, the morning of Jesus’ resurrection, Mary Magdalene saw him near the sepulcher, “and knew not that it was Jesus. Jesus saith unto her, Woman, why weepest thou? whom seekest thou?” (John 20 ■. 14-17) Mary on this occasion thought that he was the gardener, until she heard the sound of his familiar voice.
On the same morning the women returning from the sepulcher saw the Master. The apostle Matthew (28: 9,10) says: “And as they went to tell his disciples [what the angel at the sepulcher had said], behold, Jesus met them, saying, All hail. And they came and held him by the feet, and worshipped him. Then said Jesus unto them, Be not afraid: go tell my
brethren, that they go into Galilee, and there shall they see me.”
Simon Peter, the apostle, saw Jesus on the same day near Jerusalem. (Luke 24: 34) On this same Sunday morning, while walking to Emmaus, two of the disciples were overtaken by Jesus; and ho journeyed with them and they did not recognize him until he sat with them to eat and blessed the food in his familiar way.—Luke 24: 13-21, 30, 31.
On the evening of the same Sunday, near Jerusalem, ten of the disciples saw him.—John 20: 19-25.
Thereafter he again appeared to the disciples at Jerusalem, when Thomas was with them. This was one week after his resurrection.—John 20: 23-29.
September 1, 1934
ffKe WATCHT0WER.
267
A few days later, while seven of his disciples were fishing in the sea of Galilee he appeared to them and held conversation with them.—John 21: 1-13.
A few days later he appeared to the eleven on a mountain near Galilee.—Matt. 28: 16-20.
A^ain he appeared to a company of more than five hundred gathered together by appointment in Galilee. —1 Cor. 15: 6.
On another occasion James saw him alone.—1 Cor. 15: 7.
His last appearance was on the Mount of Olives, to his disciples, at the time of his ascension.—Acts 1: 6-9.
Saul of the city of Tarsus had opposed the Lord and persecuted him. Bent on the slaughter of the disciples of the Lord, Saul was on his journey to Damascus, when suddenly there shone about him a light more brilliant than the sun at noonday. This was a manifestation of the Lord in his resurrected glory. On this occasion the Lord spoke to Saul and said to him: “I am Jesus, whom thou persecutcst.” (Acts 9:1-9) Afterwards Saul of Tarsus was called Paul. He accepted the Lord, was begotten and anointed of the holy spirit, and became a special minister of Christ, clothed with power and authority to speak the Word of truth.
Writing concerning the Master, Jesus of Nazareth, the apostle Paul said: “For I delivered unto you first of all that which I also received, how that Christ died for our sins according to the scriptures; and that he was buried, and that he arose again the third day according to the scriptures; and that he was seen of Cephas [the apostle Peter), then of the twelve: after that, he was seen of above five hundred brethren at once; of whom the greater part remain unto this present, but some arc fallen asleep. After that; he was seen of James; then of all the apostles. And last of all he was seen of me also, as of one born out of due time.”—1 Cor. 15: 3-8.
Then Paul sets forth an argument clear and convincing, concerning the resurrection of the Lord, in which he proves that Jesus was raised from the dead, that his resurrection was necessary, and that unless he was raised from the dead there is no hope for the human family. But with positiveness he asserts ‘Christ has been raised from the dead and has become the firstfruits of them that slept’, and that the resurrection of Christ Jesus was a guarantee that in God’s due time he would resurrect others who have died.— 1 Cor. 15: 12-26.
Again Paul wrote that God has appointed a day for the judgment of the world, and that he has given assurance of that time, in that he raised up Christ Jesus from the dead.—Acts 17: 31.
The beloved apostle John, faithful and true to the Lord to the end, under inspiration wrote this concerning the Lord Jesus: “That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our
hands have handled, of the Word of life; (for the life was manifested, and we have seen it, and bear witness, and shew unto you that eternal life, which was with the Father, and was manifested unto us;) that which we have seen and heard declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us: and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.”—1 John 1: 1-3.
The resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ is proved so cogently and convincingly by the Scriptures that there cannot remain a doubt in the mind of anyone who believes that the Bible was written as the Word of God. The Lord’s resurrection has an important relationship with the great sin-offering for mankind.
The value of Jesus’ perfect human life laid down at the tree on Calvary, but the right to which life survived, constituted the purchase or ransom price which we call merit. Jesus died upon the tree, but his right to live was not taken away. There is a vast difference between living and having the right to live. Adam the first man had the right to live, but he sinned. Immediately after God’s judgment was entered against him his right to life was gone, yet he survived for nine hundred and thirty years. Jesus actually died on the tree; but, he dying as a voluntary sacrifice, his right to life did not perish, but survived.
It was Adam’s commission of sin that caused God to sentence him to death. If Adam or any of his race were ever to be released it must be after the offering for sin is made, which offering must be the ransom price, namely, the merit or valuable thing or right to a perfect human life. This offering must be made in heaven. Therefore, in order for Jesus to present his sin-offering he must be raised from the dead a spirit creature and appear in the presence of God in heaven itself and there present the value of his sacrifice at the court of sentence.—Ileb. 9: 20-26.
The proof is conclusive that Jesus was made flesh and dwelt amongst men; that he suffered death in order that he might provide the redemptive price for men; that God raised him out of death a divine creature and exalted him to a position above all others in the universe, God alone excepted. On this point the sacred record says: “[He], though being in God’s form, yet did not meditate a usurpation to be like God, but divested himself, taking a bondman's form, having been made in the likeness of men; and being in condition as a man, he humbled himself, becoming obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. And therefore God supremely exalted him, and freely granted to him that name which is above every name; in order that in the name of Jesus every knee should bend, of those in heaven, and of those on earth, and of those beneath ; and every tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, for the glory of God the Father.”— Phil. 2: 6-11, Diaglott.
Now we can understand the living picture made when Abraham the Hebrew offered his son Isaac as a
263
watchtower.
Beooklys, N. Y.
sacrifice on Mount Moriah. There Abraham was a type or prophetic picture of Jehovah God. Isaac, the only son of Abraham, was a type of Jesus, the beloved and only begotten Son of Jehovah. Abraham went as far as possible in offering his son as a living sacrifice without actually taking his life. But the picture was sufficient to show that God would offer his beloved Son a living sacrifice, and this was the lesson that Jeliovah • purposed to teach. At the moment when Abraham’s hand was descending with a knife to strike dead his son, God stopped him and through his angel spoke to Abraham. “And the angel of the Lord called unto him out of heaven, and said, Abraham, Abraham: and he said, Here am I. And he said, Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou any thing unto him: for now I know that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not withhold thy son, thine only son, from me.”—Gen. 22: 11,12.
Then and there God gave to Abraham that promise in which all mankind is vitally interested, because it foretells the coining of the great Deliverer of mankind through whom all the nations of the earth shall be blessed. We read that God added: “By myself have I sworn, saith the Lord; for because thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld thy son, thine only son; that in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which is upon the sea shore; and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies: and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed: because thou hast obeyed my voice.”—Gen. 22: 16-18.
Again, the death of Jesus was foreshadowed in the passover which God instituted among the Jews while in Egypt. (Ex. 12: 1-12) A lamb was taken up into each Jewish house on the tenth day of the month Nisan, which lamb must be without spot or blemish. On the fourteenth day of that same month the lamb must be slain and the blood sprinkled upon the door posts, which was a sign of protection for the firstborn of the family inside that house and which was a provision
precedent to the deliverance of all the Israelites out of Egypt. The antitype or real fulfilment of that lamb was Jesus, as it is written: “The next day John [the Baptist] sccth Jesus coming unto him, and saith, Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world.” (John 1: 29) Testimony to the same effect is found in the book of Revelation (5: 6), where the apostle John says: “And I beheld, and, lo, in the midst of the throne [of God] and of the four beasts [round about], and in the midst of the elders, stood a Lamb, as it had been slain, having seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of God sent forth into all the earth.”—Rev. 5: 6.
In this last quoted scripture the number seven is a symbol of completeness; horns a symbol of complete power; the eyes a symbol of complete wisdom; thus testifying that the great antitypical Lamb of God would bo clothed with perfect wisdom and all power and authority to carry out the divine purpose; an I this is exactly what the Scriptures show was granted unto Jesus. After his resurrection from the dead and before his ascension to heaven Jesus said: “All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth.”—Matt. 28:18.
The lamb that was taken up to be offered for the passover of the Jews “shall [so the divine instructions stated] be without blemish, a male of the first year”. (Ex. 12: 5) Writing concerning the redemptive price provided by the blood of Jesus, the apostle Peter, under inspiration, says: “With the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot.”—1 Pet. 1: 19.
Jesus, being the antitypical paschal Lamb, must offer himself to the Jews on the tenth day of Nisan. It was on the tenth day of Nisan that Jesus rode into Jerusalem on the ass and offered himself to the Jews as their King. (Matt. 21: 1-9) lie must die on the fourteenth day of Nisan in order to fulfil the type, and it was on the fourteenth day of Nisan that he was nailed on the tree.
EXALTING JEHOVAH’S NAME
THOUGH unseen by human eyes, Jehovah, the Almighty Creator of heaven and earth, is now becoming more fully known through the wonderful works which he.is performing for the information and encouragement of those who trust in him. Songs of praise, therefore, are very much in order; and such praise to Jehovah is today rising from among the gathered witnesses of Jehovah, who throughout all the earth declare among the people Jehovah’s name and the good news of his kingdom, the only hope of the world.—Matt. 12:18-21.
Jehovah God has provided music for the new-born government and his faithful witnesses who delight to sing that musie. The Psalms of the Bible are poems set to music.
One of these kingdom poems is Psalm 99. It opens with the statement that Jehovah has become King and calls upon the people to tremble. “Jehovah [at this particular time] is great in Zion [his organization] ; . . . Let them praise thy great and terrible name; for it is holy. . . . Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at his footstool; for he is holy.” Uis name
SEPTEMBER 1, 1934
WATCHTOWER.
269
is exalted by a great public proclamation. “His footstool” mentioned herein is his temple class on earth, for there the Lord God is represented on earth.
Verse 6 of this psalm speaks of Moses, Aaron, and Samuel as calling upon the Lord and being heard by him, and his answering them. This is evidently here inserted as an encouragement to those who today call upon the name of Jehovah and trust him implicitly.
Another one of these government songs is Psalm 68. It opens with the statement: ‘ ‘ Let God arise, let his enemies be scattered.” Representatively Jehovah arose in the representative capacity of the Melehizedek priesthood. Christ, the great High Priest after the order of Melehizedek, stands up from his scat to make his enemy his footstool, and those on earth who are devoted to Jehovah are willing volunteers in this day. (Ps. 110:3) “Sing unto God, sing praises to his name; extol him that rideth upon the heavens by his name JAH, ami rejoice before him.” God is not so much concerned about hearing the singing for himself, but to have the people hear it, that his name might l>e exalted. Therefore this must be by a public witness to his name.
It is written that when the ark of the covenant was set forward on its journey toward the Promised Land these identical words with which the psalmist opened were spoken: “Rise up, Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered.” (Num. 10:35) When David carried the ark to its resting place on Mount Zion this custom must have been followed. It is recorded that on this occasion David caused to be appointed singers with instruments of music. (1 Chron. 15:16-28) With song and instrumental musie the ark was brought forward and placed on Mount Zion. This was done in the presence of the enemies. That service pictured what is now going on in the earth. The song of the kingdom now says: “They have seen thy goings, 0 God; even the goings of my God, my King, in the sanctuary.” (Ps. 6S:24) Thus the enemy sees the work going on and hears the remnant singing.
Another song of the new government is Psalm 149. The song opens with: “Praise ye the Lord. Sing unto the Lord a new song (in view of the fact that his kingdom has come], and his praise in the congregation of saints. Let Israel rejoice in him that made him; let the children of Zion be joyful in their King,” because the King of glory is come. “Let the saints be joyful in glory; let them sing aloud upon their beds.” The Lord has been glorified as King, and the honor attaches to his remnant as ambassadors of the new King, and therefore they are in glory. They sing upon their beds instead of going to sleep, as some have. They arc active in showing forth the praises of the Lord day and night and will continue until earthly sleep overtakes them. This is in exact harmony with the words of God’s prophet in Isaiah 62:6,7, in which the Lord says his watchmen shall not hold their peace
day or night but shall continue to make mention of the name of the Lord.
“Let the high praises of God be in their mouth, and a two-edged sword in their hand.” God is their Creator and is worthy to be praised. The “sword in their hand” shows that these faithful ones are engaged in a warfare against Satan’s seed.—Gen. 3:15.
“To execute vengeance upon the [nations], and punishments upon the people.” The “sword” with which they are to execute this vengeance is the Word of God. (Eph. 6:17) The method of execution is simply by declaring what the Word of God has to say concerning his vengeance and the expression thereof against Satan’s organization.
“To bind their kings with chains, and their nobles with fetters of iron.” Manifestly it is the kings of “Christendom” that are referred to here as being bound. The faithful remnant class use the Word of God to bind these kings and nobles. “The rod of the wicked shall not [longer] rest upon the lot of the righteous.” (Ps. 125:3) The proclamation of the truth and the hearing of it by the people is destroying the influence of the “nobles”, namely, the clergy, over the people. Men are getting their eyes open and are getting away from standing in fear of these ecclesiastical “nobles”.
“To execute upon them the judgment written.” This shows that-the remnant class arc to follow what is written and are only to proclaim the message of God's kingdom. It is not for them to do any violence to the rulers or the nobles, but to declare the judgment which the Lord God has already decreed against them and which is written in his Word. They are therefore merely the servers of notice as to what shall be done. The song concludes: “This honour have all his saints.” The Lord counts theirs an honorable work. Those who fail and refuse to joyfully have a part in performing this work of testimony to the great name of Jehovah are by the terms of the psalm excluded from the saintly class.
Another one of these kingdom songs is Psalm 72. “Give the king [The Stone, Christ Jesus, God’s Anointed King] thy judgments [thy decrees and authority to execute them], 0 God, and thy righteousness [‘the robe of righteousness’] unto the king’s son [Jehovah’s royal sons still on the earth], lie [Christ Jesus, having been given God’s judgments and authority] shall judge thy people with righteousness, and thy poor with judgment.” This song is another evidence as to what must now be done as a part of God’s great work in the earth and which must be done by the remnant.
Another one of the new government songs is Psalm 95, which the remnant class are now singing: “0 come, let us sing unto the Lord; let us make a joyful noise to the rock of our salvation.” The reason for this song is that Jehovah is the great God and is now exalted
270
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N.Y.
in Zion. Irf 1914 the earth became the Lord’s, and he sent forth his Anointed One to oust the ruler thereof. Therefore “in his hand are the deep places of the earth”. God through his prophet Ezekiel had promised that he would search out his sheep and call them, and that he would shepherd his flock and deliver them out of places where they have been scattered. (Ezek. 34; 11,12) Recognizing that the Lord God has done this, the remnant sing: “For he is our God; and we arc the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his hand. To day, if ye will hear his voice, harden not your heart, as in the provocation, and as in the day of temptation in the wilderness.”
The apostle Paul applies this psalm to the close of the age of God’s favor to natural Israel; and, according to the rule laid down by him, it applies with greater force to the end of the world when God is gathering his people to himself, (lleb. 3:15-19; 4:1-3; 1 Cor. 10:11) Since the coming of the Lord to his temple, and the lieginning of judgment throughout the house of God, the Lord’s voice thus speaks out to the. temple class that their hearts may not be hardened but that they may rejoice to obey his Word. The Lord says that some of those anointed to kingship will harden their hearts and will turn away and will not engage in the glad song announcing his kingdom. These will complain against their brethren and insist that there is nothing to be done but to await the time when they shall lie taken to the kingdom. The Lord rep-restnfsthc faithful remnant class, however, as singing: “And they sung as it were a new song before the throne, and before the four beasts, and the elders: and no man could learn that seng but the hundred and forty and four thousand, which were redeemed from the earth.”—Rev. 14:3.
The complaincrs cannot understand this song because they refuse to participate in it. Those who have already passed into glory and are for ever with the Lord engage in the singing of the new song declaring the praises of Jehovah. The remnant still on earth participate in the singing of these songs that constitute the music of the new government. The fact that the statement is made that no man on earth can learn that song except the 144,000 shows that those of the remnant elass still on earth would know and participate in the song.
Another of the new government songs addressed to the “Chief Musician” is Psalm 66. “Make a joyful noise unto God, all ye lands.” This joyful noise must be made amongst the nations as a witness and must be given as the Lord commanded by those who love the good tidings and who are the faithful witnesses of the Lord. The song continues: “Sing forth the honour of his name; make his praise glorious.” In the centuries past God has magnified his Word of promise. Now the time has come when his name must be exalted in the earth; and his faithful witnesses, whom he has appointed, are privileged thus to magnify it, by telling
forth to those who will hear that his righteous government is at hand.
Among the new government music which the remnant class sing is Psalm 75. “Unto thee, O God, do we give thanks, unto thee do we give thanks :,for that thy name is near, thy wondrous works declare.” (Ps. 75:1) Jehovah is now doing his works in the earth. These things seen by the anointed servants are evidences to them that God himself is near and is taking a hand in the affairs of the earth. Some works he must do by forces other than his people on earth. Almost all his work on earth done by the anointed is the making proclamation to the honor of his name. Opportunities that they have now to serve him in declaring his name are proof to the anointed that God is using them, and that therefore they have his approval. Such is further proof that now is God's due time to have his name declared in the earth. With a clearer vision of God's purposes concerning them, ■ the anointed can go on in his work with full confidence. They are not so much concerned about how long they must continue to work on earth, nor how great the danger of attack from the enemy; but they arc concerned about faithfulness to their covenant. With serenity they sing forth the honor of his name.
Some who are anointed think they should not speak against the Devil’s organization but should be at peace with it. Sueh are fickle, because they cannot pursue that course and be loyal and faithful unto the Lord. To the anointed ones the Lord says: “My son, fear thou the Lord and the king [God’s Anointed One, the Stone laid in Zion] ; and meddle not [associate not] with them that are given to change [that are fickle].” These who turn aside to associate with the workers of iniquity shall fall. “As for such as turn aside unto their crooked ways, the Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of iniquity; but peace shall be upon [spiritual] Israel.”—Ps. 125:5.
Only those who arc faithful to the Lord shall stand. That one is of the remnant class now is no guarantee that he is going to be of that elass finally. He must continue diligent and faithful even unto the end. “Seest thou a man diligent in his business [that is, the King’s business, looking after the kingdom interests] ? he shall stand [face to face] before [the] kings [.Jehovah and Christ Jesus] ; he shall not stand before mean [or obscure] men [the petty kings of earth; he will not have the approval of such].” (Prov. 22:29) Those who are faithful and so continue unto the end, and are diligent in proclaiming the praises of the name of the Lord, shall have the friendship of God's Anointed King. ‘lie that hath pureness of heart, and grace upon his lips, shall have the King for his friend.’— Prov. 22:11, margin.
The marvelous work of Jehovah progresses and his people look forward with confidence to the time when his righteous government shall be completely established in the earth, solely in charge of earth’s affairs.
NOAH DOES WELL
Dear Brother:
A foreign-speaking director told me that when he waa in the Greek army his commander said, “When you see a Turk, don’t hunt me up for advice. Shoot the Turk.’’ I made immediate use of the opportunity Jehovah furnished through ids servant our president by carrying a set of the new records and a port* able phonograph with me each Sunday on our service work, trying to find one sincere seeker of truth and then letting you answer his questions. 1 rejoice to tell you your efforts along tlus line have already been amply repaid and a now and wonderful opportunity for service opened. It is a real time-saver to a worker.
The first Sunday, an elderly gentleman, after the usual card testimony, being- penniless, expressed gratitude for charitable gifts of booklets, etc., he had received from time to time from our witnesses, and said, “ Now tell me your latest news on Armageddon.’’ I played the lecture on that subject to him and a roomful of relatives, it being a short distance back to my car and the phonograph. At the conclusion, with tears running down onto Ids snowy beard, he said, “Young man, that’s the most forceful lecturer I have ever heard, and he has told me more on that little record than I have heard from preachers in seventy years.’’ With expressions of joy he followed me to the gate and asked God’s blessing on the work for the peace it had given him. If you had seen the expression on that old fellow’s face!
Each Sunday, in addition to week-day use, I have taken your lectures along in the car, hoping at least one person will stop me to ask questions. Each Sunday such an incident has occurred, and the total time required to really explain a subject is never more than ten minutes. I have noted many workers spend 5-10-20 minutes in fruitless lecturing at a door, often leaving the people more confused than ever. In my opinion (and I voice that of every listener to date) those lectures are the most pungent pieces of information on the subjects ever prepared. The only objection I have heard is from our own workers who apparently desire to hear their own voice set forth the information in their own way.
Eor such effort, richly blessed, I have been severely censured. I am told, “You should not use the records during the work period. L'se the card and then talk to the peojde, if they seem interested.’’ Personally, I prefer to let my superior do my talking when 1 secure an open door. You furnished me with a tool, and I will surely use it, especially when it seems particularly fitting and potent. I am told, “W’ait until the Society tells you how to use them.’’ (Three people, three Kundays would have missed the blessing.) I prefer to shoot the Turk on sight, and will do my best to aim straight until my commander secs fit to better direct my fire. If I am wrong, 1 trust the Bulletin straightens this out.
Noah L. Resseger, Ohio.
(Continued from page £7£)
NEW YORK
Auburn WMBOSu 6:30pm Sa 2:15pm
Bing ’niton WNBF Su 7:3 5pin Brooklyn WBBB Su 10:15am
Su 6:30pm	Mo	10:30am
Tu 10:30am	Tu	6:30pm
We 10:30am	Wo	6:30pm
Th 10:30am	Th	6:30pm
Fr 10:30am	Fr	6:30pm
Buffalo WGR Su 10:00am Elmira W ESG Su 10:15am Freeport WGBBSn 9:00am
Tu 7:00pm Th 7:00pm HudsonF. WGLCSu 10:45am Jamestown WOOL Su 9:30am New York WBNX Su 2:30pm New York WOV Su 4:30pm SaranacL. WNBZ Su 10:15am
Tu 4:15pm Th 4:15pm Syiacuse W.SYR Su 10:30am Tupper L. WHDL Su 10:15am
Th 11:30am
Wb. Pl’ns WFASSu 6:00pm
Mo 1:00pm Sa 9:00am
NORTH CAROLINA
Asheville WWNC Th 5:30pm Charlotte WSOO Su 10:15am Greensboro WBIG Su 9:45am Jtalcigh WPTFSu 9:45am
NORTH DAKOTA
G’d Forks KFJM Su 2:30pm
OHIO
Akron	WADC Su 1:45pm
We 10:45am
Akron	WJW Su 5:30pm
We 11:30am
Cleveland WHK Su 7:00pm Tu 3:15pm Fr 6:30pm Cleveland WJAY Su 9:45am Columbus WAIU Su 10:00am Th 7:45pm
Columbus WBNSSu 9:45am
Mo 1:15pm We 1:15pm
Fr 1:15pm
Dayton WSMK Su 1:30pm
Mt. Grab WIIBDSu 4:30pm
We 4:30pm Fr 4:30pm
Toledo WSPDSu 9:30am
___ Sa 8:15am
Youngst ’nWKBN Su 10:00am
We 4:15pm
Zanesville WALR Su 10:00am
We 4:15pm
• OKLAHOMA
Elk City KASA Su 1:15pm
Ponca City WBBZ Su 10:00am
Wo 9:00pra
Tulsa KVOOSu 9:15am
OREGON
KlamathF. KF JI Mo 8:15pm
Marshfield KOOS Mo 1:30pm Medford KMED Su 10:00am Tu 1:00pm
PENNSYLVANIA
Erie WLBW Su 10:45am Glenside WIBG Su 1:15pm Johnstown WJAC Su 4:30pm Phil ’a WCAU Su 12:00 un Philadelphia WIPSu 6:45pm Pittsb ’gh KQV Su 10:30am
We 1:45pm Fr 1:45pm Reading WEED Su 3:45pm
We 3:45pm Wash’ton WNBO Su 9:45am W’msport WEAK Su 6:30pm Y’ork WORK Su 3:00pm
PHILIPPINE ISLANDS Manila KZEGSu 7:00pm Th 7:00pm
SOUTH CAROLINA Greenville WFBC Su 10:00am Spart’b’g WSPASu 6:30pm
SOUTH DAKOTA
Pierre KGFX Su 1:00pm
Tu 4:00pm Th 4:00pm
Watertown KGCB Su 9:15am We 8:45pm Fr 8:45pm
TENNESSEE
Cha’noogaWDOD Su 1:15pm
Th 8:00am
Jackson WTJS Su 1:30pm
We 5:30pm Fr 5:30pm
Knoxville WROL Su 7:00pm Memphis WMCSu 4:30pm Memphis WREC Su 9:00ain
TEXAS
Amarillo KGRS Su 9:00am Austin KNOW Su 10:00am CorpusChr. KG FI Su 9:00am
We 6:45pm Fr 6:45pm Dallas KRLD Su 10:30am Dublin KFPLTh 8:00pm
Fr 8:45am
El Paso KTSM Su 1:15pm IT. Worth KT AT Mo 5:15pra
We 5:15pm Fr 5:15pm
Galveston KLUFSu 1:45pm
Wo 8:00pm Houston KXYZ Su 10:00am S. Angelo KGKLSu 1:45pm
Th 8:45aru
S. Antonio KTSA Su 10:45am
Tyler KGKB Su 9:15am We 9:15am Fr 9:15am
WiehitaF. KGKO Su 12:30pm Th 8:45pm
UTAH
Ogden KLO Su 3:15pm
We 5:00pm
Salt L. City KSL Su 9:45pm
VERMONT
Rutland WSYB Su 10:00am
Th 5:30pm
St.Albans WQDM Su 1:00pm
VIRGINIA
Ch’lottesv. WEHC Su 10:45am
Danville WBTM Su 9:15pm Lynchb ’g WLVA Su 12:45pm Norfolk WTAIt Su 12:30pm Petersb’g WPIIR Su 6:45pm Wo 10:00am
Richmond WRVASu ]2:]5pm
Roanoke WDBJ Su 12:30pm We 5:00pm
WASHINGTON
Aberdeen KXRO Su 1:15pm Bell’ham KVOS Su 10:00am Th 5:30pm
Seattle K.TR Su 10:00am Seattle	KVL Mo 6:45pm
Tu 6:45pm We 6:45pm Th 6:45pm Fr 6:45pm
Sa 6:45pm
Spokane KFIO Su 9:15am Spokane KGA Su 6:00pm Tacoma KVISu 2:45pm WallaW'alla KUJ Su 7:45am
Su 1:30pm
Wenatchee KPQSu 1:00pm We 7:00am
Yakima KIT Su 10:00am Th 7:00am
WEST VIRGINIA
Bluefield WHIS Su 9:00am Fr 8:00am
Cha'ston WOBU Su 4:OOpm Fairmont WMMN Su 12:45pm Ilunt’ton WSAZ Tli 4:00pm Wheeling WWVA Su 10:00am
WISCONSIN
La Crosse WKB1I Su 12:00 nn Madison WIBA Su 10;05am Mani ’woe WOMT Mo 7:00pm Th 1:00pm
WYOMING
Casper KDFN Su 10:30am Th 8:45pm
271
WATCHTOWER.
RADIO SERVICE
The good news of the kingdom of Jehovah is broadcast each week or oftener by these and other stations at time shown.
(Current local time is shown In each instance,!
AUSTRALASIA
NEW SOUTH WALES Albury 2-AY Tu 8:45pm Goulburn 2-GN Su 7:30pm Grafton 2-GF Tu 7:30pm Gunnedah 2-MO Su 7: 00pm Lismore 2-XNWo 7:15pm Newcastle 2-HD Su 9:30am
Su 7:15pm Su 11:40pm We fl :30pm
Sydney 2-UE Su 9:15am XV 'gaXV’ga 2-WG Wo 9:30am We 7:45pm
QUEENSLAND
Brisbane 4-BC Su 10:15am Mackay 4-M K Su 10:15am Maybor'gh 4-MB XX e 9:45pm Rockh ’pton 4-RO We 10:00pm Townsville 4-TO We 8:00pm
TASMANIA
Launceston 7-LA Fr 10:15pm
VICTORIA
Ballarat 3-BA Su 12:45pm
Bendigo 3-BOTu 8:00pm
Hamilton 3-IIASu 0:45pm
Horsham 3-IISSu 7:00pm Melbourne 3-AW Su 10:15am Sale	3-TRSu	(5:30pm
Swan Hill 3 SU Su 7:15pm
WEST AUSTRALIA Kalgoorlie 0-KG Su 7:45pin I’ertb 6-MLSu 7:00pm
BELGIUM
Hainaut BONNE Sa 5:30pm (330 m) ESPERANCE
CANADA
ALBERTA Calgary CFC'N Su 5:45pm
NOVA SCOTIA Sydney CJCB Su 9:00pm
ONTARIO
Hamilton CROC Su 10:30am Su 1:30pm Su 8:15pm
CHINA
Shanghai XMHASu 9:45am
CUBA
Caibarien CMIID
Spanish Su 7:00pm
Havana CMK Su 11:30am
Spanish Su 9:00pm
Santa Cl’a CMUI Su 12:15pm
Spanish Su 11:05am
ESTHON1A
Revtd RADIO-Su 3:30pm (286.1m) TALLINN
FRANCE
Beziers RADIO-Th 8:00pm (220.1m) BEZIERS
Bordeaux RADIO-Mo 7:45pm (237 m) SUD-OUEST
Fecamp RADIO-
(206 m) NORMANDIE
French Tu 8:00pm
Paris RADIO L L Fr 8:15pm (370 m)
Paris RADIO- Su 12:00 nn
(312.8 m) VITUS
Th 7:30pm Sa 7:30pm
Toulouse RADIO-We 7:15pm (385.1m) TOULOUSE
MEXICO
Mexico XECW
Spanish Th 10:00pm
UNITED STATES
ALABAMA
Birm’liam WAP1 Su 12:45pm Birm’ham WBRC Su 10:00am Dothan WAGE Su 1:30pm M ’tgmneryXVSFA Su 3:45pm Muscle S. XVNHASu 0:00pm
Wo 8:00pm Fr 8:00pm
ALASKA
AnehoragcKFQD XVe 9:30pm Ketchikan KGBU Mo 7:15pm
Th 7:15pm Sa 7:15pm
ARIZONA
Bisbee KSUN Su 4:00pm . Wo 4:00pm Fr 4:0'>pm
Jeiome KCR.J Mo 5:15pm
We 5:15pm Sa 5:15pm
Spanish Th 4:30pm
Prescott KPJMSu 5:45pm
XX'e 5:45pm Fr 5:45pm
Tueson KG AR Su 5:45pm
Wo 7:00pm Fr 7:00pm
Yuma KUMA Su 6:15pm
Spanish Su 6:00pm
ARKANSAS
Fay ’villo KUOA Su 12:45pm
XX'e 11:45am Fr 4:30pm
HotSp’gs KTHSSu 5:00pm
Little R’k KGHI Sn 7:00pm
XVo 5:45pm Fr 5:45pm
Little R ’k KLRA Su 10:30ain
Paragould KBTM Su 10:0<>am We 11:30am
Tcxaikana KCMC Su 6:45pm
CALIFORNIA
El Centro KXO Su 10:00am
Eureka KJEM Su 10:3'him
Fresno KMJ Su 3:45pm
Hollywood KNXSu 9:15pm
Long B ’ch KGER Su 10:45am
Los Angeles KTM Su 9:30am
Su 8:00pm Th 8:00pm
Oakland KLS Su 11:15am We 2:45pm Fr 2:45pm
Oakland KROXV Su 10:15am
Su 6:15pm Mo 8:15pm We 8:15pm
Sa’mcnto KFBK Su 9:30am 8. F’ciseo KTAB Su 9:30am Sa 8:30am
Stockton KGDM Su 9:30am We 7:15am Fr 1:15pm
COLORADO
Col ’o Spr. KVOR Su 10:30am
We 5:30pm Sa 4:30pm
Denver KVOD Su 7:00pm Grand J ’n KFXJ Su 1:15pm Gieeley KFKA Su 6:45pm Lamar K1DW Su 7:15pm
We 2:40pm Fr 2:40pm
Yuma KGEK Mo 12:45pm We 12:45pm Fr 12:45pm
CONNECTICUT
Bridgeport WICC Su 10:00am
DELAWARE
Wilm’ton XVDELSu 6:15pm
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
Washington WOL Su 6:00pm
FLORIDA
Jacksonv. WMBR Su 10:00am
Miami XVlODSu 9:4.juiu
Miami WQAM Su 4:45pm Orlando WDBO Su 12:45pm Pensacola XVCOA Su 1:00pm
We 7:00pm
GEORGIA
Albany WG PC Su 10:30am
Athens	WTFISu	9:45am
Atlanta	WGST Su	5:45pirt
Atlanta	W.ITLSu	2:15pm
Augusta	WRDW Su	3:00 pm
Th 7:45pm
Columbus WRBLSu 9:30um
LaGrange XVKEU Su 3:00pm
We 3:0Opin- Fr 10:00am
Macon	WMAZ Su 4:00pm
Rome	XVRGA Su 12:30pm
XVe 8:45pm Fr 8:45pm
Savannah XX TOC Su 1:00pm
HAWAII
Honolulu KGM15 XVo 12:05pm Fr 7:15pm
IDAHO
Boise KIDOSu 10:30.im
We 8:45 pm
Idaho Falls KID Mo 10:00am
Nampa KFXD Su 11:00am Md 7:45pm
Pocatello KSEISu 2:00pm
Su 9:00pm
Twin Falls KTFI Su 10:15am Su 4:45pm
ILLINOIS
Decatur WJBLSul0:00am Fr 6:3(>am
Harrisb’g WE BQ Su 6:00pm
Mo 10:30pm Fr 10:00pm Quincy WTAD Su 12:30pm We 1:00pm Rockford WROK Su 10:00am Su 10:00pm We 10:30pm Sp ’gfield WCBS Su 12:30pm Sa 11:15urn Tuscola WDZ Sii 12:45pm
INDIANA
Hammond WWAE Su 11:00am
Ind’apolisWKBF Su 10:00am
Th 1:00pm
Muncie WLBCSu 1:30pm
Fr 7:30 pm
IOWA
Des Moines WHO Su 10:30am
KANSAS
Coffeyville KGGF Su 1:45pm Th 8:00pm
KENTUCKY
Louisville WAVE Su 9:15am
LOUISIANA
Monroe KMLD Su 10:45am Shrevep’t KXVEA $u 10:15am
MAINE
Bangor WLBZ Su 10:45am
MARYLAND
Baltimore XX BAL Su 3:15pm
Cumber!’dWTBO Mo 1:15pm
We 1:15pm Fr 1:35pm
Ilagerst ’n XV J E J Su 10:15am
MASSACHUSETTS
Babson P. WBSO Su 12:30pm
Boston XVNAC Su 10:00am Sp’gfield WMAS Su 10:30am XXoiccster WORUSu 10:30am
MICHIGAN
Calumet WHDFTu 6:15pm
Detroit XV.IRSu 9:45:00
Jackson WIBMSu 6:30pm
KalumazodXVKZO Su 9:45am
XVe 2:00pm
MINNESOTA
F’gusFallsKGDE Su 10:00am Min’apolisXVDGY Su 2:00pm Moorhead KGl'K Su 7:30pm
Wo 5:15pm Fr 5:15pm
MISSISSIPPI
Hatticsb’gXVPFB Su 1:30pm
We 7:45pm
Laurel XVAML Su 1:00pm Meiidian WCOU Su 10:00 im
We 6: 15pm
Miss. City XX'GCMSu 9:45am \Xre 8:15pm
MISSOURI
Columbia KFRU Su 6:15pm
We 7:15am
Kans.C’y KWKC Su 2:00pm Tu 7:00am
MONTANA
Kalispell KGEZ Su 9:00am
NEBRASKA
Ker.rney KGFW Su lC;f)(»:nn Lincoln KFAB Su 9:3vani Lincoln KI'OR Su 10:15am
Scottsbl.’f KGKY Su 10:15am XVe 5:45 pm Fr 5:45 pm
NEVADA
Reno KOH Su 10:30 im
NEW JERSEY
Newark WNEW Su 10:0Oain
NEW’ MEXICO
Albuq’que KOB We 5:45pm
Roswell KGFLSu 5:15.;.ir.
We 4:30pm Fr 4:30pm
(Continued on page 271)
ffne WATCHTOWER.
Published Semi-Monthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N. Y., U. S.A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford President W. E. Van Ambubch Secretary “And all thy children shall bs taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy childrenIsaiah 54:13-
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven end earth and the Giver of life to Ids creatures; that tho Logos was the beginning of his creation and Ids active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now tho Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created tho earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man wilfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are bom. sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and tho man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptivo price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every crcatuio and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, nnd that Christ Jesus is tho Chief Officer thereof and is tho rightful King of tho world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus uro children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and uro his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to tho supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of tho kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and tho Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of the peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ which has now begun; that tho Lord’s next great act is tho destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under tho kingdom all thoso who will obey its righteous laws shall bo restored nnd live on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and supplies other literature to aid pa such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his Beloved. King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of tho Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, 51.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, 51.50; Cheat bbitain, Australasia, and South Africa. 7s. American remittances should bo made by Express or Postal Money Order, or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should be made direct to the re-pcetno branch otlices. Item it tames from countries other than tlm^o mentioned may bo made to tho Brooklyn office, but by fnlemattonal Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ................31 Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, Pineland
Canadian . .........*10	Irv. In Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
A usfralasian . . 7 Beresford Hoad, Sirathtield, N. 8. W.. Australia South African .... Bo.-ton House, Capo Town, South Africa 1’leaso a<hlre..s Hie Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.}
All sincere students of the Biblo who by reason of Infirmity, poverty or advei-ity are unable to pay tho subscription pore may have The Watchtower free upon written application to tho publishers, made once each year, stating tho reason for so requesting it. Wo are glad to thus aid tho needy, but the wiitfen application onco each year is required by tho postal regulations. -Votiee to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will bo sent only when ro'l«e«ted. Ch.'ingo of nilcres, when requested, may be espeeted to appear on address- label within ono month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with tho journal one month before the subscription expires. Entered as Second Class Mail Matter al Brooklyn, .V. I’., Tostoffice.
Act of March S, 137.9.
THE KINGDOM PRAISE PERIOD
This nine-day service period, September 29 to October 7 inclusive, begins the new service year of 1934-1935, it will be earth-wide in its scope, and it is expected that more lands where some of Jehovah’s witnesses or Jonadtibs are located will receive a witness during this period than during any previous like period. In the English-speaking countries Jehovah’s witnesses and the Jonadabs will specialize on placing the new booklet, litghtcous Hitler. In countlies of another language the branch office in charge will duly announce the booklet to be distributed there. And, important! don’t forget reporting your work for the period, promptly at the close thereof, to the respective office having supervision over the witness in your part of the field.
PUBLIC LECTURES BY TRANSCRIPTION
Jehovah’s blessing has been markedly upon the use of the portable transcription machine. He has plainly manifested that this maeliine meets the need of the hour, when the enemy, under Gog, is seeking to curtail the ire- of the radio by God's anointed and when the people’s ears are eager to hear, not man’s message, but God's. The transcription machine has increased the power of Jehovah’s witnesses afield to preach Ilia truth manyfold, so that the desire for the literature is stimulated and study classes of niany interested hearers are being formed. Besides more than GOO sum machines in the United States alone, great numbers are now being eCee.tively used in countries near and afar. For more information, write the Society.
NOTICE OF ANNUAL MEETING
Pursuant to the prevision of law and the charter of the Watch Tower Bible nnd Tract Society, notice is hereby given that the annual business meeting of the said Society will be held at Pittsburgh, North Side (formerly Allegheny), Pennsylvania, at 10 o’clock a.m., Wednesday, October 31, 1934, at which the usual annual business will be transacted.
-RIGHTEOUS RULER”
Another new booklet! The two radio lectures “World Control” and “Flee Now”, with an excellent introduction thereto, bound together under one cover, this cover bearing a most inspiring design. Even Jehovah’s witnesses should not fail to read this booklet, not to speak of the Joninbib cl:;.?.-. It miy be had for 5e a copy by all such. The beginning of the distribution thereof to the general public is announced elsewhere.
Vol. LV	September 15, 1934	No. 18
WICKED SPIRITS
“For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places.’’—Eph. 6:12.
PART 2
JEHOVAH’S great name having been reproached both by angels and by men, he sent Jesus to earth for the purpose of vindicating his name and to bear witness to the truth. In doing this Jesus must preach ami did preach both by word of mouth and by his consistent course of action. Whatsoever preaching Jesus did, that preaching was done in the performance of his commission. The apostle Peter under inspiration wrote: “For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to Clod, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the spirit: by which also he went and preached unto the spirits in prison; which sometime were disobedient, when once the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls, were saved by water.’’—1 Pct. 3: 18-20.
2	Having now learned that the primary purpose of Jehovah in sending Jesus to earth, and the primary purpose of the work of Jesus, is the vindication of Jehovah’s name, the remnant may now expect to obtain through Christ Jesus at the temple a clear understanding of the words of the apostle concerning the “spirits in prison’’. Who are those spirits in prison? Who imprisoned them? and in what manner did Jesus preach to them? According to the Scriptures those “spirits in prison’’ were prior to the flood the ones designated in Genesis six as the “sons of God’’, and their wrongdoing consisted in their leaving their assigned duties in God’s organization and marrying the daughters of men and thus devoting themselves to that which was in disobedience to God’s law concerning them. The Scriptures do not say that their disobedience extended over the entire 600 years that Noah lived. Probably they were disobedient during all that time and the preaching of righteous Noah brought home to them notice that they were doing wrong. It is the wickedness of man that is emphasized by the Scriptural record. (Gen. 6:5) It was then that God declared that “yet his [man’s] days shall be an hundred and twenty years”. It was during the latter part of these 120 years that Jehovah gave Noah instruction
concerning the ark, because at that time of receiving such instruction Noah had sons and his sons were married. The disobedience of the sons of God continued during that period of time. This is definitely fixed by 1 Peter 3: 20, above quoted: ‘Which sometime [aforetime, If.P.] were disobedient, when the ark was being prepared.’ When the ark was completed and the Hood came, there the “old world” ended. That means the change in spirit conditions as well as earthly conditions; hence at that time apply the words of the apostle, to wit: “The world that then was, being overflowed with water, perished.” (2 Pet. 3:6) It was at that time that the spirits were imprisoned, and which shows that they were not destroyed. It was to those imprisoned spirits that Jesus preached. Noah, “a preacher of righteousness,” preached to them prior to the flood and they had not heeded his preaching, and for that reason they did not escape imprisonment. Those spirits could not have been killed at that time, because they were alive in Jesus’ day; otherwise Jesus could not have preached to them. It is quite certain that those disobedient spirits, “the sons of God,” are still alive, but under restraint or imprisoned.
3	Who imprisoned them? There is no reason to conclude that God imprisoned them. Since they were disobedient to God, would he not be the one to imprison them? Not necessarily so. There is no evidence in the Scriptures that God did imprison them. Those angels once in God’s organization and in his service had fallen to the wiles of the Devil, and God would deliver such up to his enemy Satan and permit the enemy Satan to imprison them. Such is the course followed by Jehovah under like circumstances. This is supported by the faet that the Israelites were once in the organization and service of Jehovah, and that they fell away to the wily influence of the Devil, and God gave them over to his enemy and their enemy, Satan, and permitted many of them to be held in captivity and in prison. (Iios. 11:8; Jer. 12: 7; Isa. 47:6) Also those who go to make up the “great multitude” class were begotten of the spirit, being brought forth as the sons of God, and had opportunity to devote themselves
276
STe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y,
wholly to God’s service and had an invitation to run tor the prize of the kingdom, and yet they have fallen to the wily influence of the Devil and his allies, have attempted to serve God and the Devil’s organization at the same time, have fallen into Satan's trap, and are held in Satan’s organization or prison house, and are designated as “prisoners”. (See The Watchtower, .1926, page 339.) The disobedient “sons of God” in the days of Noah likewise did not heed the preaching of Noah, and when the flood came they found there was no protection for them regardless of whether or not they desired to ref urn to God's organization at that time. They had been disobedient and walked into Satan’s trap. Had God imprisoned those disobedient spirits the manifest purpose would have been to restrain them from further disobedience, and this supports the conclusion that God did not restrain them. If Satan is the one who put them in prison his purpose would be to Keep them under his control and thus prevent them from returning to God, just as he holds now the. “great multitude” in prison. After the flood came, and which taught these disobedient spirits the supreme power of Jehovah, and showed the vindication of his word and his name, such spirit creatures would be restrained by Satan and his wicked allies to prevent them from breaking away. Babylon is the name of Satan’s organization; and as God’s once chosen people, the Israelites, were held in Babylon, it is evidently in Babylon, that is to say, the Devil’s invisible organization, where the disobedient spirits are held in prison and which, in the Scriptures, is called “the land of Magog”.—Ezek. 38:2; 39:6.
4	Since those “sons of God” who became disobedient in Noah’s day did not take advantage of God’s long-suffering during the 120 years, and did not hearken unto the preaching of righteous Noah, God’s representative and witness, Jehovah would let them go and would give them no protection and did give them no protection in the flood. This finds a strong parallel at the present time, as will hereinafter be seen. Their disobedience in disregarding God’s organization and his service would separate them from Jehovah, and their fear would bring them into Satan’s snare, just as fear brings the “tribulation” company into the snare of Satan. (Prov. 29:25) Thus Satan and his nephilim bullies would hold these “sons of God” in restraint or in prison, not permitting them again to return to the Lord Jehovah and his service. When the “sons of God”, in harmony with Jehovah’s will, came to present themselves and Satan would come also in their midst there to show off himself, those whom Satan had restrained would not appear. (Job 2:1) The disobedient “sons” of Noah's day would not be there, but would be held in restraint, even as Satan and his agents now hold the “great multitude” in restraint and away from the assembly of God’s witnesses, and this Satan does by using the clergy to restrain them. But as the message of truth now preached by the consistent lives of the faithful witnesses, as well as by
radio and in printed form, reaches the “prisoners”, the “great multitude”, even so God has arranged that the message of truth shall reach the spirit prisoners held by Satan, that they in due time might seek him.
To those disobedient spirits Jesus preached, as stated by the apostle Peter. Since the purpose of preaching is reformation, if possible, of those who hear, that must have been the purpose of Jesus in preaching to them. (Rom. 10:14, 15) By maintaining his integrity toward God under the most trying conditions, even suffering an ignominious death, Jesus preached a powerful sermon to all who observed. Then being raised up out of death by the power of Jehovah and given the most exalted place in God’s organization, and that because of his faithfulness to God, would be a most powerful witness to those spirits hold in prison and who were there because they had failed to be faithful to God and remain in his organization. The fact that it is stated that Jesus did preach Io them strongly supports the conclusion that they v ill have an opportunity to be recovered in God's due time. If that is the correct conclusion, then they will have to take a positive stand against Satan and Gog and then at the cost of great suffering firmly show thei.i allegiance to Jehovah and his organization. If those prisoners arc now held by Satan they are not necessarily the ‘seed of Satan’ any more than the “great multitude” constitutes a part of the seed of the wicked one. They followed their own course of reasoning, disregarded the word of God, and fell into a trap, ju>t as the “great multitude” has done.—Ps. 107:9-13.
0	How did Jesus preach to those spirits in prison? Not necessarily by word of mouth, but by his consistent conduct and unyielding devotion to Jehovah under the most severe test. The words of the apostle just preceding his statement concerning Jesus’ preaching to the spirits throws light upon the matter under consideration. Peter was there stating Io the Chiis-tians bow they were once going astray, and how they were brought back to the Lord Jesus Christ. Then lie says: “In like manner, ye wives, be in subjection to your own husbands; that, even if any obey not the word, they may without the word be gained by the behavior of their wives; beholding your chaste bchaxior coupled with fear. As Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him lord: whose, children ye now are, if ye do w ell, and are not put in fear bv anv terror.”—1 Pet. 3:1, 2, 6, A.Zf.P.	’	‘
T The argument of the apostle is that one professing to follow Christ Jesus must also follow a course of action in conformity to his profession, that observers may note the consistent action in the deportment and the testimony delivered by word of mouth. Mere behavior or conduct, hov.-ever, such as is called “character development”, without testimony by word of mouth will not glorify God. but there must be both an oral testimony and a consistent course of action on the part of the professed Christian. Says the apostle: “Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him lord” because
September 15, 1934
STe WATCHTOWER,
277
he was God’s chosen servant. She was not honoring the man, but she was honoring the servant of God.
8	Noah by building the ark showed to observers his faith in God and his devotion to Jehovah. His words and his course of action were consistent. Continuing, says the apostle: “But sanctify in your hearts Christ as Lord: being ready always to give answer to every man that asketh you a reason concerning the hope that is in you, yet with meekness and fear.”—1 Pet. 3:15, A.H.V.
• Such a question could not be propounded unless the verbal testimony is given causing men to ask questions, and this shows that one must preaeh both by word of mouth and by the course of action to those with whom he comes in contact. A good conscience is kept by so doing, regardless of being misunderstood by others. Hence the apostle adds: “Having a good conscience; that, wherein ye are spoken against, they may be put to shame who revile your good manner of life in Christ.” (1 Pet. 3:1G, zi.Zf.F.) Jehovah’s witnesses must go contrary to the world, showing forth the praises of Jehovah, and thus doing they are looked upon and called evildoers. They must be preachers by word of mouth and by their consistent course of action. The proof comes to others that they are not evildoers when God takes occasion to prove to false accusers that (hose whom they have accused have been and are his faithful witnesses.
10	Then the apostle's argument shows that the faithful servants of God will be brought into conditions causing suffering, and that such is the will of God in order to afford an opportunity for them to maintain their integrity toward him. God does not send the suffering, but the faithful ones, suffering for righteousness and for doing right, prove their integrity. Therefore says the apostle: “For it is better, if the will of God should so will, that ye suffer for well-doing than for evil-doing.” (1 Pet. 3:17, A.H.V.) Likewise did Christ Jesus suffer, the just for the unjust. “Because Christ also suffered for sins once, the righteous for the unrighteous, that he might bring us to God; being put to death in the flesh, but made alive in the spirit.” (1 Pet. 3; 18, A./f.V.) Suffering was not required of Christ Jesus in order to provide the ransom price. Christ Jesus in maintaining his integrity toward God suffered injustice to be heaped upon him. lie suffered and remained faithful to God, and thus proved himself entirely faithful; and because of his faithfulness Jehovah raised him up out of death and exalted him to the highest place in his organization.
11	At the time of his consecration at the Jordan Jesus was counted as dead, and there began his quickening in the spirit. For three and one-half years lie was preaching the truth by word of mouth and by his consistent and constant devotion to Jehovah God. Likewise the followers of Jesus are quickened of the spirit to become preachers of God’s Word. (Rom. 8:11; 1 Cor. 4:9) Jesus, always in Jehovah’s organization and in his favor, refused to yield to the temptations
presented to him by Satan, and amidst all the persecutions that were heaped upon him by Satan he remained faithful and true to Jehovah. This, together with his continued course of consistent action unto death, and his being raised out of death, was the manner in which he preached to the spirits in prison, as is stated by Peter: “In which also he went and preached unto the spirits in prison.” (1 Pet. 3:19, A.H.V.) These imprisoned spirits found themselves there because they had failed to be faithful in their service to God while in his organization, and now they saw the result that comes for unfaithfulness and also the result to those who arc faithful. The preaching of Jesus, therefore, was the delivering of a message in a roundabout or indirect way. He was sent to preach by word of mouth to the Jews, which he did. (Matt. 15:24) Uis preaching to the spirits was by their observing his faithful devotion and consistent holding to God’s organization, which would in effect say to them: ‘If you had remained true and faithful to God’s organization where he placed you, al this present time you would not be in prison and away from God’s favor.’ In this manner Jesus would preach to the spirits in prison, just as the behavior or conduct of the women whom Peter admonishes in this connection, and which Peter uses to illustrate the point of his argument. The conduct of Jesus preached in favor of God’s side of the great controversy and against the side of Satan, that wicked one who had entrapped these disobedient spirits. The resurrection of Jesus and his exaltation because of his faithfulnc :s to God added great strength to that preaching. Satan, knowing this, desperately put forth every effort in hi.; power to prevent the resurrection of Jesus.
12	Many have insisted that Jesus went somewhere and preached to the spirits in prison, because both th? Authorized and the American ItcvisedVcrsion say that he “went” and preached to the spirits. It is entirely consistent with the foregoing explanation of his preaching by his faithful course of action, and also in complete harmony with all other scriptures, for us to conclude that Jesus did go somewhere and preach to the spirits in prison. During the three days that Jesus was dead, to be sure, he did not go anywhere. After his resurrection to life as a spirit creature divine, and between that time and the time of his ascension into heaven, a period of forty days elapsed. Within that period of time he appeared in a human organism several times to his brethren, but these appearances were only for a few minutes on each occasion. The Scriptures are silent as to where Jesus was during the other part of that forty days. There appears from the prophecy of Ezekiel that the “laml of Magog” is the place where the angels who sinned in Noah’s day are imprisoned. Since it appears that they wore imprisoned by Satan, this supports the conclusion that they arc in the “land of Magog”. (Ezek. 38:1, 2; Vindication, Book Two, page 311) When Jesus was resurrected he was a spirit divine, clothed
278
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N.Y.
with all power and authority and ability to go and come at will. There seems to be no reason why he might not have gone to the "land of Magog” and there addressed a message directly to the spirit creatures restrained in prison that had sinned in Noah’s day, and which spirits have since been held in prison by the Devil. We know that the Lord has provided means whereby the "great multitude” "prisoners” now on earth have the gospel preached to them by radio at the present time. Why could not Jesus have preached to the spirits in prison by something similar to our radio in his time or speak to them directly? He certainly had the power to do whatsoever he might choose to do in harmony with the will of God. He was certainly able to go, and there was surely ample time for him to do so between the time of his resurrection and his ascension into heaven. (Matt. 28:18; Acts 1: 3, 4) Certainly these imprisoned spirits must be reminded that because they were once in God’s organization and left it they had fallen into Satan’s hands and been imprisoned, that Jesus, by remaining faithful and true to Jehovah and resisting the Devil’s wiles, even unto an ignominious death, had been raised from death and exalted to the highest position, and that if these spirits in prison had remained faithful they would have been entirely at liberty. What Jesus told them in words, we do. not know, but we do know that his course of action fully supports the conclusion that he might have used words similar to those above.
13	Peter did not say that Jesus preached deliverance to the imprisoned spirits; but according to the commission of our Lord his preaching to them, even indirectly, would imply that there is hope for the deliverance of the imprisoned spirits who in the day of judgment boldly take their stand on the side of Jehovah, even as there is hope for the "great multitude” to receive deliverance at that time. What Jehovah has in store for these "sons of God” who became disobedient, the Scriptures do not reveal, but if at Armageddon any of them do take a positive and unequivocal stand on the side of Jehovah and gladly leave it to Jehovah where to place them, they may be recovered and return to some place in his organization.
FINAL JUDGMENT
14	The judgment entered long ago against Satan is final, and that judgment is that he shall in God’s due time be completely destroyed, and "never shalt thou be any more”. (Ezek. 28:19) Satan is willfully and maliciously wicked, and those angels or spirit creatures who joined him in the rebellion are likewise willfully and maliciously wicked, and the same everlasting destruction is reserved for them. (Matt. 25:41) "The wicked shall perish.” (Ps. 37:20) It is concerning those wicked angels of Satan that the apostle wrote: "Whose judgment of old [now from of old, A.R.V.], does not linger, and their destruction does not slumber.” (2 Pet. 2:3, Diag.) Why does not judgment linger now, and their destruction wait? Because, as
shown by the context, the apostle is directing his speech as applicable to the time of the end of the world, where we now are. (2 Pct. 3:7) The execution of this final judgment must take place now within a short time, because the end of the world has been reached and the warning is now given to Go’d’s people, that they may keep themselves close to Jehovah’s organization and hence in his love. At Armageddon this execution shall take place.
SENTENCED TO DEATH
15	The apostle Peter, in his second epistle, the second chapter thereof, emphasizes the future of all the willfully wicked, and in this connection says: "For if God did not spare the angels who sinned, but having confined them in Tartarus with chains of thick darkness, delivered them over into custody for judgment.” (2 Pet. 2:4, Diag.) When were these wicked angels here mentioned sentenced? The context shows that it was preceding the time of the flood, because their judgment was "of old” but now does not linger. The Authorized Version says: ‘They were cast down to hell’; but the word translated "hell” is turtarus. The phrase "having confined them in Tartarus”, according to the Dwglott, is just one word in the Greek. According to the Greek mind the word pictures a deep abyss and signifies a great abasement or degradation, being reduced to a degraded state far deeper than that to the dust from which man was made and from which he is raised out of death. It is the same abasement or degradation to which Lucifer was reduced. The "angels that sinned” committed that great sin long before Noah’s day; and this is proved by the foregoing statement of Peter, and further shows that his statement docs not refer to the "sons of God” who married the daughters of men in Noah’s day. Those wicked spirit creatures were a part of Lucifer's official organization, who joined him in the rebellion and were sentenced at the same time Satan was sentenced,-and until the time of their execution they arc ‘confined in chains of darkness’. That docs not mean literal chains such as we see with our eyes, but "chains of thick darkness”, that is, restraint in darkness similar to that stale in which the "man of sin”, "the son of perdition,” is found, having lost the light concerning God’s purpose. This means utter darkness as to their understanding of Jehovah’s purposes. The holy angels have desired to look into these things, and now having come to the temple with Christ Jesus they are enlightened and permitted to look into them. (1 Pet. 1:12: Matt. 25:31) Not so, however, with the wicked angels. They are in the dark so far as God’s favor and his purposes are concerned. They are degraded and abased Io the lowest degree. There is no light of God’s favor for them. Like the unfaithful wedding guests, they are east "into outer darkness”. (Matt. 22:13) In the light of God’s face is life; hence "chains of thick darkness” would clearly imply eventual destruction. This text, therefore, could not refer to the confining
September 15, 1934
WATCHTOWER.
279
in dark rooms of spirit mediums who operate there. Mediums’ operating in dark rooms is merely a means employed to deceive. It must be borne in mind that these wicked angels were once a part of God’s organization under Lueifer, and when Lucifer became God’s enemy they likewise became God’s enemies, and He degraded them into darkness. Such seems to be the rule that the Lord applies to all of those who are once enlightened and willfully become wicked.
16	Speaking of those onec in line for the kingdom, Jesus said he would send forth his angels and gather out all those ‘that offend and do iniquity’ and “shall cast them into a furnace of fire’’. (Matt. 13:41, 42; Matt. 7:23) “And cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.” (Matt. 25:30) The Devil himself is the chief one or chief prince of this degraded host. There arc other princes operating under him. (Dan. 10:13, 20) All of these are designated by the Scriptures as “principalities”, “powers,” ‘rulers of darkness,’ a host of ‘wicked ones in unseen places’.—Eph. 6:12, margin.
’’Further say the Scriptures: “God . . . delivered them over into custody.” Jehovah did not need to wait until the flood before first delivering them over into chains of darkness or into custody, but this he would do at the time they became ‘the seed of the Serpent’, which was at the time they joined that old Serpent, Satan the Devil, in his rebellion against God. In the day of execution of the judgment of these wicked ones they will be cut off just as Satan will be cut off. “The Lord knows how to rescue the pious out of trial, and to keep the unrighteous for a day of judgment to be cut off.” (2 Pet. 2:9, Diag.) Putting them into “custody” would mean that these wicked ones arc constantly under surveillance of the holy angels acting under the direction of the Lord, which surveillance, however, would not prevent the wicked ones from associating with and operating with Satan in heaven, where they were at the time when Satan was cast out of heaven by the Lord. At that same time these angels were cast down to the earth with Satan. (Rev. 12:9) They operate with Satan in his organization now to bring woe upon the world, and this they are doing.—Rev. 12:12.
It goes without saying that the wicked angels with Satan were not killed when they were sentenced. They are yet very much alive. Without doubt Jehovah has reserved them alive under restraint of darkness and under surveillance in order to show’ his power over them at Armageddon and thereby to convince all creation that Jehovah is God the Almighty One. (Ex. 9:16, Leaser) The Lord Jesus declares that these wicked ones who arc Satan’s angels shall be cut off at the same time the Devil will be cut off.—Matt. 25: 41, 46.
Jude fully sustains the above conclusion. “And those angels who kept not their own principality, but left their own habitation, he has kept in perpetual
chains, under thick darkness, for the judgment of the great day.” (Jude 6, Diag.) Originally they were a part of Lucifer’s organization, and therefore “their own principality” was the place where Jehovah had assigned them in his organization under Lucifer. The statement “loft their own habitation” does not mean that they forsook the spiritual realm and became human creatures, because they did not give up their spirit bodies but still have them, although at times they may clothe themselves with human organism or bodies. This they must have done when they appeared as nephilim or giants in the earth. This they no doubt did for the very purpose of entrapping the “sons of God” who married The daughters of men in Noah’s day. Their “own habitation” means the place to which they were originally assigned in Jehovah’s organization and which they left when they joined Satan in the rebellion. Those wicked ones, says Jude, God “has kept in perpetual chains, under thick darkness, for the judgment of the great day”, which means the great day of God Almighty, the battle of Armageddon. (Rev, 16: 14) In order for those wicked spirits to be brought to final judgment at “the great day” they must be alive; and hence they are alive. This does not mean that, there is any hope for them, any more than there is hope for Satan, but that it is the day of their execution under the terms of the- judgment long ago written against them and which execution will be an exhibition of Jehovah’s power and a vindication of his name. Concerning that great day of execution it is written: “And the Lord shall utter his voice before his army; for his camp is very great: for he is strong that exe-cuteth his word: for the day of tire Lord is great ami very terrible; and who can abide it?” (Joel 2:11) “The great day of the Lord is near, it is near, and hasteth greatly, even the voice of the day of the Lord: the mighty man shall cry there bitterly.” (Zeph. 1:14) By his prophet Jehovah further says concerning that time of execution: “Alas! for that day is great, so that none is like it: it is even the time of Jacob’s [the remnant’s] trouble; but he [the faithful remnant] shall be saved out of it.”—Jer. 30: 7.
20	Before the day of their execution Jehovah informs Satan and his wicked angels that they are to be executed, and he uses his witnesses now on the earth, the faithful remnant taken out for his name’s sake, to give that testimony. This witness or testimony began particularly in 1928, when the Lord’s angel began the pouring out of his “vial” upon the air, and from which time forward there went forth the declaration against Satan and his organization and in favor of Jehovah and his organization. (See Revelation 16:17; Light, Book Two, page 57; Ezekiel 38:3-16; Vindication, Book Two, page 311.) This is a fitting time for Jehovah to make his faithful witnesses the remnant a “spectacle” or “theatre” both for men and for angels. (1 Cor. 4: 9, margin) Their testimony by word of mouth and by faithfulness to God and his organization under the most severe test is a true demonstration
280
Gfa WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
of Jehovah’s purpose to preserve the faithful and to destroy the wicked.
WAR
21	It is those wicked spirits, together with Satan, who with the killing of Abel began their murderous assaults upon those who serve God, and ever since then they have sought to destroy the servants of the Most High; and they would succeed in their murderous attacks except for the fact that Jehovah throws around his own faithful ones all needed protection. It is that same wicked crowd under Satan that constantly assaults Jehovah’s faithful witnesses. These wicked ones are led by Gog, the chief executive officer of Satan’s organization. To Jehovah’s faithful witnesses, the remnant, is committed the testimony of Jesus Christ, that is to say, the testimony to the honor and praise of Jehovah’s name and to the vindication thereof, and now Satan and his wicked angels go forth to make war upon and maliciously try to destroy all of those who keep God’s commandments.—Kev. 12:17.
22	The conflict or war in which Jehovah’s witnesses engage is not with human creatures, that is to say, with flesh and blood. We once were led to believe that this was their fight, and that they must develop a perfect character in order to get to heaven. But that is not their real fight. In recent years The Watchtoieer has time and again declared that we have no fight with men. Our fight is with Satan and a host of wicked spirits operating with him, which unseen wicked hosts use men as their dupes or agents, who are on earth and who willingly or unwillingly do the bidding of the unseen wicked powers. We have now come to the “last days”, that is to say, the days just preceding Armageddon, in which, as in the days of Noah, the earth is filled with wickedness by reason of the operation of Satan and his wicked allies. (2 Tim. 3:1-6) The great Spirit, Jehovah God, by and through his faithful servant Paul gave warning to.the followers of Christ Jesus who arc witnesses for Jehovah in these day;;, and who are therefore on the side of Jehovah, and the special objects of the enemy’s assault: “Finally, strengthen yourselves in the Lord, and in his mighty power. Put on the complete armor of God, that you may be able to stand against the crafty ways of the enemy.” (Eph. 6:10, 11, l)ia</.) What enemies? Satan and his host, his wicked spirits, that have operated with him since the time of the rebellion, and concerning which wicked hosts the apostle says: “Because our conflict is not with blood and flesh, but with the governments, with the authorities, with the potentates of this darkness, with the spiritual things of wickedness in the heavenlies.” (Eph. 6:12, Viag.) Why is that wicked crowd making war on Jehovah's witnesses? Because such witnesses are in God’s organization and engage in his service of delivering the message of truth, which Satan and his crowd do not want the people to hear, and because the truth pronounces the doom of Satan and his organization.
23	Another translation of this text is here helpful to understood the matter. “Be strong in the Lord and in the strength of his might; put on God’s armor, so as to be able to stand against the stratagems of the devil. For we have a struggle not with blood and flesh, but with the angelic rulers, the tmgelic authorities, the potentates of the dark present, the spirit-forces of evil in the heavenly sphere.”—Moffatt.
24	The Devil and his great tyrannical and maliciously wicked hosts are far more powerful than Jehovah’s witnesses. That wicked host misses no opportunity to make an assault upon the faithful. When they see Jehovah’s witnesses going forth to the work of bearing testimony to the name of the Most High that wicked crowd seeks the destruction of the faithful. Why, then, should Jehovah’s witnesses be bold in the proclamation of the truth and continue to sing forth Jehovah's praises and thus condemn the world? Why should they not proceed more cautiously and avoid offending God’s enemies? Rather, why should they proceed with the work without fear of devils or other wicked agents on the earth, as they arc now doing? The answer is that they go forth fearlessly because Jehovah of hosts is their fear and their sure protector. (Isa. 8:12, 13) The holy angels under the command of the Lord Jesus Christ as Jehovah's chief executive officer are sent before God’s faithful witnesses. These are keeping under surveillance and holding back the wicked ones, and thus the protection of those remaining faithful to God as his witnesses is guaranteed. “The angel of Jehovah cneampcth round about them that fear him, and dclivercth them.” (Ps. 34:7, A.fi’.F.) Except for the protection afforded to Jehovah’s witnesses the Devil and his wicked crowd would instantly destroy them. Those who love God and who remain faithful will have boldness in this day of judgment and continue to faithfully proclaim the message of the truth, knowing that no weapon formed against them can prosper.—1 John 4:17, IS; Isa. 54:17.
COMMUNICATION
25	The “spirits in prison” to which Jesus preached were not the wicked spirits or nephilim that form a part of Satan’s- organization. To have preached to that wicked crowd would have been entirely inconsistent and against the will of God, seeing that God had already sentenced them to destruction. It was to the “sons of God” who fell into Satan’s trap, and hence into his prison, that Jesus preached as stated by the apostle Peter. (1 Pet. 3:19, 20) Nor is there any Scriptural evidence that those “spirits in prison” have ever communicated with or attempted to communicate with any human creatures through mediums or otherwise. The Scriptural evidence is conclusive that the wicked spirits that joined Satan in his rebellion have communicated and do now continue to communicate wfith human creatures by use of willing mediums, and this they do for the very purpose of deceiving mankind and drawing men away from God and hold
September 15, 19-34
THE WATCHTOWER.
281
ing them in Satan’s snare. Jehovah provided in his law that all men or women practicing the fraudulent art of mediums, witches, necromancers or soothsayers should be put to death, because they are working as Satan's agents. (Ex. 22:18; Deut. 18:10) This is conclusive proof that the efforts of men and women to get in communication with the spirits is entirely contrary to God’s law and brings disaster upon those who practice such.
26	Witchcraft and mediums are of Satan and the fruit of his rebellion: “For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry. Because thou hast rejected the word of the Lord, he hath also rejected thee from being king.”—1 Sam. 15:23.
27	This statement of Jehovah’s prophet announces the rule of Jehovah showing the direct relationship between rebellion and witchcraft and that stubbornness and lawlessness against God, the rejection of his Word, is the cause of one's falling into wickedness. Saul was the first king of Israel, which was God’s typical organization. Saul disobeyed God and rebelled. This supports the conclusion that witches or mediums represent the rebel Satan and his wicked associates who arc also rebels, and that such are the ones that communicate through witches or mediums with the human race. Saul sought advice from the witch of Endor after first having directed his servants to search out such a medium or witch. He fell completely under the control of the wicked spirits operating through that witch. (1 Sam. 28:7-16) Those wicked spirits induced Saul to believe that he was communicating with Samuel; but the context of the scripture shows that they were lying, because Samuel had long been dead, and the dead know not anything.—Eccl. 9: 5, 10.
2*	Those wicked spirits with Satan continued to harass, defraud and mislead the Israelites, causing that people who constituted God’s typical organization to turn away from Jehovah and to entirely lose his favor. (Amos 3:2) When Jesus was on earth he preached the kingdom message to the Jews, and during that time these wicked spirits continued to harass the Jews and drive many of them into iniquity. “When the even was come, they brought unto him many that were possessed with devils: and he cast out the spirits with his word, and healed all that were sick.”—.Matt. 8:16.
29	The Scriptures describe those wicked ones as “unclean spirits” and “devils”, of which Satan is the chief. These devils knew Jesus to be the Son of God, and without doubt knew that the judgment of destruction stood against them. “And he healed many that were sick of divers diseases, and cast out many devils; and suffered not the devils to speak, because they knew him.” (Mark 1: 34) When Jesus cast out these wicked spirits and caused them to depart from the ones that they were afflicting, they cried out. “And there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean
spirit; and he cried out, saying, Let us alone; what have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou art, the Holy One of God. And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy peace, and come out of him.” (Mark 1: 23-25) This is evidence that Jesus was not preaching to those wicked ones, but that they were practicing their wickedness and they feared that he had come to execute Jehovah’s judgment against them.
30	On another occasion Jesus met two men possessed of these devils: “And, behold, they cried out, saying, What have we to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of God ? art thou come hither to torment us before the time? And there was a good way off from them, an herd of many swine, feeding. So the devils besought him, saying, If thou cast us out, suffer us to go away into the herd of swine.”—Matt. 8: 29-31.
31	The present time, when the Lord Jesus at the temple is causing the proclamation of the truth to be made, and particularly the judgment of Jehovah concerning the destruction of these wicked ones, must be to them a time of real torment. No wonder they fight against Jehovah’s witnesses; and thanks be unto God who provides all the needed protection for those who remain faithful! The foregoing texts show that Jesus was not preaching to those wicked ones any message of reformation, but he was rebuking them and they feared the time of their execution had arrived. This is further proof that such wicked spirits are not the ones who sinned in Noah’s day. The two classes are clearly and distinctly* marked out by* the Scriptures, one doomed to absolute and complete destruction, the other having a possibility of recovery.
DECEIVERS
32	Satan, that old Serpent and arch deceiver, together* with his wicked angels, has deceived millions of people in modern times. The organization designating itself “Christian Scientists” is a striking example of such deception. It is unbelievable that so many men and women who appear to be sincerely desiring to do right would willfully serve the Devil. Without a question of doubt they are deceived, and this wily foe, the Devil, has fixed up a scheme to turn them away* from God. He has thus induced many* persons to follow the teachings of a woman, and which teachings it is wrongfully* claimed are supported by the Scriptures. Men are induced to believe that they can heal the sick, and doubtless Satan lends all the power he possesses to temporarily heal them. They have fallen for Satan’s first lie, that there is no death (Gen. 3:4), and thus he has caused many of such persons to deny* the Lord and the blood of Jesus Christ that purchased the human race.—John 8: 44.
33	Millions of other persons are deceived, being induced to believe that they can talk with their dead friends, when in fact they are communicating with those wicked spirits that have been opposed to God
282
Tfr'e WATCHTOWER.
Bkcoklyx, N. Y.
and righteousness since the days of Eden. Such wicked spirits act through mediums and by this means deceive those who do not adhere strictly to the Word of God. Many public officials in many of the countries consult these mediums, and thus consult the wicked spirits, in order to find out what they must do or what course they shall take, and thus the Devil carries on this wicked practice to turn men away from Jehovah and into unrighteousness. Every religious organization that has existed, beginning with Nimrod, Satan has oven-eached and used for his purpose. The most glaring example of this is the Homan Catholic hierarchy. Parading under the name of God and of Christ, that organization is used by Satan to deceive millions of people who have desired to do right but who are kept in ignorance of what is Jehovah’s purpose. The Jloman Catholic hierarchy is the strongest visible foe on earth of Jehovah’s witnesses, and that organization is desperately fighting to keep the people in ignorance of the truth. This is conclusive proof that the Homan Catholic hierarchy is Satan’s organization into which he has drawn and entrapped many good persons whom he desires to hold under restraint and away from God. In like manner Satan has held many persons in the Protestant churches under the control of their clergymen. It was even so in Noah's day that Satan entrapped the “sons of God’’. The fact that the clergy have joined hands with the political and financial interests of the world, all of which is under Satan, is proof conclusive that Satan has entrapped them and is using them for his purposes. Both the Catholics and the Protestants preach to the people that their dead friends are alive and conscious either in purgatory or in torment. Such is in substance Satan’s first lie spoken to man. (Gen. 3:4; John 8: 44) Many good people are induced to believe that their friends who have died arc suffering and in purgatory and ma5r now be aided by prayers said in their behalf by clergymen. All of such fraudulent practice originated with Satan and is carried on by him and his host of wicked ones. Now Satan knows that his time is very short until the great fight at Armageddon takes place, and he hastens to drive all men into spiritism or devilism and therefore against God; and for that reason at the present time there is a great turning to spiritism and spirit mediums throughout the land. All who follow the lead of Satan and his wicked allies will die at Armageddon.
PARAMOUNT TRUTH
34	What truth of and concerning these wicked spirits stands out as of paramount importance to all who w-ish to have and to hold the favor of Jehovah God? It is this: that there is but one place of safety, and that is to be in and to abide in the organization of Jehovah God. “Be still, and know that I am God: I will be exalted among the nations, I will be exalted in the earth. Jehovah of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our refuge.” (Ps. 46:10, 11, A.B.V.) Every
thing in opposition to Jehovah God will ultimately be destroyed.
35	Lucifer knew that Jehovah is the Almighty God and that he, Lucifer, was duty-bound to obey God. He was in God’s organization and willingly forsook it, setting himself up in opposition to God, and took away with him a host of angels who were under him. Such leaving of the organization of God means their destruction. Jehovah has been long-suffering toward them in this, that he has permitted Satan and his wicked host to continue in existence and to exhibit their wickedness until God’s due time to execute them. What God has prominently set out in his Word concerning this wicked crowd serves as a strong warning to all intelligent creation.
30	Any creature once in God’s organization and who treats his privilege carelessly and indifferently opens himself to the subtle attack of the enemy. Yielding to the enemy's influence and then turning away from God’s organization and thereafter willfully opposing the same means that creature's certain destruction. Willful sin is knowingly violating God’s law. Such is wickedness, and all the wicked God will destroy.—Ps. 145:20.
37	Saul is another example of those once in Godri organization and who fail. Judas is another example of those once in God's organization who become willful, fall to the wiles of the Devil, and then willfully turn away and oppose God, and whose destruction ri certain. Such is the fate that comes to the “man of sin” or “son of perdition”. These were once in the truth, in God's favor, and in his organization, and because of selfishness turn away from God and sin'r'ev destruction. The apostle Peter concerning such says: “For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the >vorld, through the knowledge of the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein and overcome, the latter end is worse with them than the, beginning. For it had been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than, after they have known it, to turn from the holy commani.ment delivered unto them.” (2 Pet. 2:20, 21) Israel as a nation was God’s typical organization and in his favor and had his protection, but that nation fell away to the Devil and suffered destruction. Likewise “Christendom”, or “organized Christianity”, began with the avowed purpose of serving God, but its leaders have turned away from God and Christ and have joined hands with the Devil's organization and must suffer destruction at Armageddon.
SAFETY
33	Where is safety to be found? And who are they that find such place of certain safety? The destruction of the world in Noah's day by the flood foreshadowed the destruction of the present world at Armageddon. Because Noah devoted himself to Jehovah, maintained his integrity toward God and continued faithful, he was righteous in the sight of Jehovah, At
September 15, 1934
WATCHTOWER.
283
the direction of God Noah built the ark, which served as a place of safety and preservation of Noah and these associated with him. That foreshadowed that the only place of safety during the greatest tribulation of all time is to be found in Jehovah’s organization. Tho ark which Noah built at the command of God is therefore a picture of Jehovah’s organization, and symbolically says to all intelligent creatures: “Jehovah’s organization is the only place of safety.”
30	The flood brought great tribulation upon the world. Armageddon will bring the greatest tribulation. (Matt. 24:21, 22) In the tribulation of Armageddon the opposers of God will find no way of escape, hence no place of safety. (Jer. 25:33-35) The fact that they call themselves Christians or by the name of Christ and God will furnish them no place of safety. Since the days of Enos men have been hypocritically calling themselves by the name of God, all of which is a mockery. (Gen. 4: 26, margin) God cannot be mocked with impunity. (Gal. 6:7) All who oppose Jehovah’s witnesses in their giving testimony concerning the kingdom of God will be destroyed, and that definitely includes the “man of sin”, “the son of perdition.” The nephilim, being those who rebelled with Satan, shall be destroyed with Satan at the battle of the great day of God Almighty. (See Vindication, Book Two.) “The sons of God” who became disobedient and left God’s organization in the days of Noah have been imprisoned for a long time. They are yet alive, and it seems that their punishment may end approximately at Armageddon. Such of that company as turn-to righteousness may be saved and recovered. The “great multitude” class are those who consecrated themselves to do God’s will, were begotten of the spirit, and have since tried to uplift the world by remaining in the “churches”; and these arc held as prisoners by Satan’s organization. They will find no place of escape at Armageddon except through death. They are ‘appointed to die’ and, like Samson, those among them who stand steadfast in the Lord will pull down “organized Christianity” upon their heads and will die, but will be raised out of death and made servants to Jehovah’s capital organization.—Kev. 7:15.
TEMPLE COMPANY
40	The final show-down is at hand, when every creature must stand on the side of Jehovah God and his kingdom or on the opposing side. There is no middle ground. The temple company is in the most favored position and hence in the greatest danger, because more is required of them. They must abide faithfully in Jehovah’s organization, at all times having on and keeping on the “whole armor of God”, otherwise they will not be able to stand against the assaults of the enemy. The description of the armor of God shows that the temple company must have the truth and faithfully serve the truth by being wholly obedient to God’s great prophet, Christ Jesus. (Acts 3:23) They must be wholly and completely devoted to righteous
ness. They must be and remain at peace with each other and walk in unity and in peace. They must have absolute faith in God, make him their fear, and abide in his sanctuary regardless of what devils beset them and assault them. They must have an intelligent understanding of God’s purpose, and for that, reason must continue to feed upon the Word of truth; which Jehovah now reveals to them. They must at all times wield the “sword of the spirit, which is the word of God”. All this they must have and do now in order to maintain their integrity toward Jehovah. They must at all times be fair to each other and stand firmly together for the cause of righteousness.
41	Some who now believe themselves to be in the temple and who probably arc in that condition manifest a spirit that puts them in the gravest danger. Among other things, they manifest a desire to punish some of their brethren. They seek to find fault with their brethren and report them for the purpose of getting them into difficulties, having a desire to sec them fall. They fail to remember the unalterable rule which Jehovah has announced, to wit: “Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord.” Those who thus act as spiritual policemen for their brethren often find themselves in great distress and trouble, which is due to the fact that they neglect to abide by the Word of the Lord, which is: ‘See that you suffer not as a busybody in other men’s affairs.’ (1 Pet. 4:15) Jehovah’s unalterable rule, and which now applies specifically to tho temple company, is that they must “do justly”; which means that every one of the temple must do that which is right and fair, towards his brethren especially; “love mercy,” which means the very opposite of a desire to injure another or to inflict punishment upon another, but having a desire to help one in trouble who really seeks or desires help; “walk humbly with thy God,” which moans to be fully obedient to Jehovah, pursuing at all times a course wholly devoted to righteousness. These rules require one to be guided strictly by what is laid down in the Scriptures, and hence all must inform themselves. (Micah 6: 8) Be sure that you do not suffer for wrongdoing; and if you are suffering for doing right remember the admonition of the apostle in this connection: ‘It is better to suffer for well doing.’—1 Pet. 3:17.
JONADAB COMPANY
42	God’s witness Noah, the “preacher of righteousness”, foreshadowed the faithful remnant now on the earth. Those persons with Noah in the ark foreshadowed the Jonadab company now on the earth who associate themselves with God’s organization. These have the promise that, performing the conditions named, they may be hid in the day of Jehovah’s anger. (Zepli. 2:3) The conditions are that they attach themselves to the Lord’s organization, and they must remain there steadfastly serving God, working in harmony with Jehovah’s witnesses, and refusing to compromise with the world. Any attempt to remain in the organization
284
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y,
or “chariot” of the Lord and at the same time to support the wicked world, even with the unwise desire of lifting up the world, will meet with disaster. The paramount truth, therefore, revealed in connection with the spirit creatures that sinned, and which is for the benefit of those now living, is this: that Jehovah’s organization is the onljr place of safety, and one who once avails himself of that safety and then voluntarily leaves the same, is certain of destruction. Those who arc of the Jonadab company must continue to faithfully study God’s purposes as embraced in his Word; and hence the publication of the Lord’s Word is for their benefit. They must show their love for God by being diligent in keeping his commandments. For the benefit of the temple company, and also for the benefit of those who join themselves to God’s chariot, the Lord has now pulled back the curtains and permits his light to shine in the faces of those who have devoted themselves to him, and gives them a view of things that now must shortly come to pass, as well as the meaning of things that, have come to pass in the sixty centuries gone by. The truth that stands out and is made to appear in the vision as of paramount importance to all others is this: Jehovah, the Almighty God, is the Giver of life, and he will preserve those who love and obey him and who remain steadfastly faithful to his organization, at all times manifesting an unfaltering and unbreakable love for Jehovah. The crucial test upon all intelligent creation is here. Let all such take warning and beware. “Jehovah is in his holy temple: let all the earth keep silence before him.” —Hab. 2: 20, A.B.V.
43	Satan and his wicked host will continue to assault all who take their stand on the side of the Lord. This requires resistance on the part of Jehovah's anointed. It furnishes an opportunity for them to prove their loyalty and maintain their integrity. As an illustration: God permitted Satan to attack Job and bring upon him great affliction, but said to Satan: ‘Do not take his life.’ (Job 2:G) Jehovah will not permit Satan to destroy the right to life of any of his anointed who remain faithful to him. They must die, of course; but, being faithful unto death, they shall receive the crown of life. The Devil and the wicked angels likewise assaulted Jesus and continued to do so for three and one-half years. They succeeded in causing his death, but God raised him out of death and thus demonstrated his supreme power and made manifest his reward to those who are faithful. The Jonadab company will be assaulted by Satan and his wicked agents and allies. If they stand firm and remain faithful and true to God and his organization, they will be preserved. These truths are now of greatest importance. They were written aforetime for the comfort and aid of the remnant and for those that are associated with the remnant. It behooves each one of Jehovah’s witnesses to aid others to understand these truths who have a desire to know and to serve Jehovah God.
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
* 1. Jehovah sent Jesus to earth for what purpose! How was that purpose accomplished!
U 2. Who are those spirits in prison, to whom Jesus preached! When were they disobedient, and of what did thc-ir wrongdoing consist! Show that God gave them-notice of impending judgment. What is meant by the statement that “the world that then was . . . perished’’!
H 3,4. With illustrations of God’s procedure under other like circumstances, explain who imprisoned those spirits, and how this was done.
H 5,(1. Where and how did Jesus preach to those spirits! What was the purpose thereof concerning them!
1 7-9. With scriptures, point out the consistent course of action for the professed Christian.
K 10,11. Describe .lesus’ course of action, and account for his being subjected to suffering. How was this related to his preaching to the spirits in prison!
U 12,13. Explain how Jesus “went’’ and preached to the spirits. What inference concerning those spirits may reasonably be drawn from the fact of Jesus' preaching to them ?
14. Quote scriptures indicating the judgment awaiting Satan and those spirit creatures with him, and when execution of such judgment is due.
7 15-18. Referring to 2 Peter 2:4: Identify the angels here mentioned. When did God do what is here recorded, and how, and why? Compare this with what Jesus says concealing those who once were in line for the kingdom but have been unfaithful. Identify also the principalities, powers, etc., mentioned by Haul (Eph. (i: 12).
“i 19,20. Show that the foregoing conclusion is consistent with . the statement by Jude (verse <i). Explain how the piesmit testimony of Jehovah’s witnesses is related to the. judgment of Satan and his wicked angels and the execution thereof.
U 21-23. Identify the enemies with which Jehovah’s witnesses nio engaged in conflict, and describe the warfare. Why does that wicked crowd make war on these witnesses, and what purpose does this serve!
K 24. In view of the malice and power of the enemy, account for the courage and the security of those now proclaiming the message of truth.
K 25. Drove the identity and purpose of the spirits that communicate with human creatines through mediums, etc., and that such agents of communication, as well as the men and Women who seek to use such agency, are acting contrary to God's law.
26,27. With illustration, show the relationship between rebellion and witchcraft, and the outcome of stubbornness.
f 28-31. What evidence is found in the reei/rds by Matthew and Murk that it was not to those wicked ones that J-sns preached, and that they were then practicing their wickedness and feared that Jesus had come to execute Jehovah’s judgment against them!
32,33. Show that, particularly in religions doctrines and practices, since Noah’s day down to and in modern tinns Satan and his wicked angels have deceived and kepi in ignorance millions of well-meaning people. Account for the great turning to spiritism and spirit mediums throughout the earth at the present time.
34. What truth concerning these wicked spirits stands out and is of paramount importance to all who wish to have and to hold the favor of Jehovah God’ Why?
f' 35-37. With illustrations of the result of disobedience to God, point out the importance now of careful consideration of these examples of indifference, carelessness, and willful violation of God’s law.
H 38, 39. Explain how God’s procedure in Noah’s day foreshadowed his provision of a place of safety for tlm obedient, and certain adverse dealing with the disobedient, at Armageddon.
40. To whom is the admonition of Ephesians 6: 13 (with context) addressed, and what does it mean?
5 41. Show whether all who believe themselves to be iu the temple are carefully observing God’s expressed rules for the temple class.
$ 42. Whom did Noah and those with him foreshadow! How!
September 15, 1934
WATCHTOWER.
285
What, then, is the paramount truth revealed in connection with the spirit creatures that sinned, and what was the purpose of the record thereof?
If 43. Show from the Scriptures what may be expected from the
enemy, now and later, by all who take their stand on the side of the Lord. What, then, is now the responsibility and privilege of Jehovah’s witnesses and all others to whom Jehovah's purposes are being revealed!
THE BODY OF THE CHRIST
AS THE divine High Priest of the Melchizedck order Christ Jesus was raised from the dead and ascended into heaven, and there he appeared in the presence of Jehovah God and presented tile value of his human sacrifice as an offering for sin. (Heb. 9: 24-26) His sacrifice was acceptable to Jehovah, and was accepted; and the acceptance was made manifest by God’s pouring out of the holy spirit and by the cloven tongues of fire that rested upon his disciples at Pentecost, the fiftieth day after Jesus’ resurrection. (Acts 2:1-4) Thus Jehovah God opened the way for life and immortality through Jesus Christ, his beloved One.—2 Tim. 1:10.
The Scriptural proof establishes, therefore, the fact that the Logos (or Word of God), Jesus, and Christ Jesus, are one and the same person. That be did not die when he came to earth to be born as a man, but that his life was transferred from heaven to earth, is proved by his words to the Jews, namely: “Before Abraham was, I am.” (John 8:58) Abraham lived two thousand years before Christ Jesus was born on earth. Hence the Lord’s words imply a continuous existence. To die means to go out of existence. Jesus’ words, therefore, must be construed to mean that from the time of the beginning of creation until the moment he spoke those words he had existed and had the right to exist. He died upon the tree as a man and must, as a mun, for ever remain dead, but the right of his life as a man he gives for the life of the world. This is proved by his words: “I have power to lay it [my life] down, and I have power to take [receive] it a gain. This commandment have I received from my Father.” —John 10: IS; 6: 51.
Christ Jesus alone is sufficient to execute Jehovah’s purpose. He alone provides the ransom price for mankind. It hap pleased Jehovah God, however, in the exercise of his loving-kindness, to select others to he members of that company which the Scriptures call the “body” of Christ and therefore to be a part of The Christ, Jesus being the Head thereof. In doing this God does not select angels to be a part of The Christ, but he selects men and women who have the faith like unto that of Abraham, “the friend of God.” (Heb. 2:16, 17) God visits the nations to take out from them a people for his name. (Acts 15:14) These are made acceptable unto God through Christ Jesus, and in no other way. God did not predestinate the individuals who will make up the body of Christ, but he did predestinate that there should be a number selected from amongst men to make up that body. Concerning this it is written:
“Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ: according as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love: having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will. To the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he hath made us accepted in the beloved: in whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace; wherein he hath abounded toward us in all wisdom and prudence; having made known unto us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure which he hath purposed in himself.”—Eph. 1: 3-9.
The nation of Israel was once the chosen people of God. They did not constitute God’s new creation, but that nation foreshadowed the new creation, which creation is God’s people selected and elected for a purpose. (Gal. 6:15; 2 Cor. 5:17) Israel after the flesh was the moving picture which was provided by Jehovah and which foreshadowed the real thing, which real thing is, to wit, spiritual Israel, the new creation. Jacob, whose name was changed to Israel, was the beginning of the Israelites after the flesh. Jacob’s natural offspring were born under the terms of The law covenant which Jehovah confirmed with them at Mount Sinai in Arabia. The new creation is spiritual Israel begotten and brought forth as “a people for his name” under the terms of the new covenant.
The Israelites entered into a covenant with Jehovah, by and through the prophet Moses as their mediator or go-between. By agreeing to the terms of the covenant they bound themselves to be obedient to God’s will. That covenant confirmed at Sinai served as a schoolmaster to safeguard and lead obedient ones of the Israelites until God’s due time to begin the m>w creation, which is The Christ. (GaL 3: 24) The nation as a whole failed to keep the terms of the covenant and lost everything that that covenant promised. A small remnant of that people, however, did accept Christ as the great Redeemer and Deliverer; and by the grace of God such became a paid of the new creation.—Rom. 11:5.
To natural Israel God said at Mount Sinai: “Now therefore, if ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people: for all the earth is mine. And ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy na
286
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn', N. Y.
tion. These are the words which thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel.”—Ex. 19: 5, 6.
To spiritual Israel, foreshadowed by natural Israel, that is to say, to those who have accepted Christ as their Redeemer and have come into Christ, the Lord God says through his appointed witness: ‘‘But you arc a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for a purpose.” (1 Pet. 2: 9, Diag.) This scripture and the one just previously quoted prove conclusively that Israel after the flesh was the picture foreshadowing Israel after the spirit, which is the reality; and that the reality is God’s new creation.
The new creation, which is spiritual Israel, is begun and completed by the terms of a covenant. Jesus the Head thereof made a covenant with Jehovah at the Jordan liver to do his Father's will. That covenant entailed upon Jesus the sacrificing of himself as a man. There is no evidence that he knew at the time he made the covenant that he was to die. lie spent forty days and nights in the mountain, studying God’s purpose and communicating with Jehovah after his mind had been illuminated by the holy spirit, which descended upon him in the form of a dove. Then he would know, and then and thereafter he intelligently and faithfully carried out his covenant.
The members of his body must follow in the same way as Jesus went. (1 Pet. 2:21) All who become members of the new creation must do so by and through a covenant of sacrifice as the initial stop. (Ps. 50: 5) A covenant is a solemn agreement to do or not to do a certain thing. When the disciples of Jesus believed he was the Messiah or Christ, and became his followers, they thereby agreed to do the will of God. When they accepted Jesus as the Messiah, that was the beginning of their covenant. That marked their consecration to God. They could not be justified until the ransom sacrifice of Jesus was presented in heaven as a sin-offering and there accepted. The acceptance was manifested at Pentecost, and then and there these disciples were anointed as justified and spirit-begotten sons of God who were called and accepted to be God’s witnesses on earth.
The new creation is a select or elect company who are taken out from amongst men and then adopted into the family of God through Christ. God’s manner of selecting and forming the new creation is important. His Word tells in what manner he selects and develops the members thereof. This information discloses how one becomes a real Christian.
Since all the human race is born in sin and no man who is a sinner can approach God, what can a sinner do to become a Christian and thereby a member of the new creation? The Scriptures declaring that life is a gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord, it is manifest then that knowledge of the gift and of how it is given is the first essential. Man must learn first, cither by being informed by someone or by reading from the Word of God, that he is a sinner, that he needs help, and that he is unable to help himself. See
ing that the course of mankind is unrighteous he must have a desire for righteousness. He learns that Jehovah is God, and believes that fact. This constitutes faith in God, without which it is impossible for him to please God. (Ilcb. 11:6) He then learns that Jesus Christ is the beloved Son of God, -whose life was given as a ransom for mankind.
His fear of God is the beginning of -wisdom. (Ps. Ill: 10) That means that he is now beginning to apply his knowledge in harmony with God’s will, and this he docs when he begins to fear Jehovah. He has a desire to know more about Jesus and why he died and was raised from the dead. By this knowledge ami desire God draws him to Jesus. This is in harmony with the statement made by Jesus, namely: ‘‘No man can come to me, except the Father which hath sent me draw him.” (John 6:44) It is thus seen that an honest and righteous desire to live, and to live in harmony with the Creator, is one of the first essentials for one to become a Christian.
It is reasonable to conclude that God so surrounds such a one with circumstances that would attract him to the Lord Jesus, and thereby draw him to Jesus. Proof of this is found in the experience of Cornelius, the Roman centurion who became the first Gentile convert to Christianity. He knew nothing of God’s purpose to save through Jesus Christ, but he did have faith in and reverence for Jehovah. He had an honest and righteous desire to be in harmony with God. He prayed to God, and his prayer ascended unto God as a memorial. (Acts 10:1-48) In due time Jehovah brought to his attention the knowledge of his way to life, by sending the apostle Peter to him to tell him.
So it often occurs when one has an honest desire to know the Lord that someone comes his way and places in his hand a book, or tells him something of God's gracious provision for salvation. When he receives this knowledge into a good and honest heart he kains that God’s way for man to return to him and get life everlasting is through Jesus Christ. The testimony of Jesus is: ‘‘I am the way, and the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me.”—John 14:6.	’
Up to this point the man has been going in the way of sinners. His mind has been devoted to things selfish. Having a desire for life, and now seeking the way to life, he repents. Repentance means a change of mind. By the knowledge thus obtained he 1ms changed his mind, and desires to know God’s way to life. In this inquiring attitude the words of Jesus now’ apply to him: ‘‘If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.”—Matt. 16:24.
To obey this injunction from Christ Jesus means to make a consecration. One who consecrates himself to God thereby agrees to do God’s will. The man, now believing that he is a sinner and that Christ Jesus is his Redeemer, and that the way back to Jehovah
September 15, 1934
/Jfie WATCHTOWER,
287
and to life is through Christ Jesus, says in substance if not in terms: ‘I am determined to do God’s will’; and then solemnly and reverentially in his mind or by his lips he says to Jehovah: ‘Trusting in thee and in thy Word, and believing in the precious blood of Christ, I do now agree to do thy holy will.’ This constitutes a denial of self; this is his consecration; and since it is his agreement to do the will of God it is man’s part of his covenant with God.
It may now be properly said that the man is converted. To be converted means to change one’s course of action. He changes his course of action by turning
away from following selfish things and by agreeing to follow and by following the Lord Jesus Christ. The Lord Jesus now stands sponsor for the one thus consecrating, because of his faith; and as man's mediator or advocate presents him to Jehovah. If the man’s justification by Jehovah follows, and his acceptance for sacrifice, immediately thereafter his begetting by the holy spirit as a son of God occurs. In due time the kingdom call or invitation is sent to him, and if he responds thereto and qualifies God accepts him and anoints him with his spirit, and thus he becomes a Christian and a member of the body of Christ.
LETTERS
GIVE GOD THE GLORY
Dear Brother Rutherford:
Rejoicing in the full and clear light your Scriptural and reasonable explanation of the “covenants” and “restoration of all things” has brought us, we give God the glory thlough our present Lord and King Christ Jesus. We are not unmindful of your commission and the great responsibility laid on you as one of Jehovah’s witnesses in the particular field of serving convenient food, and daily, if not hourly, bear you’up in our prayers to God, in thanks for the great help he has supplied and for the faithful and loving devotion on your part in pointing out these things in the Word of God. To him lie ail tho glory, and may the. witness work increase until he shall vindicate his own name once and for all.
Lovingly yours,
A. L. Norfleet, New Hampshire.
GREAT PRIVILEGE TO SHARE IN VINDICATION
Peak Brother Ruthekford:
The El Paso division of Jehovah’s witnesses voted unanimously to express to you their appreciation of the truth coming to them through Jehovah’s appointed channel, The U’titch-tower. We have long been convinced that The Watch tower is the mouthpiece of Jehovah, and now realize that the Lord Jesus, from the temple, is providing the truths published therein.
The-ninny truths which have come to us in recent Towers have been a great source of encouragement to us, and we are determined to work in the Lord’s vineyard as long as he commands us to do so. Jehovah’s lightnings reveal that spiritual Israel is in the new covenant and that it is our great privilege to have a share in tl.e vindication of Jehovah’s name. This knowledge gives us much joy.
Believing that service in the form of witnessing from door to door is the paramount duty of the followers of Christ today, this company has stiiven to faithfully perform such work in this locality. As Jehu drove his chariot furiously while on his mission to destroy Jezebel, so we too have, by the Loid’s grace, been keeping the wheels of our witness work turning as rapidly as possible. .So successful have we been in this that the end of the seventh month of our fiscal year finds us over the yearly quota, set for us by one of the Society’s regional service directors, in placements of books and booklets and in the number of testimonies given. Our quota for hours in the service has also been reached at the present writing. We give thanks to Jehovah, who giveth the increase, and by obeying him we have proved that “the joy of the Lord is |our] strength”.	.
We face with confidence the approach of Armageddon, because our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from Satan.
Our prayers for you, dear brother Rutherford, are that the all-powerful Jehovah may continue to protect and guide you in your work of supervising the activities of those in God’s visible organization.
With Christian love, we are
El Paso division of Jehovah’s witnesses.
THOUSANDS GATHERED TO HEAR MESSAGE
Deaf. Brother Rutherford:
1 deem it a pleasuie to inform you of the joys of service during the 24 days spent on the road.
The loud-speaker was at its best for all but the last three lectures. As it covers a radius of nearly two mile", it is gratifying to Sec how thousands are gathered in a short space to hear the message. Demand for lectures increases daily; so them is no room for slacking.
We received the machine from Havana, but, although we had a dillicult task to clear same from the customs, through lack of piopcr invoice, vve nevertheless cousidetcd it the Lord’s provision that another machine is nil’orded us. We hope to leave no stone unturned where delivering the testimony is concerned; for the time is ripe for it, and vve have the equipment with which to proceed. We continue to pray for you. Accept greetings from the brethren in Jamaica.
With best wishes,
Yours in the King’s service,
P. H. Davidson, Jamaica Tlroaeh.
JEHOVAH BOUNTIFULLY FEEDING THE REMNANT
Dear Brothfi; UniiEitrimo:
Greetings in Zion!
Received the poitable phonograph yesterday, and how thankful we are to Jehovah God for this another means of witnessing to his great and holy mime! Words cannot be found to expte-s our appreciation for this machine. We hope to use it at every opportunity we have in singing forth his praises. We thank you, dear brother, and may the dear Lord continue to use you to his honor and glory'.
We went out this morning in the service anti I found quite a bunch at one house and put on No. I of the Seiie-, and as 1 was leaving the house the man from the next door stopped me and said: “Stop up at the church anil demmwtrate what you have there; we have a large crowd up there and you can see them all together.” We thanked him, and asked when his Sunday school would be over. So vve were there on time to put on a couple more lectures for the whole Sunday school, L'io in all. All praise to Jehovah above, from whom all bh-.-aings How. I feel that has well paid for the machine; for these were a bunch of Holiness people who would not listen to a word I tell them at their doors, and to think they sat there and listened to every' word you told them, and said, “That is gtand!” We hope to go back there again if the Devil doesn't get busy now. Today vve put on six lectures with small machine, and total attendance DiO.
We wish to Jliank our heavenly Father for using you, dear brother, in bringing to light so many wonderful things about the covenants, which we have need of at this time. We are looking forward to the piece on the Hebrew chthhen in The Watchtower soon, which you gave at the Toronto convention. Jehovah God is bountifully feeding the remnant from his table nojv; and, oh, to be able to keep in the light at this time!
With much Christian love, yours in his service,
Mr. and Mrs.’ John E. Miller, Virginia.
288
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N.Y.
RESOLUTION
Dear Brother Rutherford:
At the close, yesterday, of “The Nations’ Hope” Testimony Period the following resolution was adopted enthusiastically:
“We, the Jonadabs, of the Junior witness company of Jehovah’s witnesses of Fresno, California, do hereby declare our allegiance and devotion to Jehovah God and his glorious kingdom and our thankfulness to Jehovah and his earthly organization for the privilege of service in joyfully declaring the name of Jehovah and his kingdom to the people of “Christendom”. The Los Angeles resolution is unanimously and enthusiastically adopted by us, to wit:
“ ‘Resolved, That we do now take our stand on the side of Jehovah God and his kingdom; and that we will obey, servo and worship Jehovah God and his beloved Son, Christ Jesus, who is the rightful ruler of the world, and we will thus participate in the vindication of Jehovah’s name.’ ”
Nearly 500 Recovery were placed by the juniors during the testimony period, and thousands of testimonies given.
The neighbor children are joining in with us and were out almost every day of the campaign. One of the boys told a woman, “These books show how Jehovah is giving the people their last chance.” She said, “Then it’s a pass through Armageddon,” and he replied, “So far as I’m concerned it’s a nickel a pass. ’ ’
rTM LECTURES BREAKING DOWN PREJUDICE
Dear Brother Rutherford:
We received phonographs and records and wish to thank you for same. Want to assure you we will do our best to follow instructions and use them only to Jehovah’s honor.
Would also express our thanks for the portable transcription machine. We are very grateful for it. The lectures by 1’TM
have broken down much prejudice and caused many people to come to our camp for literature. The people are waiting at their homes for the literature after hearing the lectures, and many pieces are placed.
We held a second lecture at the home of an old man (87) last night, who has bitterly fought “Itussellism” for years. After hearing “World Control” he said: “That beats all preaching I’ve ever heard. I am afraid I’ve been wrong in so bitterly opposing this and that I’ve been fighting the truth.”
We can notice loss of interest in clergy and churches where these lectures arc hold.
With thanks to Jehovah for this added equipment for fighting Satan, we are
Yours in Jehovah’s service,
Byron and Nettie Tritt, Pioneers.
JEHOVAH’S LOVING-KINDNESS MANIFESTED
Dear Brother Rutherford:
The Hallowell (Maine) company of Jehovah’s witnesses are unanimous in their appreciation and gratitude to Jehovah for the wonderful articles, which we have just finished studying, on “His Covenants”.
Jehovah’s goodness and loving-kindness toward his people have been manifested in a most marked degree as he has given them the food that is convenient for them, to prepare them for the great day when his name will be completely vindicated and victory over Satan is fully established. '
Be assured that we are in heart harmony with this great organization of the Lord’s. May. the heavenly Father bless and strengthen you that you may be able to direct, aid and comfort his church, is the prayer of the Hallowell company of Jehovah ’s witnesses.
SERVICE APPOINTMENTS
T. E. BANKS
J. C. RAINBOW
Ixmlaville, Ky..........Oct.	2, 3
Cincinnati, (Hito ........ ”	4,5
Dayton. Ohio ............. ”	6, 7
Coluinbus, Ohio .......... "	9,10
I'ittsliiirgh, l'a....... ”	11, 12
Hillsville. I'll.......... ”	13,14
Steubenville, Ohio ....... ”	10,17
Akron, Ohio ..........Oct.	18.19
Cleveland. Ohio ........ "	20.21
Toledo, Ohio ........... ”	23,21
Detroit. Mich........... ”	25,20
Buffalo, N. Y........... ”	27, 28
Boston, Mass............ ”	30, 31
Hartford, Conn..........Nov. 1,2
Rochelle, III..........Oct.	9
Moline. Ill............. "	10,11
Sheffield, 11!.......... ”	12
LaSalle, 111............ ”	13
Peru, III............... ”	1 t
Knoxville, 111.......... "	Iff,	17
Canton, Ill............. ”	18
Peoria, Ill........... Oct.	19. 20
Delavan, 111........... "	21
Atlanta, Ml............ ”	23
Bloomington,	III..... ”	21,25
Chnmitaiixn. til....... ”	20,27
Sidnev, 111............ ’’	28
Danville, III........... ”	30,31
G. H. DRAPER
W. J. THORN
Pratt, Kans...........Oct.	4
Arlington, Kans. ------ ”	5
Hutchinson, Kans....... ”	6, 7
McPherson. Kans........ "	9
Holyrood, Kans......... ”	10
Russell, Kans.......... ’•	11
Abilene, Kans.......... ”	12-14
Jamestown, Kans........ ”	10
Is-norn, Kuns.......... ”	17
Achilles, Kans......... ”	18
Goudland, Kans		.. Oct.	19
Ransom. Kans		... "	20
I bulge City, Kuns		... ”	21
Garden City, Kans. Plains, Kans		... "	23
	.. ”	24
Rolla, Kans		... ” 25	2G
Alva, Okla			27
Mooreland, Okla		... ”	28
Grand, Okla		... ”	30
Texola, Okla		... ”	31
Attleboro, Mass......Oct.
Westerly, It. I....... ”
Mystic. Conn.......... ”
Norwich, Conn......... ”
Chester, Conn......... ”
Mciiden. Conn......... ”
Cromwell, Conn........ ”
New Britain, Conn..... ”
Hartford, Conn....... ’’
Torrington, Conn...... ”
2,3 4 5 0
7 8
10 11
12-14 16
Waterbury, Conn. ...Ort.	17
I'nion City, Conn..... ”	18
Derby. Conn............ ”	HI
Now Haven. Conn........ ”	20,21
Orange, Conn........... ”	23
Milford, Conn.......... ”	21
Bridgeport, Conn....... ”	25, 2‘1
Dorion, Conn........... ”	27, 28
Bethel. Conn........... ”	30
P't Chester, N.Y...Oct. 31,	Nov. 1
A. IL MACMILLAN
Canton, Ohio ......
Steubenville, Ohio Connellsville, Pa. . Youngstown, Ohio Warren, Ohio ......
Elmira, N. Y.......
Buffalo, N. Y'.....
Niagara Falls, N.Y. .. Oct. 18, 19
Rochester. N. Y....... ”	20, 21
Auburn, N. Y.......... ”	23. 21
Syracuse, N. Y........ ”	25, 20
Watertown, N. Y....... ”	27, 28
Utica, N.Y............ ”	30.31
Johnstown, N. Y...Nov. 1. 2
S. H. TOUTJIAN
Ft. Lauderdale, Fla.	..Oct.	3
Miami. Fla		... ”	4, 5
Key West. Fla		... ”	7, K
Fort Mvprs. Fla		... ”	10
Arcadia, Flu		... ”	11, 12
Sebring, Flu		... ”	13
Avon Park, ria		... ”	14
Wauchula, Fla		... ”	10
Bradenton, Fla.....Oct. 17.18
St. Petersburg, Fla.... ”	19,20
Tampa, Fla............. "	21,22
Lakeland. Fin.......... ”	21.25
Tarpon Springs, Fla.	. ”	20
Ocala, Fla............. ”	27
Bunnell. Fla............”	28
Jacksonville, Fla...... ”	30. 31
G. Y. M’CORMICK
Modesto, Calif		....Oct. 2,3	Bakersfield, Calif. ..	...Oct.	Id	J. c.		WATT	
Oakdale, Calif		..... M	4	Arvin, Calif			17	Port Huron. Mich.	...Oct.	2,3	Lansing, Mich	 Flint, Mich		....Oct. 19, 20
Turlock, Calif, 			 °	5	Taft. Calif		.... ”	IS				
Atwater, Calif			 ”	6	r.os Angeles. Calif.	.... ” 19	21	Roche-ter. Midi. ...	.... ”	4			 " 21, 22
Fresno, Calif				 ”	7, 8.	Phoenix, Ariz		... ” 23,	21	Detroit, Midi		.... ”	5-l<>	Fosters, Mich. .....		 ”	24
Lemoore, Calif. ....		 ”	10	Prescott, Ariz			2d	Roval Oak. Mich. ...	.... ” 11, 12	Saginaw, Midi			 ” 25, 2li
Coalinga, Calif. ....		"	11	Marana, Ariz			2.S	BellexHie, Mich		.... *'	13	Rar City, Mich. ..		 ” 27. 2S
Tulare, Calif			 ” 12, 13	Tucson, Ariz		... " 30,	31	Ann Arbor. Mich,...	.... ’’ 14, 15	Midland. Mich			 ” 30, 31
PorUrviRe, Calif. ..	..... ”	14	Somerton, Ariz		...Nov.	1	Jackson. Mich		.... " 17,18	Pinconning, Mich.	...Nov.	1
STie WATCHTOWER.
Published Semi-Monthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N. Y., U. S. A. officers
J. F. Rutherford President W. E. Van Amburgh Secretary "And all thy children shall he taught of Jehovah; and great shall he the peace of thy children.” ~ Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of Ins cieation and his active agent in. the creation of all things; that the Logos is now tho Lord Je-’us Christ in. glory, clothed with rill power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man. wilfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and tho man Jesus suffered death in order to produce the ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with till power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ, Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is tho rightful King of tho world; that tho anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus arc children of Zion, members of Jehovah's organization, and aro bis witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his puiposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear tho fruits of tho kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and tho Lord Jesus Christ hns been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to tho establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of tho peoples of earth can como only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ which has now begun; that tho Lord's next great act is tho destruction of Satan’s organization and tho establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under tho kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall bo restored and live on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
rpms journal is published for the purpose of enabling I the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically’ designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and supplies'other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in tho Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to tho Biblo as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for tho kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his Beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of tbs Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns aro not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, ?1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, am> South Africa, 7s. American remittances should Lo made by Express or Postal Money Order, or by Bank Draft. Ci'iiadian, Briti.-h, South African anil Australasian remittances should bo made direct to the respective branch oltices. Remittances from countries other than tho.-.o men-tinned may be made to tho Brooklyn office, but by Jiitcrnalional Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British « ...............31	Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England
Canadian .............40	Irwin Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Australasian. . . 7 Beresford Bond, Strathiield, N. S. V/., Airtrnlia South African .... Boston lletrc. Capo Town, South Africa
Please address the Society In every case.'
(Translations of this journal appear in several lanyuayes.)
All sincere students of tho Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay tho subscription prico way have The Watchtower free upon written application to tho publishers, made once emh year, stating tho reason for so requesting it. Wo are plod to thus nid Ilie nceilj’, but 1ho written application once each year is required by tho postal regulations. Xotice to Subscribers: Aiknowledemont of a new or a renewal sub-S’riptlnn will Iio sent only vvl:»n rc<|.if- tod. Chanao of addrejs, when requested, may be o.vpccie,I to apnu.ir on address label witbin one month. .V renewal blank Carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with tho journal one month beiore tho subscript ion expire;. Entered as Second Class Mail Matter at Brooklyn, A’. F., Poslofftec.
Act of .March 3. ISIS.
THE KINGDOM PRAISE PERIOD
This nine-day service period, September 29 to October 7 inclusive, begins the new service year of 1934-1935. It will be earth-wide in its scope, and it is expected that more lands where some of Jehovah’s witnesses or Jonadabs are located will receive a witness during this period than during any previous like period. In the English-speaking countries Jehovah’s witnesses and the Jonadabs will specialize on placing the new booklet, Righteous Ruler. In countries ot another language the branch office in charge will duly announce the booklet to bo distributed there. And, important I don’t forget reporting your work for the period, promptly at the close thereof, to the respective office having supervision over the witness in your part of the field.
HAS YOUR SUBSCRIPTION EXPIRED?
For the benefit of subscribers, and for their convenience, a renewal blank is sent with this journal one month (on foreign subscriptions two months) before the subscription is due to expire. Machinery used to print subscriber 's address on label or wrapper is so constructed that the plate bearing undress is automatically dropped from the list at expiration; thus discontinuance of an expiration is accomplished mechanically in every instance.
PUBLIC LECTURES BY TRANSCRIPTION
Jehovah’s blessing has been markedly upon the use of the portable transcription machine. He has plainly manifested that this machine meets the need of the hour, when the enemy, under Gog, is seeking to curtail tho uio of the radio By God's anointed and when the people’s ears are eager tv hear, not man’s message, but God’s. The transcription machine lias increased the power of Jehovah’s witnesses afield to preach His tiuth manyfold, so that the desire for the literature is stimulated and study classes of many interested hearers are being formed. Besides more than 600 suen machines in the United States alone, great numbers are now being effectively used in countries near and afar. For more information, write the Society.
NOTICE OF ANNUAL MEETING
Pursuant to the provision of law and the charter of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, notice is hen by given that the annual business meeting of the said Society will lie held at Pittsburgh, North Side (formerly Allegheny), Pennsylvania, at 10 o’clock a.m., Wednesday, October 31, 1931, at which the usual annual business will be transacted.
Vol. LV	October 1, 1934	No. 19
THE CRUCIBLE
“If it be so, our God, whom we serve, is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace; and he ivill deliver us out of thine hand, 0 king. But if not, be it known unto thee, 0 king, that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up.’’—Dan. 3:17,18.
PART 1
JEHOVAH permitted Daniel and other faithful men to be carried away captive to Babylon for the purpose of there giving a testimony to the name of the Most High and looking forward to the vindication of his name. The terms of the controversy raised by Satan’s challenge would necessarily require such faithful witnesses to be subjected to very severe trials and that while passing through such trials those witnesses must have and exhibit full faith and confidence in God. Knowing that whatsoever things were written in the divine record aforetime were, there recorded and preserved for the comfort and assurance of the remnant now on earth, with confidence we examine the divine record made concerning the three Hebrew children in the crucible, and we may expect to find therein comfort and assurance, that those who in this day are wholly devoted to God may have hope.
2	Daniel, by the grace of Jehovah, had interpreted Nebuchadnezzar’s forgotten dream, and which interpretation now made known to the remnant discloses to them what constitutes Satan’s invisible organization, as well as his visible, and by what means Jehovah will destroy that wicked organization. (Dan. 2:19-45; see The Watchtower, 1930, pages 227-233, 243-248) Nebuchadnezzar, after receiving the interpretation of his dream, fell upon his face and worshiped Daniel, thus foreshadowing the Greater Daniel, Christ Jesus, interpreting the purpose of Jehovah, and the worship of him by those who are devoted to God and to Christ Jesus.
3	Time and again in the Scriptures it is written, “And they shall know that I am Jehovah.” The Devil had defamed Jehovah’s name, but now God had made the Devil’s representative see some light: “The king answered unto Daniel, and said, Of a truth it is, that your God is a God of gods, and a Lord of kings, and a revealer of secrets, seeing thou couldest reveal this secret.” (Dan. 2:47) That caused Nebuchadnezzar to acknowledge that Jehovah is God. It was the beginning of the vindication of Jehovah’s name, which Babylon had defamed by destroying Jerusalem. At this point Daniel is used to picture
Jesus Christ at the time he is sent forth to “judge and make war”. The name “Daniel” means “God’s judge”; which high position is filled by Christ Jesus. (John 5:22) This record, together with what follows in Daniel the third chapter, shows that Ibis prophecy applies to the “day of Jehovah”, in which daj’ his holy name must be vindicated. The World War and attending conditions marked the beginning of the fulfilment of the great prophecy uttered by Jesus in Matthew twenty-four. The fulfilment of that prophecy shows that the time had arrived for the ‘Stone cut out of the mountain without hands’, described in Daniel’s prophecy, to move into action against Satan’s organization, which in Daniel’s prophecy was pictured by the dreadful image. What King Nebuchadnezzar said to Daniel in acknowledgment of tnc supremacy of Jehovah was thus proved true by what came to pass in 1914 and thereafter. During the time from 1914 to 1918 there was a measure of admission by the Devil’s organization that the same is true. Nebuchadnezzar ‘made Daniel a great man and ruler in Babylon and placed him over the wise men of Babylon’. (Dan. 2:48) Such in a measure foreshadowed the coming exaltation of Christ Jesus at the time God enthrones him and when Jesus takes Satan and casts him out of heaven.—Ps. 2: 6-9; Kev. 12:1-9.
‘Daniel was mindful of his brethren who had been carried away captive with him, and he then and there, made request in their behalf: “Then Daniel requested of the king, and he set Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego over the affairs of the province of Babylon: but Daniel sat in the gate of the king.” (Dan. 2:49) This finds a parallel in the present time when Jesus Christ at the. temple gathers to himself his faithful ones and shares the honor and privilege of the kingdom with them. In harmony with the will of God Christ Jesus gathers these faithful ones into the temple, clothes them with the garments of salvation and covers them with the robe of righteousness, and invites them into his joy, which is the vindication of Jehovah’s name. To them is then committed the testimony of Jesus Christ.
m
292
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
3	It appears that Daniel’s three friends, Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-nego represented the remnant who are Jehovah’s witnesses, for the reasons following: Their Hebrew names were Ilananiah, Mishaei, and Azariah. (Dan. 1:6) “The prince of the eunuchs gave [them] names” according to the Babylonian tongue. To Ilananiah he gave the name Shadrach; to Mishaei, the name of Meshach ; and to Azariah, the name of Abed-nego. (Dan. 1:7) The Babylonian name “Shadrach” means “decree of the moon god”. The Hebrew name “Ilananiah” means “whom Jehovah has graciously given” or “Jehovah hath been gracious” or “Jehovah has favored”. “Meshach” means “guest of the king”, or “ram”, the name of the sun god. Uis Hebrew name “Mishaei” means “who is like God”, The Babylonian name “Abed-nego” means “servant of Nogo” (that is, of Nebo, the god Mercury). His Hebrew name “Azariah” means “helped by Jehovah”, The Babylonian names given to these three faithful Hebrew persons evidently were names of some of the nephilim who had for a long while operated with Satan in ruling the world. It would be like Satan to want to perpetuate the names of these under-ofiicers in bis organization amongst men on the earth. These three faithful Hebrew men were “children of Judah”, or Judeans. (Dan. 1:6) They had connection with the royal family of David, since it is recorded they were “of the king's seed, and of the [other] princes”. (Dan. 1:3) This strongly supports the conclusion that those three faithful men represented God's remnant now on earth who as the sons of God have been invited into and taken into the covenant for the kingdom and are companions of Jesus Christ, the Greater Daniel, and whom the Devil seeks to entrap and destroy.— Dan. 2:17,18.
“Doubtless these three faithful Hebrews had rendered assistance to Daniel in connection with the dream of Nebuchadnezzar and for that reason Daniel made request of Nebuchadnezzar to grant to these three brethren of his some place in his kingdom. They were in the class of the “wise men”, and therefore had been in danger of losing their lives, together with Daniel, and their prayers had been to Jehovah that he would manifest his favor in giving wisdom and power to Daniel to the vindication of His name. This furnished the occasion for Daniel to be a witness for Jehovah before the king of Babylon and therefore to tell the day of the vengeance of our God. and also the good news of the setting up of Jehovah’s kingdom through The Stone, Christ Jesus. (Dan. 2:27-30) The three Hebrews above mentioned, at the request of Daniel, were given certain duties to perform in the government of Babylon. They were in Satan’s world but were no part of it. God permitted them to be there that they might serve as witnesses for him; thus they pictured the company of God’s remnant today on earth who are in the world but are no part of it and who are given certain duties to perform as Jehovah’s witnesses and to proclaim the message
of the vengeance of our God, calling attention of the people to the vindication of Jehovah’s name by and through Christ Jesus. Daniel sat at the court of the king. (A’.D., margin) He pictured Christ Jesus, who, as the Greater Daniel, sits in Jehovah’s palace, temple or court and thus fills the position that brings him in close communion with the great Emperor of the universe, Jehovah God. (Hah. 2:20; Mal. 3:1) As Daniel and his three Hebrew brethren were in the world of Babylon bearing testimony to the name and power of Jehovah, even so now Christ Jesus and the remnant are ‘in the midst of the enemy’, bearing testimony to the name of Jehovah.—Rev. 12:17; Ps. 110:2.
1 Nebuchadnezzar pictured regal power which sometimes is used for good, when diligently engaged in doing the will of God, and at other times is used to represent the Devil hypocritically using liis power in a wicked manner. The third chapter of Daniel as compared with the last two verses in the second chapter of Daniel's prophecy notes such a change. “Nebuchadnezzar the king made an image of gold, whose height was threescore cubits, and the breadth thereof six cubits; he set it up in the plain of Duia, in the province of Babylon.” (Dan. 3:1) This opining of the third chapter shows Nebuchadnezzar acting particularly as the representative of the Devil, because he now violates God’s law, to wit: ‘Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of anything. Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them nor serve them; for I am the Lord [Jehovah] thy God. I am a jealous God.’—Ex. 20:4-6.
’ The image of gold made b.v Nebuchadnezzar, and described in the. foregoing, pictures the entire organization of Satan, both visible and invisible. Being of gold would indicate that this organization under Sa-Ian included the spirit creatures that formed The original invisible organization of Lucifer, which spirit creatures joined Satan in his rebellion, and are otherwise mentioned in the Scriptures, when they material-iz<d as i cphilim, and as angels which “bear rule over all the earth”. (Gen. 6:4, zl.A’.V.; Dan. 2:39) The image here described compares with the terrible image seen in Nebuchadnezzar's dream, as recorded in the second chapter of Daniel’s prophecy, and may have been suggested to Nebuchadnezzar’s mind by that dream. The Babylonian cubit was twenty-one inches; hence that image was 105 feet tall and 10! feet broad. Being ten times as high as it was broad would well picture the loftiness of Satan’s organization in its invisible parts, and compares with Nebuchadnezzar's dream of the big tree in the midst of the rarth, “the height thereof reached unto heaven, and the sight thereof to the end of all the earth.”—Dan. 4:10,11.
6 The image was set up in the plain of Dura, which was the central or key part of all the empire of Babylon. “Dura” means_ “circle” or “enclosed place”. Doubtless this plain was a part of the plain of Siiinar where Nimrod, under the direction of the Devil, built
October 1, 19C4
Ffc WATCHTOWER.
293
Babylon. (Gen. 11:2) The colossal image above described could be seen from ail parts of the plain. It therefore pictured the manner in which Satan sets up his organization over the earth and man. .Evidently the golden statue was so located in the king's land for his pleasure and convenience, it being near’ the capital city and the palace. It was the place for mass worship by the officials of the Babylonian government, and hence pictured Satan’s official organization both invisible and visible.
10	Keeping always in mind the issue raised by Satan’s defiance we may be fully assured that everything Satan does is fox’ the purpose of supporting his side of the controversy and to bring reproach upon God and to turn men away from the .Most High. Keeping this great issue in mind enables us to locate the time of the fulfilment of Daniel’s prophecy relative to the great image of gold erected in the plain of Dura. “Then Nebuchadnezzar the king sent to gather together the princes, the governors, and the captains, the judges, the treasurers, the, counsellors, the sheriffs, and all the rulers of the provinces, to come to the dedication of the image which Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up.’’ (Dan. 3:2) This verse of the prophecy describes a gathering together or assembly of the officials of the nation, to wit, the political, religious, commercial, judicial, and the law-enforcement element, or strong-arm squad. It was a matter of world importance, because Babylon was then the world power. The “image” was set up on the “plain of Dura” in 606 B.C., and Satan’s world has continued since; but from ami after 1918 Satan lays special stress on his organization because he knows that bis time is short before the great battle of Armageddon is fought. It was about 1918 that he began to assemble or “gather together” the official element of the whole earth to use them in due time in the battle, and in doing this he uses the three “frogs”, as described in Revelation 16:13,14. Satan’s purpose is to turn all mankind, including the true worshipers of Jehovah, away from the true God and to the worship of creatures or the work of creatures’ hands, or else to destroy them. The League of Nations is therefore brought into existence by Satan, and was set up in the year 19.19, and his religious ‘nobles’ on the earth then with uplifted “holy hands” hailed it as the expression of God’s kingdom on earth, and now say of it: ‘The League of Nations is the oidjr light there is.’ Thus the Federation of Churches declare that Satan's organization produces the only light that there is, and thereby deny Jehovah God and his kingdom and the great King, who is the light of the world. The great golden image erected in the plain of Dura therefore pictured the entire organization of Satan; and tne League of Nations is Satan’s dummy son, which causes to shine the only light that Satan's agents now have on earth.
11	The king Nebuchadnezzar set a day for the dedication of the golden image which he had caused to be
set up. "Whatever local or tribal gods were worshiped in the various sections of the Babylonian empire, these for the time must be set aside and, according to the command of the king, there must be one common deity, higher power or authority which all must worship, and the king Nebuchadnezzar must be the dictator of that authority. The golden image was dedicated to the Devil, being produced by his authority. It certainly was not dedicated to Jehovah God, the God of Daniel and his three Hebrew companions. It was a creature-made thing and was the greatest religious effort that Babylon or Satan’s organization had ever put forth to control the peoples of earth up to that time. The miniature dedication took place at the assembly of the officials of Babylon, but the real and greater dedication takes place after the ‘birth of the man child', that is, the beginning of the kingdom of God, in 1914, when Christ Jesus was placed upon his throne and sent forth to rule. The beginning of the kingdom was a challenge to Satan’s organization. The greater dedication to the image of gold; that is to say, Satan’s organization, is approximately at the time the two great signs or wonders appear in the heavens, as mentioned in Revelation the twelfth chapter. The two ‘signs’, or ‘wonders’, symbolically represented God’s organization and Satan’s organization in opposition; hence, all the official element of Satan’s organization on earth must take their stand for one or the other of these organizations, and thus clearly identify themselves. Jehu, as the servant of God, had forced the identification one way, and now Nebuchadnezzar, as the servant and representative of the. Devil, forces the identi-fieation in the very opposite way. In both instances those who stood faithful to God took their stand on God’s side and the enemies of God took their stand on the side of the Devil and his organization. The purpose of the Devil in forcing the identification after the ‘birth of the man child’ is that he might “get” or destroy Jehovah’s witnesses; and this is shown by his act of setting up the golden image that he might “get” or destroy Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-nego. Since 191S Jehovah’s witnesses have been bearing testimony to the kingdom, and Satan’s determination is to destroy them; and he organizes a conspiracy into which he draws his officers, the purpose, of which is to cut off Jehovah’s witnesses from being a nation. (Ps. S3:1-5) Both in setting up the golden image in Babylon, and in the greater dedication since 1914, Satan is endeavoring to show that he is the ‘god of the world’ and his right to rule must continue.
12	Not even the faithful followers of Christ Jesus saw this “image of gold”, that is, Satan’s organization, until alter 1921. It was at the Cedar Point assembly of the followers of Christ Jesus in the year 1922 that the Resolution or “Challenge” there sent forth by Jehovah’s witnesses definitely mentioned Satan's organization. It must have been about that time that the “golden image” ox’ Satan’s organization antitypieally was forced to be dedicated to the modem
294
efc WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
world and its rulers. Even today there are not many in the world aside from the anointed who sec or discern Satan’s organization. The three principal elements constituting the ruling power in earth are what today are called "yes men" and assemble and bow before the Devil’s organization, as described as follows: "Then the princes, the governors, and captains, the judges, the treasurers, the counsellors, the sheriffs; and all the rulers of the provinces, were gathered together unto the dedication of the image that Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up; and they stood before the image that Nebuchadnezzar had set up.”—Dan. 3:3.
” The Devil had tried to hide from "Christendom” knowledge even of the existence of himself, and also the fact of the existence of his organization. By this means ho expected to entrap them all. Now Jehovah causes Satan’s organization to be brought to light, and causes his own witnesses to give testimony concerning the same, particularly as a warning to all people of good will, and as a notice and warning to the nations of the earth in general. To offset Jehovah’s purpose Satan brings forth his organization, pictured by the golden image, as a thing to be worshiped, adored and served. Satan is thereby thrust into the open and becomes bold through his earthly agents in declaring his production, the League of Nations, as representing his earthly organization as a thing to which all people should give allegiance.
14	Even though Jehovah by his strong "right am”, Christ Jesus, did cast Satan and his organization out of heaven about 1914, yet he did not destroy that organization at that time, but has suffered or permitted it to remain to serve his own purpose, including just such a fiery test as that which now comes upon his people, as pictured by the fiery test that came upon the three faithful Hebrews. That test here and now involves the faithful remnant on the earth. After 1918 all the leaders and prominent ones of the earth were forced to stand before Satan’s organization. All who were in the world must stand before this image of Satan’s organization regardless of whether they are "not of the world” even though in the world. All arc in the world, and the attempt is to force everybody to stand before the Devil’s organization. In 1922, when the attention of God’s faithful witnesses on earth began to be called to the fact of the existence of Satan’s powerful organization, the faithful then began to take their "stand” before Satan’s organization, but against it and definitely on the side of Jehovah, which is pictured by the three Hebrews in Babylon who took their stand definitely on Jehovah’s side. At the same time those of Satan’s official organization on earth, and all whom they influenced and controlled, began to take their stand before the "image” and on the side of Satan, and have continued thus to do.
15	Now the three "frogs” of Revelation sixteen, and particularly the "false prophet” frog, as the herald of Satan, begin to bellow forth the message of Satan,
just as the herald cried out in Babylon: "To you it is commanded, 0 people, nations, and languages.” (Dan. 3:4) The "herald” there would well picture the "loud-speakers” or earthly mouthpieces of Satan’s organization wrho say just what Satan directs them to say. The message delivered by the “herald” was directed, as the scripture says, to "people, nations and languages”, which means specifically to the rulers of the people, nations and languages. Such rulers were at that very time present, standing in front of the golden image, because they had been assembled by the king for that purpose. Their people whom they represented, and for whom they stood, were back home and out of sight of the image and out of reach of the sound of the music. The king knew that his faithful rulers were submissive and obedient to his commandment, and as rulers of his organization he would expect them to keep the people in subjection. Now the command of Satan’s "herald” is, since J 938, to the visible rulers of the world, and they are expected to obey and keep the people in subjection to their commands; and the rulers put forth their strongest endeavors to do so.
10	A kind of hypnotic mass was performed on the plain of Dura before that image; and so now likewise the "hypnotic mass” is performed by Satan and his representatives on the earth before his organization. The Devil’s organization is threatened with complete downfall, and, sensing this danger, he assembles his representatives, and his herald cries out to the peoples of the world, even as Nebuchadnezzar’s herald cried out, to wit: "That at what time ye hear the sound of the cornet, Hute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, dulcimer, and all kinds of music, ye fall down and worship the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the king hath set up.” (Dan, 3: 5) A pleasant, outwardly agreeable and soothing tone is given on this occasion of mass worship, pictured by the use of the concert orchestra, which would have a tendency to awe and soothe the worshiper's. Even so after Satan was east out of heaven he attempted to soothe, awe and muse a worshipful feeling amongst his earthly representatives that they might reverentially bow before him and his organized power. The dedication of Satan’s organization after it was cast out of heaven would give rebirth or recovery and reconstruction of that organization which had received such a dreadful jolt when Christ threw it out of heaven and down to the earth.
17	Following the ‘birth of the man child’, that is to say, the birth or beginning of the kingdom, Christ Jesus the King did cast Satan out of heaven, and there was great rejoicing in heaven, doubtless accompanied by exquisite and incomparable music, because it is written concerning the same: "Rejoice, yc heavens, and yc that dwell in them.” The "last trump” of God was then sounding and ‘there were heard the voices of harpers harping with their harps, and they sung as it were a new song’. (Rev, 14:2,3) Satan always tries to imitate God, because Satan is a mimic
Octom: 1, 1934
Tfle WATCHTOWER.
295
god; hence he tries to have the dedication of his organization accompanied by music.
18	Knowing that he must keep all honest ones in the dark, and being the archdeceiver, the Devil would try to have the manifestation and dedication of his organization and his worship carried on as joyfully amongst the people as possible. Even though it is a time of great “woe to the inhabiters of the earth and of the sea” which the Devil himself has brought upon the people, yet he would have his religious representatives, the clergy, explain to the people that sueh woe is punishment sent upon them by Jehovah God, and hence if they wanted to have joy and pleasure they must look to Satan and his organization for the same.
19	As Nebuchadnezzar the representative of Satan had a great band of music to perform on the plain of Dura at the dedication of the golden image, so now the Devil would have a manifestation of his organization attended by that which would soothe the people into silence mid hypnotize them and cause them to strike an attitude of formal worship. So the Devil produced a great band composed of many musical instruments. Of those instruments that are employed by Satan in his optimism-spreading, nationalisminspiring, dream-producing music-makers to produce cheer and enforced worship, arc these: The League of Nations multitoned horn, the Disarmament cornet, the Economic Monetary Conference Hute, the “New Deal” harp, the technocracy saekbut, the National Economy League psaltery, the “back-to-the-chureh” musical saw, the “holy year” saxophone, the peace pact dulcimer, the big navy bass horn, and a multitude of other wind-jamming instruments, bones, sticks, and drums of up-to-date, ami all jazz instruments, operated to the dedication of the Devil’s organization; and the whole thing makes a terrible noise. Every tune played by this orchestra is out of harmony with the music of God’s kingdom, but in modern times the people, as a general rule, willingly take to jazz. For fear the song of the kingdom might be heard Satan commands that his agents, and particular!}" the clergy of the religious part of his organization, shall have the exclusive use of the radio by which to instruct the people in matters of religious worship. Then he puts the Roman Catholic hierarchy, and their so-called “priests”, and the misnamed “Protestant” preachers and the Jewish rabbis in the lead and causes them to shout to the people: ‘Follow the light back to our god [meaning, of course, Satan, the god of this world] ; this is the only light there is.’ The preachers now openly deny God's Word, substitute “science so called” for the same, and expect to control the people by their jazz. The deluded ones fall down and worship before the Devil’s organization. But not so with those who serve God. Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-nego refused to fall down before the image of gold; and the remnant of God on earth now refuse to fall down
before any part of Satan's organization and worship it.
29	Who caused the image to be set up? The scripture reads: “Ye fall down and worship the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the king hath set up.” So it is the king that erected the image, and it is the king that commands the worship; and the king represents the Devil. Therefore the question is: Shall we be submissive to the higher powers, meaning, of course, the king and his official family? To refuse to obey the king's command would be a challenge to the king’s supremacy and to the legitimacy of the image erected by him. That would mean, then, that the king is the one who determines what and when the people shall worship, and that his power is supreme, and that the people must hear, obey and worship whatsoever the king commands them to obey and worship. Applying the picture, then, to the present time, it means that the Devil would compel all the people of earth to worship him and his organization either directly or indirectly, and to thus reproach the name of Jehovah, the great Being, who is supreme above all. Tl:e question of supremacy is brought to the fore, and Satan boldly claims that he is supreme; therefore everyone is forced to take his stand either on the side of the. Devil or on the side of Jehovah ami his kingdom. The visible part of Satan’s organization today insist that the power of the state is supreme and that everyone must be submissive thereto regardless of whether the rule promulgated is contrary to God's law or not.
21	There was no effort on the part of King Nebuchadnezzar to render good and blessings to the people. The primary thing was to cause the people to obey him in matters of worship; and in doing this he was fully supported by all the officials of his realm. It is even so today with the Devil and his representatives. As it was declared by the king’s messenger on the plain of Dura, so now the visible messengers of the Devil declare: “And whoso falleth not down and worshippeth, shall the same hour be east into the midst of a burning fiery furnace.” (Dan. 3: fi) Anyone refusing to fall down and worship would thereby declare that some other ruler is supreme and henee worthy to be worshiped in spirit and in truth, and that the king’s image is fraudulent and a counterfeit. So it was in Nebuchadnezzar's time, and even so it is today. Those who refuse to join with the religious combine and worship in the place and in the manner the Devil’s organization has arranged are considered to be enemies of the nation and worthy to be destroyed, which was symbolized by the easting of the three Hebrews into the fiery furnace. Those who now stand firm for God and his kingdom and worship Jehovah in spirit and in truth and refuse to compromise with any part of Satan’s organization thereby declare that this worldly organization ruled by Satan and his agents is a fraudulent, counterfeit thing operating to the reproach of Jehovah's name.
296
WATCHTOWER
Brooklyn, N. Y.
22Why should the decree of Nebuchadnezzar consign to the crucible or fiery furnace all who refused to bow down to the image’’ Not for the purpose of purifying or refining them or making them better, but for the sole purpose of destroying them. Such is the policy also pursued by Satan and his representatives today. The king of Babylon did roast Ahab in the fire, and now the Devil’s crowd would roast anyone in the fire who does not obey them. (Jer. 29: 21, 22) The furnace employed by Nebuchadnezzar was made to destroy the creature; so now the purpose of Satan is to destroy. But Satan and his agents can only “kill the body’’. God’s faithful witnesses know this, and they know that the furnace or fiery crucible is employed for the purpose of breaking down their integrity toward God and thus to lead them to complete destruction. By the grace of the Lord God they remain true and faithful to Jehovah, and he saves them.
23 The furnace of Nebuchadnezzar, therefore, foreshadowed the hot and crucial tests or conditions of natural discomfort, such as threats upon the lives of the Lord’s faithful ones, bodily assaults upon them by the strong-arm squad, incarceration of the faithful in prisons, newspaper “roasts”, abuse by the clergy, decrees unjustly entered and enforced by the law department of Satan’s organization, and the public branding of all of Jehovah's witnesses as enemies and as the offseouring of the earth. All such crucial or fiery treatment Jehovah permits to come upon his people now to te st their integrity. The enemy attempts to destroy Jehovah’s witnesses, and may succeed in killing the organism of some, but God’s promised protection is to those who remain faithful to him. The Word of God makes it sure that he will have some of the remnant on earth at the final show-down and, even though some of them may be killed by the Devil’s crowd, the remnant as a class will survive and persist. It must be expected that the hottest part of this fire, or crucible experience, will be just prior to the battle of Armageddon. It may even appear that the case of Jehovah’s witnesses is all cooked up when Gog and his hordes will have invaded the land of Jehovah’s people to spoil them, but God will furnish the protection. The act of Gog will cause the Lord’s fury to come up into his face, and then shall follow the destruction of the enemy, to the vindication of Jehovah’s name.—Ezek. 38: 8-18; 39:1-4.
21 The Devil with his visible officers on the plain of Dura swept everyone into line and caused them to bow down, the only exception being the faithful Judeans. “Therefore at that time, when all the people heard the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbnt, psaltery, and all kinds of music, all the people, the nations, and the languages, fell down and worshipped the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up.” (Dan. 3:7) Every man then holding a job owed his position and salary to the king; hence selfishness of such men and the fear of a creature induced
all of them to worship in the Devil’s appointed manner. The Devil gave the king Nebuchadnezzar his power; hence the king represented the Devil.
23 In like conditions now existing the official element of the world, religious, political and commercial, do the king’s bidding, for they owe everything they have or expect to have to the visible organized power; and hence they bow down to the Devil’s organization, who has given his beastly power to his representatives that rule on the earth, and all of these continue now to shout out: 'Who is like unto the beast [these great rulers] ? and who is able to make war with them?’ (Rev. 13:2-4) And the rulers and their immediate supporters continue to chant: ‘The earth is ours, and we will rule it.’
2,: The tin•ee faithful Judeans, Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-nego, refused to fall down and worship the image; hence they were accused of breaking the law; and it was the priestly or religious class that did the accusing of these faithful men: “Wherefore at that time certain Chaldeans came near, and accused the Jews.” (Dan. 3:8) Having in mind that Daniel wrote this record at a time when the term “Chaldean” had come to have a restricted meaning throws light upon this prophecy as to the accusers. The term “Chaldean”, instead of applying to the people of a certain province, was made to identify a certain class of men serving the king. Daniel, though a Jew, was made master of the “astrologers, Chaldeans, and soothsayers” by the king. (Dan. 5:11) It was necessary for those composing that class to learn the language of the Chaldeans. (Dan. 1:4) The Chaldeans were the learned class, and doubtless all of the priests were required to be of that class, just as the priests of the. Roman Catholic,, hierarchy today are required to he of the learned class. Those learned men were priests, magicians, astrologers, scientists, and soothsayers, and they were the ones that accused the three faithful Hebrews. Those accusers correspond to the moderntime clergy ch.ss, the learned Chaldeans, priests and soothsayers, so-called “scientists”, who hate the faithful witnesses of Jehovah because these wifnesas tell the truth and sing Jehovah’s praise. It is this priestly or clergy' class that today, operating behind the screens, cause the arrest, persecution and imprisonment of Jehovah’s witnesses. The word “accused” used in the foregoing text also translates two Hebrew words, to wit: akal, meaning to “eat up ” or “devour”, and kerats, meaning a “bit”; hence literally meaning “to chew up” (figuratively) by slandering or false accusations. According to Rotherham, marginal reading the text says: “Did eat their pieces of.”—Dan. 3:8.
27 The action of the wicked accusers against the three Hebrew men finds a parallel in the present time. Today it is the clergy that bring accusations against Jehovah’s witnesses and that incite the political officials to take action against them. In Canada it w.ts the clergy that filed accusations with the Canadian radio commission demanding that the message of the
October 1, 3934
WATCHTOWER.
297
truth be excluded from the air. In the United States it is the clergy that bring all manner of false accusation against Jehovah’s witnesses and use every known wrongful means to induce the Federal radio commission to prevent the message of truth from being broadcast by radio. It is the clergy, beaded by the pope, of every nation of “Christendom” that today make false accusation against Jehovah’s witnesses and that thereby cause Jehovah’s witnesses to be hated of all nations for the reason they are witnesses to the name of Jehovah and his King. (Matt. 24:9) With words of flattery these clergymen appear before the political ruling element and say to them: ‘0 rulers, live for ever.’ (Dan. 3:9) Thus they appear to be loyal and looking for the best interests of the country, when they are doing the very worst thing for the peoples’ interests.
23	These modern “Chaldeans”, or learned clergymen, arc sticklers for law enforcement whenever that serves their purpose. It was so in Nebuchadnezzar’s day, and it is so now; hence this prophecy: “Thou, O king, hast made a decree, that every man that shall hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, saekbut, psaltery, and dulcimer, and all kinds of music, shall fall down and worship the golden image.”—Dan. 3:10.
29	These accusers invoke laws made by creatures which are both selfish.and God-defying and ignore and spurn the law made by the Creator, whose name alone is Jehovah. With fraudulent and pious faces they strike an attitude of great disgust concerning Jehovah's witnesses and insist on their punishment because such witnesses arc calling attention to Jehovah and his kingdom and because these faithful ones refuse to compromise with any part of Satan’s organization.
30	The Chaldeans who brought accusation were coerced by fear of men to do so, also by a selfish desire to make themselves appear as exceedingly good; hence they sought the punishment of all those who did not then bow down; and likewise now they seek the punishment of those who do not bow down to Satan’s organization. The clergy claim to want what is “within the law”, that is to say, the law of men, but they disregard the law of God. The Chaldeans repeated before the king the substance of his decree and then pointed out the faithful Judeans who refused to obey his decree: “And whoso falleth not down and worshipped, that he should be cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace. There arc certain Jews, whom thou hast set over the affairs of the province of Babylon, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego; these men, 0 king, have not regarded thee; they serve not thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up.”—Dan. 3:11,12.
31	The Chaldeans wanted to “get” those Jews, because they hated them and they hated the favors which the Jews had enjoyed up to that time. They made it appear that such Judeans were ungrateful to the king. Even so today the clergy bring to the attention of the law-enforcement bodies that Jehovah's witnesses are
ungrateful and are violators of the law of the land, even by faithfully performing the law of God.
32	Nebuchadnezzar himself had found these Hebrews, including Daniel, to be “ten times better than all the magicians and astrologers that were in all,his realm” in matters of learning and wisdom. (Dan. 1: 20) Likewise today the political rulers well know that Jehovah’s witnesses are ten times better informed and wiser concerning the Word of God than all the clergy in the land, but, notwithstanding this, they all conclude that they must hang together, fearing that otherwise they might hang separately.
33	As the clergy accused the three Hebrews in Daniel’s time, even so now that same class accuse Jehovah's witnesses, saying: “These men, 0 king, have not regarded thee [nor the law of the land) ; they serve not thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up.” Jehovah’s witnesses do not serve the Devil, nor regard the things demanded by ■Satan’s organization which contravene God’s law. They will have Jehovah first, last, and all the time. Since the time of the Detroit convention, in 1928, when the Declaration was issued against Satan and in favor of Jehovah, these faithful witnesses laid the responsibility for the present world distress at Satan’s door, where it properly belongs. They refuse to have any part in the devilish formalism of worldly worship. They serve and worship Jehovah God. They know that the religious elements sacrifice hypocritically and when they do sacrifice they do it to devils, and hence Jehovah’s witnesses refuse to have anything in common with them. The remnant know that they cannot receive the Lord’s protection unless the}' are faithful to him. They cannot be partakers of the Lord’s table and of the Devil’s table at the same time.—1 Cor. 10:20,21.
31 It is true that Jehovah’s witnesses refuse to have any part in the so-called “holy year” fiasco, because they know that God has not authorized the Homan Catholic organization, or any other organization, to proclaim a holy year. They refuse to conform to the political religions promulgated and practiced by trie earthly, worldly leaders, and hence they do not bow down to the image of gold. Unwilling to compromise with the Devil, and to bring reproach upon Jehovah’s name, the faithful remnant hate the Devil’s gilded organization, represented by the golden image, because God hates it. (Prov. 6:16) Jehovah’s witnesses are for God and his kingdom, and gladly say: “Therefore I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be right; and I hate every false way. I hate and abhor lying; but thy law do I love.” (Ps. 119:128,163) Satan’s powers, including his visible agents, reproach Jehovah’s name. Jehovah hates them, and those who are on Jehovah’s side likewise hate them. “Do not 1 hate them, O Lord, that hate thee? and am not I grieved with those that rise up against thee? I hate them with perfect hatred; I count them mine enemies.” —Ps. 139:21,22.
298
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
83 In 1929 the Lord made clearly to appear to his people who constitute “the higher powers”, and since then they have been enabled to see clearly that the faithful ones must obey Jehovah and Christ Jesus, who are “the higher powers”, and make no compromise with the wicked organization that rules the world, and which powers are not ordained of God. Jehovah’s witnesses have no inclination to violate any law of the land, and will not do so when that law is in harmony with God’s law; but they will be guided by God’s law and obey his law and trust wholly in him, regardless of results. For this reason the clergy continuously and persistently accuse Jehovah’s witnesses before the political ruling power of the world; and this they do because they are in a conspiracy, led by Satan’s agent Gog, to bring about the destruction of Jehovah’s witnesses.—I’s. 83:2-5.
What took place before Nebuchadnezzar in the plain of Dura foreshadowed the wrath of the Devil in this day against Jehovah’s witnesses, (Bev. 12:17) The king then was angry, and so now the Devil is1 exceedingly angry. ’“Then Nebuchadnezzar, in his rage and fury, commanded to bring Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego. Then they brought these men before the king.” (Dan. 3; 13) Evidently Nebuchadnezzar used bis strong-arm squad to bring in the three faithful Hebrews before him. So likewise today, wherever Jehovah's witness's are brought before the courts it is Satan who is behind the move, and his purpose is to break the courage of Jehovah’s witnesses and to cause them to fail to maintain their integrity toward God. It is the strong-arm squad that hales these faithful ones into court. The great issue raised by Satan's challenge to Jehovah is the question that is now being fought out. The Devil expects now to use pressure on Jehovah’s witnesses to cause them to forsake the path of integrity and thus to make it appear that any creature that serves Jehovah God is prompted by selfishness or what the creature may get out of it from God. Jehovah now shows these truths to his remnant that they may receive comfort and know that they are pursuing the right course, and, continuing therein, they may have strong hope that they wdl win. What,
then, does the Word of God foretell will be the final outcome to those who are and who will be in the crucible or fiery test?
(2'e 6e continued)
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
(F J. Account for the severe trials to which God’s faithful witnesses in the past weie subjected, and for the preservation of record thereof to the pi esent time.
5 2. What was foreshadowed by Daniel’s interpretation of Nebuchadnezzar’s forgotten dream, followed by Nebuchadnezzar's response thereto 1
IT 3. Apply Daniel 2:47.
If 4, 5. llow doo Daniel 2:49 find fulfilmentt Whom did Daniel’s three Hebrew friends here named prophetically represent? llow? Why weie they given Babylonian Irani"..)
6.	Explain tluse thieo IJebnws’ close association with Daniel, and Daniel's position in relationship to the king.
7.	Point out the prophetic position of Nebuchadnezzar, llo.v is this shown in Daniel 3:1?
Y 8, 9. What was pictured in the dimensions of the image, i's being of gold, and its being set up in the plain of Dura?
K 10-12. Show whether the proceduie recotded in \eises 2 and 3 served the purpose of its author, and whether as a prophecy it has been in course of fulfilment.
If 13, 11. Dy what means had tho Devil expected to entn.p “Christendom”J To what extent has he succeeded, and wiiy?
7 15, l(h ‘Show that the tactics (verses 4,5) used in Nebuchadnezzar's day are employed in the Devil’s organic i-tion today, and with what mea.sutc of success.
17-19. Compare the occasion hete desctibe.d with Revelation 11:2,.'!, to show- that Satan is tlhi mimic god.
7 20, 21. Who set up the image? What important question was brought to the fore, and what, did this mean to all who faced the nltenmthc declined in verse 0? Apply the prophetic picture.
K 22, 23. Compare the furnace used by Nebuchadnezzar with that which it foreshadowed; also the purpose then and that now, and the outcome of the test involved.
tf 24, 25. Account for the fact that Satan then and now should so readily find willing instlaments to do liis bidding.
K 26-29. Identify the Chaldeans, ancient and modem, and, with illustration, point out the coriespondeney in their eoui.e of action and in their qualification for such procedure.
5 30-33. Point out the purpose in reminding the king as in verses 10-12, and compare the method employed by that class then with that, used now for accomplishing their purpose. Apply Daniel 1: 20.
If 34, 35. Was the charge brought against these three men a statement of fact? What motive prompted the accusation? and how does it compare in this regard with the Complaint presented by the “Chaldeans” and other repiesentatives of the- “ruh-r” in these days? Account for the stand taken by those three men, and for that taken by those whom they prophetically represented.
IF 36. Show that verse 13 presents a prophetic picture.
PURPOSE OF GATHERING THE SAINTS
IN HIS book, the Bible, is presented the purpose of the Almighty Creator in gathering out from among the peoples of earth, during a long period of time, a company of individuals who now stand forth and move in united action as Jehovah's witnesses.
The period of time occupied for the selection of the members of the body of Christ, called “saints”, embraces the time from Pentecost, A.D. 33, to the setting up of God's kingdom. That period of time is properly called the Christian era or period of sacrifice, because it is the time of the selection and development of the
true Christians who werg taken into the covenant with God by sacrifice. Nearing the end of that period the time comes for bringing these faithful ones out from, and separating them from, the denominational church systems and gathering them unto God. When that time arrives Jehovah commands: “Gather my saints together unto me; those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice.”—Ps. 50:5.
Who are the saints within the meaning of this text? Manifestly those who are wholly devoted to God and are therefore godly creatures. It is that
October 1, 1934
Tfie WATCHTOWER.
299
class spoken of byr the prophet when he said: "Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints." (Ps. 116:15) Not everyone who makes a covenant by sacrifice proves faithful, and hence not everyone making a covenant by sacrifice is embraced within the class that is ‘the people taken out for Ills name’. Only the faithful ones are the saints of God, and it is of such that Jehovah speaks in Psalm 50: 5. "Saints" does not mean those whom the clergy have canonized, and to whom many ignorantly pray; nor does the term apply to those ordinarily called holy, but to those only who are in Christ Jesus by begetting, adoption and anointing. It could not embrace those such as Jews according to the flesh who were, brought into the covenant with God by the sacrifice of animals and fowls, but means those who are in the covenant by sacrifice of Jesus Christ.
From the Scriptures it appears that the gathering is done at Jehovah’s command and by the Lord Jesus together with his holy angels. "The mighty God, even the Lord, hath spoken, and called the earth from the rising of the sun unto the going down thereof. Out of Zion, the perfection of beauty, God hath shined. Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence. . . . He shall call to the heavens from above, and to the earth, that he may judge his people." (Ps. 50:1-4) Clearly the gathering of the saints unto Jehovah takes place when the Lord Jesus comes to the temple and puts his professed people to the test. The approved ones are gathered unto the Lord by being brought into the temple condition and builded up as a part of God’s organization, Zion.
The prophet indicates the time when the gathering of the saints would begin. In the above text it is stated: “Themighty God . . . hath spoken . . . from the rising of the sun.” The Lord Jesus spoke of the manner of his return and likened it unto the sun rising in the east. Jesus spoke a parable to the effect that the true saints and the false representatives of the Lord would gro w together in the same field (the world) until the time of the harvest, which time would mark his second presence (Matt. 13: 39) Many consecrated ones were in denominational church systems called “Babylon" until that time. They were looking for the second coming of the Lord.
The prophet foretold the sentiments of their hearts when he wrote: "When the Lord turned again the captivity of Zion, we were like them that dream. Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing: then said they among the heathen, The Lord hath done great things for them. The Lord hath done great things for us; whereof we are glad."— Ps. 126:1-3.
The prophet of God says: "He shall call to the heavens from above, and to the earth.” Jehovah is spoken of as "him that rideth upon the heavens of heavens, which were of old; lo, he doth send out his voice, and that a mighty voice". (Ps. GS: 33) His great executive officer in the heavens is Christ Jesus.
Jehovah calls upon him to begin the work of gathering his saints together. This harmonizes with the beginning of the Lord’s presence at the temple, from 1918 onward. He calls to earth; that is to say, he turns his attention to things on the earth and issues his command for the gathering. In gathering unto himself the remnant and those with whom he had been angry and turning his anger away from them in 1919, as foretold in Isaiah 12:1, Jehovah there began the fulfilment of the prophecy of Psalm 50:5. Thereafter the Lord began gathering God’s faithful remnant by sending forth his angels to gather the elect from the four winds and from one end of heaven to the other. (Matt. 24:31) The "four winds” and "heaven" seem to be used symbolically to testify to the fact that the gathering is a universal one from all parts of the land where there arc those who arc devoted to God. He has called the true Christians out from all church denominations and all connection with Satan’s organization and gathered them together in the bonds of truth, in the temple.
The purpose of the gathering is stated to be "that he may judge his people". (Ps. 50:4) "Judgment must begin at the house of God." (1 Pet. 4:17) Jesus spoke a parable concerning his return and the taking of account with those to whom he had committed the kingdom interests. (Matt. 25:14-30) Manifestly then the purpose is to bring his people together and give them such knowledge of God’s purpose that they might be judged and tested. Mark how the physical facts fit the prophetic words. During the period of time from about 1875 to 1918 Christ, the great Messenger of heaven, he who is Priest of the Most High God, was preparing the way before Jehovah; and then, the preparation thereof being accomplished, he suddenly or promptly comes to his temple. (Mal. 3:1) The temple is made up of the anointed ones of God. (2 Cor. 6:16) He comes for the purpose of judgment, that the approved ones may offer unto the Lord an offering (service of praise) in righteousness. He makes clear the truth to those gathered ones that they may continue to offer sacrifices of praise unto the Lord and to do this in harmony with his will. The Lord sits as a refiner to try, test and refine those whom the sons of Levi foreshadowed.—Mal. 3:1-3.
During the period of time elapsing from Pentecost until the second-coming of the Lord many persons have heard the gospel of truth and believed and made a consecration to do the will of God. These have been reconciled and fully justified and taken into the covenant by sacrifice. Not all of such have remained faithful unto the Lord, however. In fact, the greater number have been unfaithful to God. The chief responsibility’ for such unfaithfulness lies at the door of the clergy. The people have looked to the clergy as their spiritual advisers. These men claiming to represent God and to speak with authority, the people for a long while received their statements as true. The clergy’ have led the people in the wrong way.
300
<3Ti& WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Not only have the clergy participated in the politics of this evil world, but they have resorted to all the wicked tricks of politics. They have schemed for position and advantage and have used their high and influential office as clergymen to accomplish their selfish purposes. The politics of this world are under the supervision and control of Satan, its god. (2 Cor. 4: 4) The clergy have allied themselves with the god of this world and have induced great numbers of Christians to do the same thing.
Jesus in plain phrase stated that his kingdom is not of this world, but that his kingdom was future from the time he was on earth and that it would bo set up only at his second coming and the taking of his power. (John 18: 36) The clergy were not content to be the followers of Jesus, but have run ahead of the Lord and claimed it to be their commission and duty to set up the Lord’s kingdom on earth in advance of God’s time. To this end they have opened their doors and their arms and welcomed to their fold the profiteers, the politicians and the oppressors of the people. They have brought in these powerful men to the end that their church systems might be more powerful and more influential. These profiteers and oppressors have become the principal ones in their flocks, wielding the power and influence of the organization. One error of The clergy led to another until, fearing to oppose the powerful and influential ones of their congregations, they have repudiated the Bible and have told the people to bcl'eve anything that they wanted to believe, just so they remained in the chureh organization.
The clergy have advocated war and urged the people to engage in the wholesale murder of their fellow creatures. They have used their church edifices as recruiting stations. They have gone so far in their blasphemous course that they have told the young men to enlist in the war and that if they should die upon the battlefield their death there would be a guarantee that they would be taken immediately to heaven and counted in as a part of the great sacrifice of our Lord.
The influence of the clergy has led the great mass of professing Christians away from full devotion to the Lord and has caused them to mix with the world. To the people they have misrepresented the truth and have opposed God’s witnesses in an effort to give the people the truth. By threats and coercion the clergy have held back a great many timid chureh people from hearing the truth. So desperate have they been that
they have willfully misrepresented God’s purpose and have influenced their parishioners to close their eyes and ears to the hearing of the message of truth. When God’s command came to gather together his saints who had made a covenant with him by sacrifice the clergy used all their power and influence to prevent such gathering. They have succeeded in turning millions away from the Lord and his service.
To be sure, the clergy are not of those who are gathered unto the Lord. Nor are those consecrated ones who have permitted themselves to be held back from God and his truth by the influence of the clergy, of the class that is gathered unto the Lord. Those so-called Christians who love God and have been held back by reason of the influence of the clergy or held as "prisoners”, within the meaning of the Scriptures (1’ss. 79:11; 102:20), have cried unto the Lord. Under their covenant by sacrifice they are appointed to a sacrificial death; but, having been held back from faithfulness by the influence of their prison-keepers, the clergy, the time comes when they cry unto the Lord. Concerning this the prophet says: "Let the sighing of the prisoner come before thee; according to the greatness of thy power preserve thou those that are appointed to die.” (I’s. 79:11) God hears their cries and the time comes for him to release them.— I’s. 102: 19,20.
All wIio have been taken into the covenant by sacrifice have been offered the great privilege of being witnesses to the majesty and loving-kindness of God and to the outworking of liis great purpose for the reconciliation of man. Of and concerning himself, the chief One, Jesus said: "To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth, livery one that is of the truth heareth my voice.” (John 18:37) What is true of Jesus applies to all those who are taken into the covenant by sacrifice. Each one of such not only is granted the privilege of hearing the truth, but is offered the opportunity to be a witness to the truth. The only' way whereby such can be true, loyal and faithful unto God is to be witnesses to the truth as opporlunily affords. The Lord sees to it that such have opportunities. A witness is one who gives testimony'. The testimony concerning God and his purpose for the vindication of his holy name and for the reconciliation of man must be given, and it is his will to have it given by his anointed when they are gathered together to the temple during the second presence of the Lord.
SING VNTO JEHOVAH
a new song: sing unto JEHOVAH, all the earth. Declare his glory among the rations, his marvellous works among all tl.o peoples. For great is JEHOVAH, end greatly to be pra'svd: honor and majesty are before him: strength and beauty are m his sanctuaiy. Ascribe unto JEHOVAH, ye kindreds of the peoples, ascribe unto JEHOVAH glory and sticng’h. Sao among the nations, JEHOVAH reigneth: the u.orld al,o is established that it cannot be moved. He will judge the world with righteousness, and the peoples with his truth.—David.
ECCLESIASTICISM INDICTED
ON JULY 26, in the year nineteen hundred and twenty-four, a multitude of Christian people, namely, Jehovah’s witnesses, who had separated themselves from all the religions denominations and taken their stand firmly for the Lord Jehovah, passed a resolution in the form of an indictment against the ecclesiastical element as constituting a part of the Devil’s organization. This indictment so clearly sets forth the truth of the situation before the minds of the people that it is here quoted:
“We, . . . in convention assembled, declare our unqualified allegiance to Christ, who is now present and setting up his kingdom, and to that kingdom.
“We believe that every anointed child of God is an ambassador for Christ and is duty-bound to give a faithful and true witness on behalf of his kingdom. As ambassadors for Christ, and without assuming any self-righteousness, we believe and hold that God has commissioned us to ‘proclaim the day of vengeance of our God and to comfort all that mourn’.—Isa. 61: 2.
“We believe and hold that it is God’s due time for his displeasure to be expressed against wicked systems that have blinded the people to the truth and have thereby deprived them of peace and hope; ami to the end that the people might know the truth and receive some comfort and hope for future blessings wc present this indictment, based upon the Word of God, and point to the divine provision as the remedy for man's complete relief.
“We present and charge that Satan formed a conspiracy for the purpose of keeping the people in ignorance of God’s provision for blessing them with life, liberty and happiness; and that others, to wit, unfaithful preachers, conscienceless profiteers, and unscrupulous politicians, have entered into said conspiracy, either willingly or unwillingly.
“That unfaithful preachers have formed themselves into ecclesiastical systems, consisting of councils, synods, presbyteries, associations, and so forth, and have designated themselves therein as popes, cardinals, bishops, doctors of divinity, pastors, shepherds, reverends, and so on, and elected themselves to such offices, which aggregation is herein designated as ‘the clergy’; and that these have willingly made commercial giants and professional politicians the principal ones of their flocks.
“We present and charge that the clergy have yielded to the temptations presented to them by Satan and, contrary to God’s Word, have joined in said conspiracy, and in furtherance thereof have committed the overt acts as follows, to wit:
“(1) That they have used their spiritual powers, enjoyed by reason of their position, to gratify their own selfish desires by feeding and exalting themselves and failing and refusing to feed or teach the people God’s Word of Truth;
“(2) That, loving the glory of this world, and de
siring to shine before men and have the approve1 of men (Luke 4:8; Jas. 4:4; 1 John 2:15), they have clothed themselves in gaudy apparel, decked themselves with jewels, and have assumed a form of godliness while denying God’s Word and the pov'er thereof ;
“(3) That they have failed and refused to preach to the people the message of Messiah’s kingdom and to point them to the evidences relating to his second coming; and being unwilling to await the Lord’s due time to set up his kingdom, and being ambitious to appear wise and great, they have, together with their coconspirators, claimed the ability to set up God’s kingdom on earth without God, and have endorsed the League of Nations and declared it to be ‘the political expression of God’s kingdom on earth’, thereby breaking their allegiance to the Lord Jesus Christ and declaring their allegiance to the Devil, the god of evil; and to ‘his end they have advocated ami sanctified war, turned their church edifices into recruiting stations, acted as recruiting officers for pay, and preached men into the trenches, there to suffer and die; and when the Lord presentee] to them the clear and indisputable proof that the old world has ended and that his kingdom is at hand, they have scoffed at and rejected the testimony, and have persecuted, arrested and caused the imprisonment of witnesses of the Lord.
DOCTRINES
“We further present and charge that the clergy as a class have constituted themselves the fountain of doctrines which, in the furtherance of said conspiracy, they have sent forth to the people, claiming such doctrines to be the teachings of God's Word, well knowing the same to be untrue, in this, to wit:
“(1) That they falsely claim to be the divinely appointed successors to the inspired apostles of Jesus Christ; whereas the Scriptures clearly show that there are no successors to the Lord’s apostles;
“(2) That they claim the sole right to interpret the Scriptures, and that therefore they alone know what the people should believe, and bj- this means they have kept the people in ignorance of the Bible; and now in the time of increased knowledge and much reading, when the people might read and understand, these self-constituted ‘successors to the apostles’ discourage the people from reading the Bible and Bible literature, deny the inspiration of the Scriptures, teach evolution, and by these means turn the minds of the people away from God and his Word of truth;
“(3) That they have taught and teach the divine right of kings to rule the peoples, claiming such rule to be the kingdom of God on earth; they hold that they and the principal of their flocks are commissioned of God to direct the policy and course of the nations, and that if the people do not submissively concur in such policies then the people are unpatriotic or disloyal;
“ (4) That they are the authors of the unreasonable
301
302
Tile WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
and false doctrine of the trinity, by which they claim and teach that Jehovah, Jesus and the holy spirit are three persons in one, which fallacy they admit cannot be understood or explained; that this false doctrine has blinded the people to the true meaning of the great ransom sacrifice of Jesus Christ, through which men can be saved;
“ (5) That they teach and have taught the false doctrine of human immortality; that is to say, that all men are created immortal souls, which cannot die; which doctrine they well know to be false, for it is based exclusively upon the statement of Satan, which statement Jesus declares to be a great lie (John 8:44) ;
“(G) That they preach and teach the doctrine of eternal torment; that is to say, that the penalty for sin is conscious torment in hell, eternal in duration; whereas they know that the Bible teaches that the wages of sin is death; that hell is the state of death or the tomb; that the dead arc unconscious until the resurrection, and that the ransom sacrifice is provided that all in due time may have an opportunity to believe and obey the Lord and live, while the willfully wicked arc to be punished with an everlasting destruction;
“(7) That they deny the right of the Lord to establish his kingdom on earth, well knowing that Jesus taught that he would come again at the end of the world, and that the fact of that time would be made known by the nations of ‘Christendom’ engaging in a world war, quickly followed by famine, pestilence, revolutions, the return of God’s favor to the Jews [inwardly such], distress and perplexity of the nations; and that during such time the God of heaven would set up his kingdom, which will stand for ever (Dan. 2:44); that ignoring and refusing to consider these plain truths and evidences, they have willingly gone on in darkness, together with their allies, profiteers and politicians, in an attempt to set up a world power for the purpose of ruling and keeping the people in subjection, all of which is contrary to the Word of God and against his dignity and good name.
“The doctrines taught by the clergy and their course of action herein stated are admitted; and upon the undisputed facts and upon the law of God’s Word they stand confessedly guilty before God and in the eyes of the world upon every charge in this indictment.
“Upon the authority of the prophecy of God’s Word now being fulfilled, we declare that this is the day of God’s wrath upon ‘Christendom’; and that he stands in the midst of the mighty and controlling factors of the world, to wit, the clergy and the principal of their flocks, to judge and to express his righteous indignation against them and their unrighteous systems and doctrines.
“We further declare that the only hope for the peace and happiness of the peoples of earth is Mes
siah’s kingdom, for which Jesus taught his followers to pray.
“Therefore we call upon the peoples and nations of earth to witness that the statements here made arc true; and in order that the people might, in this time of perplexity and distress, have hope and comfort, wc urge upon them prayerful and diligent study’ of the Bible, that they might learn therefrom that God through Christ and his kingdom has a complete and adequate provision for the blessing of mankind upon earth with peace and prosperity, liberty, happiness and eternal life, and that his kingdom is at hand.’’
These facts are set forth here, not for the purpose of holding men up to ridicule, but for the purpose of informing the people that the ecclesiastical systems, Catholic and Protestant, are under the supervision and control of the Devil and form a part of his visible organization, and therefore constitute an antichrist. This is true for the reason that they parade under the name and title of Christian, while such claim, in the light of the foregoing facts, is absolutely false. They call themselves by the name of the Lord, but in truth and in fact they represent the Devil. 'Pho hypocrisy that began away back in the days of Adam’s grandson Enos has become so flagrant in this present day that all who have an open mind can see it.—Gen. 4:26, margin.
It has pleased the Lord God to prepare the members of his empire or kingdom, now at hand, under adverse conditions on earth.' Kcal Christians have never been popular with the world. During the entire period of the Christian era they have suffered much persecution. They have been counted as the offscour-ing amongst men. From what source could we reasonably expect persecution and adversity upon the Christians? From the Devil and his organization, of course; because God declared in Eden that there would be enmity between the seed of the woman, which seed is the empire class, and the seed of the serpent, which is the Devil’s organization. We arc not left in doubt as to who constitutes the seed or children of the Devil.
When Jesus was on earth those who persecuted him were the scribes, Pharisees and priests, together composing the clergy of that day and claiming to be representatives of God. They were hypocrites. Jesus said they were. That class exalted themselves, even as the clergy do today. They posed as men of great righteousness. To them Jesus said: “But woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye shut up the kingdom of heaven against men: for ye neither go in yourselves, neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in. Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrifis! for ye devour widows’ houses, and for a pretence make long prayer: therefore ye shall receive the greater [condemnation].’’ (Matt. 23:13,14) These same hypocrites claimed to be the sons of God; but Je.sus plainly said to them: “Ye arc of your father the devil. ’ ’—John 8:42-44.
October 1, 1931
WATCHTOWER.
303
There is a period in the history of the world known as ‘the time of the Inquisition’. It was in that period of time that the ecclesiastical courts were organized in certain countries, and men were haled before these tribunals and charged with the crime of heresy. They were put through a mock trial and subjected to all manner of wicked torture to compel them to confess a senseless creed. Who was responsible for this cruel treatment of Christians? The clergy, who claimed to be the representatives of God and of Christ, but who in truth and in fact represented the Devil. They were hypocrites. Such persecution was not confined to the Papal system.
In due course the Protestants resorted to like persecution. Call to mind the reformation leader John Calvin, the father of the Presbyterians, who signed the death warrant of Servetus and had him slowly burned to death at the stake because he did not agree with the so-called “orthodox” doctrines of that eccle
siastical system. All the wicked persecution that has been inflicted upon Christ Jesus and his followers has been done by the clergy or at the instigation of the clergy, who hypocritically claim to represent the God of love and his beloved Son.
The Dragon, the Devil, the father of these ecclesiastical systems, was the real inducing cause for such persecution. These ecclesiastical systems, particularly the clergy and the principal of their flocks, arc and ever have been a part of the world which is under the control of Satan the enemy. These have taught conflicting doctrines and have fought amongst themselves, until someone would come forward with the truth of God's Word; then they combine under the direction of their father the Devil to fight against the representative of the Lord.
Very fittingly and justly, therefore, the prophetic Word of God solemnly declares that ecclesiasticism is doomed shortly to go into utter destruction in disgrace.
(Continued from page 30!)
NEW YORK
Auburn WMBO Su 6:30pm
Sa 2:15pm
Bing ’mtonWNBF Su 7:15pm Brooklyn WBBR Su 10:15am
Su 6:30pm Mo 10:30am
Tu 10:30am Tu 6:30pm Wo 10:30am Wo 6:30pm Th 10:30am Th 6:30pm Fr 10:30am Fr 6:30pm Buffalo WGR Su 10:00am Elmira WESG Su 10:OOam Freeport WGBBSu 9:00am
Tu 7:00pm Th 7:00pm Hudson F. WGLC Su 10:45am Jamestown WOCLSu 9:3oam New York WBNX Su 2:30pm New York WOV Su 4:30pm Saranac L. WNBZ Su 10:15am
Tu 4:15pm Th 4:15pm Svraeuse WSYR Su 10:30am Tupper L. WHDL Su 10:15am
Th 10:30am
Wli. Pl’ns WFAS Su 6:00pm
Mo 1:00pm Sa 9:00am
NORTH CAROLINA
Asheville WWNCTh 5:30pm Charlotte WSOC Su 10:15am
Greensboro WBIG Su 9:45:im
Raleigh WPTFSu 9:45am
NORTH DAKOTA
G’d Forks KFJM Su 2:30pm
OHIO
Akron	WADC Su 1:45 pm
We 10:15am
Akron WJW Su 5:39pm
We 11:3i>am
Cleveland WHK Su 7:00pm
Tu 3:15pm Fr 6:3upm
Cleveland WJAY Su 9:45am
Columbus WAIU Su 10:00am
Th 7:45 pm
Columbus WBNS Su 9:45am Alo 1:15pm We 1:15pm Fr 1:15pm
Davton WSMK Su 1:30pm
Mt'Grab WIIBDSu 4:30pm
We 4:30pm Fr 4:30pm
Toledo WSPDSu 9:30am
Sa 8:1 ham
Y ouugst 'nW KBN Su 10:00am We 4:15pm Zanesville W ALR Su 10:00am
We 4:15pm
OKLAHOMA
Elk City KASA Su 1:15pm Oki 'a City KOMA Su 12 :45pm I’oncaCity WBBZ Su 10:00am
We 9:00pm
Tulsa KVOOSu 9:15am
OREGON
Klamathr. KFJIMo 8:15pm
Marshfield KOOS Mo 1:30pm Medford KHEDTu 1:30pm
PENNSYLVANIA
Erie WLBW Su 10:45am Gleusido WJBGSu 1:15pm Johnstown W.lACSu 4:30pm Fhil’a WCAU Su 13:00 nn Philadelphia WIP Su 6:45pm 1’ittsb’gh KQV Su 10:3uam
Wo 1:43pm Fr 1:45pm beading WEEU Su 3:45pm
We 3:45 pm Wish'ton WNP.GSu 9:43am W’msport WEAK Su 6:30pm York WORK Su 3:00pm
PHILIPPINE ISLANDS
Manila KZEG Su 7:00pm Th 7:00pm
SOUTH CAROLINA
Green ville WFBC Su 10:00am Spart’b'g WSPASu 6:30pm
SOUTH DAKOTA
Pierre KGFXSu 1:00pm
Tu 4:00pxi Th 4:00pm
Watertown KGCR Su 9:15am
We 8:45pm Fr 8:15pm
TENNESSEE
Cha 'nooga W DO D Su 1:15pm
Th 8:00am
Jackson WTJS Su 1:30pm
We 5:3 0 p n i	F r 5:30 p m
Knoxville WROLSu 7:00pm
Memphis WHO Su 4:30pm
Memphis WRECSu 9:00am
TEXAS
Amarillo KGRSSu 9:00am Austin KNOW Su 10:00am CorpusChr. KG FI Su 9:00am
We 6:45pm Fr 6:45pm Dallas	KRLD Su 10:30am
Dublin	KFPLTh	8:00pm
Fr 8:45am
El Paso	KTSM Su	1:15pm
Ft. Worth KTAT Mo	5:15pru
We 5:J5pm Fr 5:J5pm Galveston KLUF Su 1:45pm
We 8:00pm Houston KXYZ Su 10:00am S. Angelo KGKLSu 1:45pm Th 8:45am
S. Antonio KTSA Su 10:45am Tyler KGKBSu 9:15am We 9: loam Fr 9:15am
UTAH
Ogden KLO Su 3:15pm
We 5:00nm
Salt L. City KSL Su 9:45pm
VERMONT
Rutland WSYB Su 10:00am
Th 5:30pm
St.Albans WQDM Su 1:00pm
VIRGINIA
Ch’lottesv. WEHC Su 10:45am
Danville WBTMSu 10:15pm
Lvnclib’g WLVA Su 12:45pm
Norfolk WTAR Su 12:30pm 1’ctersb’g WP11R Su 6:45pm
We 10:00am
Richmond WRVA Su 12:15pm
Roanoke WDBJ Su 12:30pm We 5:00prn
WASHINGTON
Aberdeen KXROSu 1:15pm
Bell’ham KYOSSu 10:00am
Th 5:30pm
Seattle K.1R Su 10:00am
Seattle KVLMo 6:45pm
Tu 6:45pm We 6:45pm
Th 6:45pm Fr 6:15pm
Sa 6:4 >pm
Spokane KITO Su 9:15am
Spokane EGA Su 6:00pm
Tacoma K\'l Su 2:15pm
WallaWalla KCJ Su 7:45am
Su l:3opm
Wenatchee Rl’Q Su 1:00pm
Yakima KIT >Su 10:(’oam
Th 7:00am
WEST VIRGINIA
Bluefield W1I1S Su 9:00am
Fr 8:00a m
Chu'ston WOBU Su 4:00pm
Fairmont WMMN Su 12:15pm
Hunt’ton WSAZ Th 4:00pm Wheeling WWVA Su lUtCOum
WISCONSIN
La Crosse WKBII Su 12:00 nn
Madison WIBA Su 10:05am
Mani’woe WOMT Mo 7:00pm
Tii 1:00pm
WYOMING
Casper KDFN Su 10:30am To 8:15pm
tffle WATCHTOWER.
RADIO SERVICE
The good news of the kingdom of Jehovah is broadcast each week or oftener by these and other stations at time shown.
[Current local time is shown in each instance.]
AUSTRALASIA
NEW SOUTH WALES Albury 2-AY Tu 8:45pm Goulburn 2-GN Su 7:30pm Grafton 2-GF Tu 7:30pm Gunnedah 2-MO Su 7:00pm Lismore 2-XNWe 7:15pm New Castle 2-HD Su 10:30am
Bu 9:30pm Su 11:40pm We 6:30pm Sydney 2-UE Su 9:15am W’gaW’ga2-WG We 9:30am
We 7:45pm
QUEENSLAND Brisbane	4-BC Su 10:15am
Mackay	4-MK Su 10:15am
Marybor ’gh 4-MB We 9:45pm Rockh ’pton 4-RO We 10:00pm Townsville ATO We 8:00pm
TASMANIA
Launceston 7-LA Fr 10:15pm Ulverstone 7-UVWe 8:00pm
VICTORIA
Ballarat 3-BA Su 12:45pm Bendigo 3-BO Tu 8:45pm Hamilton 3-HASu 6:45pra Horsham 3-HS Su 7:00pm Melbourne 3-AK Su 2:15pm Melbourne 3-AW Su 10:15am Sale 3-TR Su 6:30pm Swan Hill 3-SH Su 7:15pm
WEST AUSTRALIA Kalgoorlie 6-KG Su 7:45pm Perth 6-MLSu 7:00pm
BELGIUM
Hainaut BONNE Sa 5:30pm (330 m) ESPERANCE
CANADA ALBERTA Calgary CFCN Su 5:45pm NOVA SCOTIA Sydney CJCBSu 9:00pm
ONTARIO
Hamilton CKOC Su 10:30am Su 1:30pm Su 8:15pm
CHINA
Shanghai XMHASu 9:45am
CUBA
Caibarien CMHD
Spanish Su 7:00pm
Havana CMK Su 11:30am
Spanish Su 9:00pm
Banta Cl’a CMHI Su 12:15pm
Spanish Su 11:05am
E S T II O N I A
Reval RADIO-Su 3:30pm (296.1m) TALLINN
FRANCE
Beziers RADIO-Th 8:00pm (220.1m) BEZIERS
Bordeaux RADIO- Mo 7:45pm
(237 m) SUD-OUEST
Fecamp RADIO-
(206 m) NORMANDIE
French Tu 8:00pm
Paris RADIO L L Fr 8:15pm (370 m)
Paris RADIO-	Su 12:00 nn
(312.8 m) VITUS
Th 7:30pm Sa 7:30pm
Toulouse RADIO-We 7:15pm (385.1m) TOULOUSE
MEXICO
Mexico XECW
Spanish Th 10:00pm
UNITED STATES
ALABAMA
Birm ’ham WAPI Su 12:45pm Birm ’ham WBRC Su 10:00am Dothan WAGF Su 1:30pm M ’tgomery WSFA Su 3:45pm Muscle S. WNRA Su 6:00pm
We 8:00pm Fr 8:00pm
ALASKA
AnchorageKFQD We 9:30pm Ketchikan KGBU Mo 7:15pm
Th 7:15pm Sa 7:15pm
ARIZONA
Bisbee KSUN Su 4:00pm We 4:00pm Fr 4:00pm
Jerome KCRJ Mo 5:15pm We 5:15pm Sa 5:15pir Spanish Th 4:30pm
Prescott KPJM Su 5:45pm We 5:45pm Fr 5:45pu
Tucson KG AR Su 5:45pm We 7:00pm Fr 7:00pn.
Yuma KUMA Su 6:15pm Spanish Su 6:00pm
ARKANSAS
Fay ’ville KUOA Su 12:45pm We 11:45am Fr 4:30pm
HotSp’gs KTHSSu 5:00pm Little R’k KARK Su 9:00am Little R’k KGHI Su 7:00pm
We 5:45pm Fr 5:45pn_ Little R’k KLRA Su 10:30a:>. Paragould KBTM Su 10:00am
We 11:30am
Texarkana KCMC Su 6:45pm
CALIFORNIA
El Centro KXO Su 10:00am
Eureka KIEM Su 10:30am
Fresno KMJ Su 3:45pm
Hollywood KNX Su 9:15pm
Long B ’ch KGER Su 10:45am
Los Angeles KTM Su 9:30am
Su 8:00pm Th 8:00pm
Oakland KLS Su 11:15am We 2:45pm Fr 2:45pm Oakland KROW Su 10:15am Su 6:15pm Mo 8:15prn We 8:15pia
Sa’mento KFBK Su 9:30am
S.F’cisco KTABSu 9:30am Stockton KGDM Su 9:30ata We 7:15am Fr 1:15pm
COLORADO
Col’oSpr. KVOR Su 10:30am We 5:30pm Sa 4:30pm
Denver KVOD Su 7:00pm
Grand J ’n KFX J Su 1:15pm Greeley KFKASu 6:45pm Lamar KIDW Su 7:15pm
We 2:40pm Fr 2:40pm
Yuma KGEK Mo 12:45pm We 12:45pm Fr 12:45pm
CONNECTICUT
Bridgeport WICC Su 10:30am
DELAWARE
Wilm’ton WDEL Su 6:15pm
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
Washington WOL Su 6:00pm
FLORIDA
Jacksonv. WMBR Su 10:00am Miami WIOD Su 9:45am Miami WQAM Su 4:45pm Orlando WDBO Su 12:45pm Pensacola WCOASu 1:00pm
We 7:00pm
GEORGIA
Albany	WGPC Su 10:30am
Athens	WTFI Su	9:45am
Atlanta	WGST Su	5:45pm
Atlanta	WJTLSu	2:15pm
Augusta	WRDW Su	1:15pm
Th 7:45pm
Columbus WRBL Su 9:30am La Grange WKEU Su 3:00pm
We 3:00pm Fr 10:00am
Macon	WMAZ Su 4:00pm
Rome	WRGA Su 12:30pm
We 8:45pm Fr 8:45pm
Savannah WTOC Su 1:00pm
HAWAII
Honolulu KGMB We 12:05pm Fr 7:15pm
IDAHO
Boise KIDO Su 10:30am We 8:45pm
Idaho Falls KID Mo 10:00am Nampa KFXD Su 11:00am
Mo 7:45pm
Twin Falls KTFI Su 10:45am Su 4:45pm
ILLINOIS
Decatur WJBL Su 10:00am Fr 6:30am
Harrisb’g WEBQSu 6:00pm Mo 10:30pm	Fr 10:00pm
Quincy	WTAD Su 12:30pm
We 1:00pm
Rockford WROK Su 10:00am Su 9:30pm We 9:30pm
Sp ’gfleld WCBS Su 12:30pm Sa 11:15am
Tuscola WDZ Su 12:45pm
INDIANA
Hammond WWAE Su 11:00am Ind ’apolis WKBF Su 10:00am Th 1:00pm
Muncie WLBCSu 1:30pm Fr 3:30pm
KANSAS
Coffeyville KGGF Su 1:45pm Th 8:45pm
KENTUCKY
Louisville WAVE Su 9:15am
LOUISIANA
Shrevep’t KWE A Su 10:15am
MAINE
Bangor WLBZ Su 10:45am
MARYLAND
Baltimore WBALSu 3:15pm
Cumberl ’dWTBO Mo 1:15pm
We 1:15pm Fr 1:15pm
Hagerst ’n WJE J Su 10:15am
MASSACHUSETTS
Babson P. WBSO Su 12:30pm Boston WNAC Su 10:00am Sp ’gfleld WMAS Su 10:30am Worcester WTORC Su 10:30am
MICHIGAN
Calumet WHDF Tu 6:15pm
Detroit WJRSu 9:45am
Jackson WIBMSu 6:30pm
KalamazooWKZO Su 9:45am
We 1:15pm
MINNESOTA
F’gusFallsKGDE Su 10:00am Min ’apolis WDGY Su 2:00pm Moorhead KGFK Su 7:30pm
We 5:15pm Fr 5:15pm
MISSISSIPPI
Gulfport WGCM Su 9:45am
We 8:45pm
Hattiesb ’g WPFB Su 1:30pm
We 7:45pm
Laurel WAML Su 1:00pm Meridian WCOC Su 10:00am
We 6:45pm
Miss. City WGCM Su- 9:45am We 8:45pm
MISSOURI
Columbia KFRU Su 12:00 nn
We 7:15am
Kans.C’y KWKC Su 2:00pm
Tu 7:00am
MONTANA
Kalispell KGEZSu 9:00am
NEBRASKA
Kearney KGFW Su 10:00am
Lincoln	KFAB Su 9:30ain
Lincoln	KFOR Su 10:15am
Scottsbl ’f KGKY Su 10:15am
We 5:45pm Fr 5:45pm
NEVADA Reno KOH Su 10:30am
NEW JERSEY Newark WNEW Su 10:00am
NEW MEXICO
Albuq’que KOB We 5:45pm
Roswell KGFLSu 5:15pm
We 4:30pm Fr 4:30pm (Continued on page SOS)
WATCHTOWER.
Published Semi-Monthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street • Brooklyn, N. Y., U. S.A. officers
J. E. Eutherford President W. E. Van Ambukgh Secretary "And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.”-Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation and his active agent in the creation of all things; that the Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Cltief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect mtn for the earth and placed him upon it; that man wilfully disobeyed Ged’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, nnd the man Jesus suffered death in order to produce tho ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH'S ORGANIZATION is railed Zion, and that Christ Jesus is the Chief Officer thereof and is tho rightful King of the world; that tho anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it ia to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare Iris purposes toward mankind ns expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of tho kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and tho Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to tho establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of tho peoples of earth c-n come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ which has now begun; that tho Lord’s next great aet is the destruction of Satan’s organization nnd the establishment of righteousness in the earth, nnd that under tho kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall bo restored and live on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses.. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and supplies other literature to airl in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadeasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Biblo as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation, for tho kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his Beloved King. It is not dogmatie, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of tin Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns aro not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, §1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, §1.50; Cm.'AT Britain, Australasia, ano South Africa, 7s. Anieiican remittances should be made by F.vpress or Postal Money Order, or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian niultlanros should bo made direct to the respective branch offices. Beinittnnees from countries other than tli<r<> mentioned may be m tde to the Brooklyn ollico, but by international Postal Money Order only.
Foreign On ices
Dritisft . ......... 31 Craven Terrace, I.ontlon, IV. 2, England Canarlian ....... 40 Irwin Avenue, 'Toronto, Ontario, Canada Australasian . . 7 Beresford Bond, Straihtield, N. S. W., Australia South African .... Boston House, Cape Town, -South Africa I'leasO address the Society In every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or advor-ity are unable to pay tho subscription pricl may have i he }i atchtuicer free upon written application to tho publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so re-qiic-tinv it. V.'e are glad to thus aid tho needy, but the written application once each year is required by tho postal regulations. "Xolice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will bo sent only when requested. Chan-c of nddre-i, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of etnirtlion) will be sent with the journal one month hetero the siibscriplion expires. Entered as Second Class Mail Matter at Tlroohlyn, y. Y., Posfo,Jiee.
Act of If arch 3, JS79.
“ANGELS”
Wicked spirit creatures have allticted the human race for many centuries. It is of the greatest importance that mankind should understand the origin of those wicked creatures, their methods of operation, nnd the power they exercise over the men and nations of the world. It seems the Lord's due time to revest! these truths. The booklet Angrls gives the Scriptural proof and is now ready to be released to the people. The remnant should study its contents carefully and be diligent to get the booklet into the hands of every person of good will and all who are seeking the truth. The Joimdnbs should join in this witness work and distribution. The climax of the great day of Go<i Almighty is rapidly approaching. ami a knowledge of the truth is essential to all who would receive protection. The booklet will be translated and published in many languages. The Society will supply the demand as rapidly as possible.
THE SERVANT’S TESTIMONY PERIOD
This ]H.no<l embraces the nine elays of Not ember 21 to December 2 inclusive. Seeing that it is Jehovah's will that the feet members of The Servant of Jehovah shall, without delay, give a witness to and concerning the unseen crentnies that now have to do with things pertaining to this enitli, the new booklet Anricls will be specialized on as for distribution during this period. Let all who have taken a stand on the side of Jehovah to serve him make preparation promptly to have supplies, time and teiritory for this special witness. Reporting resul’s fur the entire period is an item of importance. Let Jehovah's witnesses and Joniidabs alike report, direct to the Brooklyn office if not working in territory under one uf the Society's branches.
ANNOUNCING COMPANY MEETINGS
Many hearers of radio transcription lectures have the desire to meet with Jehovah’s witnesses and to study his Word with them. Ileru-e wherever the kingdom message is radiocast, the time and place of meeting of the local company of Jehovah's witnesses should be announced after the transcription. Tire time on t!«- air being paid for, the station manager ought to readily grant your request to make such announcement.
NOTICE OF ANNUAL MEETING
Pursuant to the provision of <uw and the eliarter of the Watch Tower Bible and Traet Society, iMm is hereby given that the annual busirle.-* meeting of the said Society will l.e held at Pittsburgh, North Side (formerly AlleghenyPennsylvania, at Io o'clock a.m., Wednesday, October ill, 1931, at which the usual annual business will be transacted.
Vol. LV	October 15, 1934	No. 20
THE CRUCIBLE
“If it be so, our God, whom we serve, is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace; and he will deliver us out of thine hand, 0 king. But if not, be it known unto thee, 0 king, that ice will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up.’’—Dan. 3:17,18.
PART 2
JEHOVAH permitted his beloved Son to be subjected to the greatest and most severe test to which any creature was ever put, and that test brought much suffering upon Jesus. His suffering was not necessary in order that the ransom price might be provided, but it was necessary for him to suffer that the name of Jehovah might be vindicated. Those who have a pari in the vindication of Jehovah's name must suffer in like manner, even though not to the great extent to which Jesus suffered. (Matt. 10:24-30; John 15:20,21) As we approach now to the day of Armageddon, and hence to the time of the most severe test upon the remnant, let those who are privileged to be in the covenant for the kingdom with Christ Jesus rejoice that they arc permitted to fill up the sufferings that arc left behind for the present time, knowing this, that Jehovah will cause all things to work together for good to those whom he has called to The kingdom and who really love him. (Col. 1:24; Rom. S:2S) Jehovah is fortifying the remnant against that day by giving them information now in advance. It is food convenient for them.
2	Nebuchadnezzar the king represented the power of the ruler; hence at this point he pictures or represents the Devil, who at the present time speaks through his representatives in an effort to ensnare Jehovah’s faithful witnesses: “Nebuchadnezzar spake and said unto them, Is it true, 0 Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, do not yc serve my gods, nor worship the golden image which I have set up?’’ (Dan. 3:14) The Devil’s earthly representatives arc his publicity agents, and Satan is the power behind the screen that directs their words and their actions. Before the king Nebuchadnezzar the three faithful Judeans were required to plead to the charge “guilty’’ or “not guilty’’. They did not hesitate to state the truth, because the issue was a simple one, to wit: Whom do you worship and serve? These three faithful Judeans unhesitatingly identified themselves as God’s servants. The Devil and his agents often try to appear to be fair for the effect it may have upon lookers-on, and
307
this they do when they sec that such a course would work to their own purpose; hence the three Hebrews were given a chance to reconsider as to whether or not they would bow down before the golden image. Likewise today the Devil causes his visible representatives to say to Jehovah’s witnesses, in substance: “We will give you another chance to say whether or not you want to obey our ordinance. We will let you off this time, but if again wc find you going about worshiping your God wc will give you the limit.’’ Further opportunity is offered that the faithful ones might compromise with the Devil or his organization and thus bring reproach upon the name of Jehovah.
3	Nebuchadnezzar the king would now let those three faithful Hebrews arrive at their own conclusion as to what benefit would result to them by going on with the rest of his organization and thus not putting the rulers to further embarrassment. Doubtless Nebuchadnezzar concluded that these men would not call h's bluff; therefore he said to them: “Now, if ye be ready, that at what time ye hear the sound of the cornel, flute, harp, sackhut, psaltery, and dulcimer, and all kinds of music, ye fall down and worship the image which I have made, well: but if ye worship not, ye shall be east the same hour into the midst of a burning fiery furnace: and who is that God that shall deliver you out of my hands?” (Dan. 3:15) The king there put it up to those three men as to whether they would follow the instruments of the Devil’s organization or would follow Jehovah’s commandments. It is even so today with the worldly ruling powers that say, in substance, to Jehovah’s witnesses: “If you will cea.-.e going from house to house and calling u[hhi the people and come to us and get a license or a permit, wc might let you go on; but if you do not first obtain a permit or do as the churches do in carrying on jour religion, and if you persist in going from house to house without obeying us, we will certainly run you in.’’
4	Satan’s earthly agents try to “save their own faces” and to keep Jehovah’s witnesses in ignoram-e of what they really intend to do, but the Lord Ged,
308
*3Tle WATCHTOWER.
Br.ooxLY.v, N. 5c’.
by his Word, makes it clear to the faithful now, informing them in advance as to what Satan’s hosts, both visible and invisible, will attempt to do against those who serve Jehovah; and, being thus forewarned, the remnant are forearmed, by the grace of God. Satan’s crowd now try to frighten and intimidate Jehovah’s witnesses, but the Lord gives them information so that they may be strengthened to go on, knowing that if they are faithful to Jehovah they will receive his protection. To be sure, Satan’s earthly agents have no fear of Jehovah, since they do not know and serve him, and hence they threaten Jehovah’s witnesses with severe punishment and say to them: “ Who is Jehovah, that he shall deliver you out of our hands ? We will teach you who is running this country, and Jehovah cannot help you.” Thus Satan’s representatives fling defiance in the face of Jehovah God. This is done in an effort to weaken the faith of Jehovah’s witnesses and to break down their integrity toward God. In the same manner Pharaoh defied Jehovah when Moses and Aaron appeared before him. Likewise when liabshakeh, leading Sennacherib’s army, encamped before the walls of Jerusalem, demanded the surrender of the city, he said to the unyielding Jews who were obeying the instructions of Hezekiah: “Hearken not unto Hezekiah, when he persnadeth you, saying, The Lotto will deliver us. Hath any of the gods of the nations delivered at all his land out of the hand of the king of Assyria? Who are they among all the gods of the countries, that have delivered their country out of mine hand, that the Lord should deliver Jerusalem out of mine hand?”—2 Ki. 18:32,33, 35.
4	Let the remnant now keep in mind that all these things were ‘written aforetime for their comfort, that they might have hope’. (Korn. 15:4) All this strongly suggests that just preceding Armageddon, when the Devil’s plan is complete and he feels ready for the attack, he and bis agents will boast and brag as to what they will do to those who take their stand on the side of Jehovah God. They will ridicule Jehovah then as they did in the days of Hezekiah. Now, in advance, Jehovah informs his faithful ones what he will do for those who will maintain their integrity toward him, and this knowledge brings great consolation at the present time to those who are faithfully obeying God’s commandments.
“In this day of Jehovah his witnesses must stand firm and must be bold in holding forth the message of the kingdom even as the three Hebrews did before King Nebuchadnezzar. “Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-ncgo answered and said to the king, 0 Nebuchadnezzar, we arc not careful [we have no need, AJf.V.; we are not accounting it needful, Uotli.] to answer thee in this matter.” (Dan. 3:1G) The language of these three faithful Hebrews shows that they had definitely decided what course they would take and that they were not at all concerned with the threat made against them by Satan's visible agent.
In other phrase, they said in substance to the king: “We arc for Jehovah, first, last, and all the time, and it is not needful for us to give consideration to what others may say that is contrary to. Jehovah's commandment.” Such is and of necessity must be the attitude of those who are today faithful unto Jehovah God and his kingdom. Jehovah revealed to his people the true meaning of “the higher powers” through The Watchtower in 1929, and thereafter the faithful have not yielded to the threats of the enemy. They know that Jehovah and Christ Jesus arc “the higher powers”, and will obey them. On July 2G, 1931, the remnant knowingly accepted the new name from Jehovah as his witnesses, and since then there is no reason for them to consider what the enemy Satan and his agents say to them. They are on Jehovah’s side, and his instructions they will obey regardless of all threats or acts of violence made against them. A striking example of this is shown by what has taken place in the state of New Jersey, and particularly in the vicinity of Bergenfield and Plainfield. Time and again Jehovah’s witnesses have been threatened and have been thrown into prisons of those places because they dared preach the gospel of God’s kingdom, and as soon as they get out of prison they go right back to preaching the gospel in the same manner as they had been preaching before the time when they were arrested. During the past three years Jehovah's witnesses have not shunned to declare the whole message of God’s kingdom and the day of the vengeance of our God. Tn every part of the laud called “Christendom” the persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses continues to increase with severity; but that does not stop tire witness work in which they are engaged.
7	The faithful witnesses will obey Jehovah’s commandment Io the very last and will not yield to the enemy nor be deterred by his threats of violence. As the three faithful Hebrews said, so say now the faithful remnant who are Jehovah’s witnesses. 1o wit: “If it be so, our God, whom we serve, is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace; and he will deliver us out of thine hand, O king.” (Dan. 3:17) Now is the time, and from this time forward, when the real crucial test of the faithful of God’s witnesses is applied ; and this pressure increases, and as it. increases the faithful must hold fast. The remnant know that Jehovah is all-powerful and that his purpose is certain to be accomplished. To be sure, they do not know what individuals amongst the remnant are going through Armageddon, but they are sure, from the Word of God. that some of the remnant will pass through that great trouble and thereafter perform some service on earth in the name of Jehovah. The Lord began to g:\e his people this assurance, particularly through The Watchtower of December 15, 1928, pace 37G, in the article entitled “Kuler Ont of Bethlehem”. The purpose of such deliverance is a partial vindication of Jehovah's name. The remnant first began to see timt the vindication of Jehovah’s name is the important
October 15, 1934
WATCHTOWER.
309
issue when the Lord caused the publication of the book Life, in 1929. There the Lord revealed the truth for the comfort of his people, and these truths have given added strength and hope to the remnant.
8	In all probability sonic of the remnant will be killed by the enemy at and during Armageddon, and hence the Devil would think that God cannot deliver them. These things do not deter the faithful remnant in the performance of their duty as commanded by the Loid. They are blind to everything except the commandments of Jehovah given through Christ Jesus. lake the three faithful Hebrews, they now say to the opposing enemy, Satan and his agents, to wit: “But if not, be it known unto thee, 0 king, that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou bast set up.” (Dan. 3: IS) Why does God permit the remnant now to be subjected to so much persecution and suffering? Manifestly it is to prove their integrity to God under the crucial test and thus ho permits them to have a part in the vindication of his name. Immediate deliverance from the fiery furnace of persecution and strife would not answer the false challenge or charge of the Devil, but their holding fast of their integrity toward God and trusting him implicitly eoine what may, even unto the point of a tormenting death, will answer that false and wicked challenge that Satan has hurled into the face of Jehovah. Such faithfulness on the part of Jehovah’s witnesses is an exhibition of devotion to principle and shows that these are not moved by passion. Such is not “character development”, but it is covenantkeeping to the very bitter end. “And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony; and they loved not their lives unto the death.”—Rev. 12: 11.
“ As the apostle said, even so now the faithful remnant say to those who demand that they cease bearing testimony to the name of Jehovah, to wit: “Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge yc.” “We ought to obey God rather than men,” and, by God’s grace, we will obev him. (Acts 4:19; 5: 29) There can be no bowing down by the remnant to Satan or any part of his organization, nor will they compromise by trying to soft-pedal the message of the kingdom toward the enemy organization. It is God’s message and he has commanded that it shall bo delivered, and he will see to it that it is delivered by those who maintain their integrity toward him. The day of his vengeance must be declared, and his witnesses must make the declaration. Let the remnant now gird up the mind and with grim determination and full confidence in Jehovah and his King stand firm, never yielding to the enemy. The fact that Jehovah caused Daniel to make a record concerning those three faithful Hebrew brethren of Daniel is conclusive proof that Jehovah now will permit some of his witnesses to be put into the crucible, that is to say, be subjected to the most severe test, and that those who stand firm and unyielding will
have a part in the vindication of the name of Jehovah God.
10	The firm and determined stand of the three faithful Hebrew men greatly angered the king Nebuchadnezzar; and likewise the firm standing of Jehovah’s witnesses now on the sido of Jehovah God enrages Satan and bis visible mouthpieces on the earth. “Then was Nebuchadnezzar full of fury, and the form of his visage was changed against Shadrach, Meshach, and Ahed-nego: therefore he spake, and commanded that they should heat the furnace one seven times more than it was wont to be heated.”—Dan. 3: 19.
11	The firm and unyielding attitude of the remnant, and their persistency in giving the testimony to the name of Jehovah, angers the earthly rulers, particularly the clergy, and causes such to openly identify themselves as on Satan’s side. These earthly rulers feel their self-importance, and hence their pride is hurt and their authority challenged when Jehovah’s witnesses will not yield to their demands, and these things cause them to lose all apparent friendliness ami indulgence towards Jehovah's witnesses; and hence earthly rulers, under the influence of Satan, turn to deliberate and open persecution of Jehovah's witnesses. This is proof that such earthly opposition to God’s message is inspired by Satan and the demons. Hitler anti his official family are, without doubt, under the control of the unseen power of Satan and his wicked allies who are carrying forward a fight against Jehovah’s witnesses. Since the time of Eden the Devil and his wicked hosts that then rebelled with Satan have fought against all who have taken their stand on the side of Jehovah God and have tried to maintain their integrity toward him. Now the Lord through his Word specifically' warns the people that their fight is not against flesh and blood, but against that wicked unseen host. (Eph. G: 12) It is Satan and his wicked angels that are pushing the fight and using their earthly representatives to do their bidding.
12	An ordinary furnace was not sufficient for Nebuchadnezzar rhe, king, but he caused it to be heated seven times more. The firing of the furnace "seven time-; more than it was wont to be heated” shows Satan's determination to bring all his forces under the leadership of Gog to bear against God’s organization to accomplish the destruction of those who stand on the side of Jehovah. Even all the “seven heads” of tiio “great dragon” (Rev. 12:3), meaning all his invisible forces, and all the “ten horns” of the “beast”, moaning his visible earthly representatives, are assembled to take part in the war against the Lord and against his anointed. (Rev. 17:3.12-14) This assembly of all his forces is in order to make it as hot as possible for those who take their stand on the Lord’s side. We therefore may expect persecutions to continue and to increase in severity down to the very time of the battle of Armageddon. But the faithful will not be terrified by such exhibition of wickedness. —Phil. 1: 2S.	’
310
Sfa WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
13	Nebuchadnezzar no doubt reasoned like tris: ihat the God of the three Hebrews might be able to deliver them out of an ordinary fire, such as he would put in his furnace to roast an ordinary man, but surely their God would not be able to deliver these men out of such a record-breaking fire as he would now make. He thought to make it impossible for God to deliver those men. lie was determined to prove himself superior to God, and thus to put reproach upon Jehovah’s name, and thereby all the Jews in Babylon would for all time have their faith in God completely crushed. Of course, Satan put those thoughts in the mind of Nebuchadnezzar the king, because he was the one back of the scenes. God permitted the enemy to go to the limit. No creature can make a test so hard but that Jehovah can prove it entirely without effect. It was done so when Elijah made a test by fire before Ahab and made it just as hard as possible by having twelve barrels of water poured over the sacrifice and the trenches all round about the altar filled with water before the fire, came down upon it. (1 Ki. 18:30-35) Such a severe test increases The faith of the creature and brings greater glory to Jehovah manifesting his supreme power. (1 Pet. 1: 7) These things show that the test that will come upon the remnant near the end will be more severe then than at any time past; but let all be assured that Jehovah through Christ Jesus will provide all the needed protection and comfort for his own. Jehovah cannot be defeated; and he will give victory to his faithful ones through Jesus Christ our Lord. —1 Cor. 15:57.
14	In keeping with the devilish, practices of all times, the king caused these three faithful Hebrew men to be securely bound, thus to make resistance by them impossible when they were taken to the mouth of the furnace. “And he commanded the most mighty men that were in his army to bind Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-ncgo; and to cast them into the burning fiery furnace.’’—Dan. 3: 20.
15	We have no means of determining just what this binding foreshadowed, but, judging the future by the past, concerning like matters, the suggestion is here made that the binding may foreshadow the stopping of the witness -work by the enemy’s applying force by and through the “strong-arm squad”, and this just before Armageddon. Such a condition would differ from that which obtained in 1918, because at that time the Lord’s “two witnesses” were “killed” and the vindication work was then unfinished, but in this final test the witness of the remnant in giving notice and warning will be completed. Jehovah is directing his own work and is maneuvering the enemy’s forces and will cause all of the enemy and his organization to take a position where they will have to fight, and it is probable that the enemy then will forcibly stop the witness work and the witnesses from further activity for a time. (Joel 3: 2,12; Zech. 14: 2) All the forces then in line, the attack will begin. Such would be the
crowning overt act upon the part of the enemy against Jehovah’s witnesses. Satan’s preparation having reached the completed stage, and knowing that he must now join battle, he makes his supreme challenge to Jehovah by committing the provocative act that causes Jehovah's Commanding Officer, Christ Jesus, to start the final battle. Jehovah’s people are now advised that Gog will lead the forces of Satan and invade the “holy land”, that is, God’s anointed people, for the purpose of destroying the faithful remnant. “And thou shalt come up against my people of Israel, as a cloud to cover the land; it shall be in the latter days, and I will bring thee against my land, that the [nations shall] know me, when I shall be sanctified in thee, 0 Gog, before their eyes.”—Ezek. 38:16; see Vindication, Book Two, page 311.
30	To be sure, the clothing of those three Hebrew men bound for the superheated furnace was inflammable and would add more fuel to the flames; lienee they were left clothed when bound. “Then these men were bound in their coats, their hosen, and their hats, and their other garments, and were cast into the midst of the burning fiery furnace.” (Dan. 3:21) The binding of these three men in this manner furnished opportunity for Jehovah to more fully demonstrate his preserving power. Today in all the nations of so-called “Christendom” the rulers are keeping close watch on Jehovah’s witnesses and they arc determined to stop the work of these faithful witnesses. By permitting the enemy to go the limit Jehovah will lit him and his agents thus show their purpose to stop the work'of Jehovah's witnesses and also to destroy the witnesses and thereby to bring further reproach upon the name of the Most High. After all these nations under the leadership of the Devil’s chief ofiicer Gog succeed to the point of stopping the witness work, then doubtless old Gog will cackle, “Now who arc the higher powers?” and then the “man of sin” class will wag their heads and say, “I told you so; I knew these witnesses of Jehovah would get themselves into a jam”; and the “man of sin” class, in order1 to save their own heads, will doubtless say to the enemy’s representatives, “Look at us; we are showing respect to the higher powers of the world.” That will be an exciting moment, because the fight is now about to start; and the remnant will know what is going to be the result, and thus the Lord will give them further strength and comfort.
1T	The earthly crowd will be expecting short shrift of Jehovah’s witnesses and all who have taken their stand on Jehovah’s side; but soon Gog will begin to cackle on the other side of his face and then the faces of. all that motlcj’ crowd of Satan on earth will turn black. The Lord Jesus Christ, the glorious Warrior, will smite the enemy to the dust. “Therefore because the king’s commandment was urgent, and the furnace exceeding hot, the flame of the fire slew those men that took up Shadrach, McsLach, and Abed-ncgo.” (Dan. 3: 22) Armageddon will be no stage play, nor a mere
October 15, 1931
SHIe WATCHTOWER.
311
“breakfast affair”, but will be the hottest fight ever known; and so terrible will it be that mam- will ask, “How can any flesh be saved?” (Matt. 24:21,22) The strong-arm squad that bound and carried these three Hebrews to the mouth of the furnace and hurled them into the flames were themselves destroyed in their efforts to destroy the faithful Hebrews; thus showing that the destruction of Satan’s forces at Armageddon is clearly foreshadowed. The action of the superheated furnace consumed the men at the mouth of the furnace; and, without a question of doubt, this was controlled by Jehovah ami as an exhibition of .Jehovah’s power striking back at the king’s mighty men. This is in harmony with Jehovah’s declaration against Satan and bis forces under Gog when be says: “Therefore will I bring forth a fhe from the midst of thee, it shall devour thee; and I will bring thee to ashes upon the earth, in the sight of all them that behold thee.”—Ezek. 28:18.
Mark the power and protecting hand of Jehovah exhibited on the occasion of the easting of the three faithful men into the furnace. The fire destroyed the men who hurled these three Hebrews into the furnace, but those three faithful men of God went right through the Hames without harm’s coining to them. They “fell down bound into the midst of the burning fiery furnace”. (Vs. 23) Probably the mob that stood by, led by the Chaldeans or clergy, cried out, “That is their finish.” But they did not know.
10	Nebuchadnezzar the king sat by in his royal chair to see the end of the three Hebrew men who had dared disobey his order, just as the Devil will sit by at Armageddon and watch his forces being led by his field marshal Gog and expect to witness the complete clearing out of all those who are on the side of Jehovah. As Nebuchadnezzar was disappointed in seeing the three Hebrews destroyed, so Satan will be greatly chagrined and disappointed at Armageddon: “Then Nebuchadnezzar the king was astonied, and rose up in haste, and spake, and said unto his counsellors, Did not we east three men bovid into the midst of the fire? They answered and said unto the king, True, 0 king.” (Dan. 3: 24) This supports other scriptures which show that Satan will survive until the very last of Armageddon and will witness the complete defeat of his own forces just before he is bound and cast into the bottomless pit. (Rev. 19:20; 20:1,2) As Nebuchadnezzar on that occasion inquired of his officers, so Satan is here represented as speaking to Gog and others of his officers that may have survived up to that time or point in the battle, asking about Jehovah’s witnesses whom he expected to see destroyed: “Didn’t we east three, men bound into the midst of the fire?” Nebuchadnezzar then observed that the men who were cast into the fire were not hurt by the flames of his superheated furnace. “Be answered and said, Lo, I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt; and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God.” (Dan.
3:25) The fact that these three faithful Hebrews were not burned does not mean that Jehovah’s witnesses may not suffer physical injury at the hands of Satan’s minions, but it does mean that the Lord’s work will not be injured by Satan nor will the integrity of the faithful witnesses be lessened by reason of Satan’s assaults. It will mean that Satan has failed in his design to destroy Jehovah’s witnesses.
20	Nebuchadnezzar saw the fourth man in the furnace, whereas only three had been cast in, and he said of the fourth man: “[He] is like the Son of God.” According to another translation: Having the appearance “like to a son of the gods”. (Jioth..') Jehovah is the only one having sons within the meaning of giving life and organism to creatures. The Lord Jesus was there in that furnace with those three faithful Hebrews and, by the grace of Jehovah, giving protection to them. This shows that Christ Jesus, Jehovah’s Field Marshal, at Armageddon will lead the fight and overcome the enemy, and all who arc with him ami remain faith! ul to the end will also be overcomers “These shall make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them: for he is Lord of lords, and King of kings: and they that are with him are called, and chosen, and faithful.”—Rev. 17:14.
21	Other scriptures contain precious promises to Jehovah’s witnesses in support of this conclusion. Jehovah by his prophet Isaiah wrote: “For 1 am the Lord thy God, the Holy One of Israel, thy Saviour. . . . Therefore ye are my witnesses, saith [Jehovah], that 1 am God.” (Isa. 43:3, 12) At the battle it will be actually seen that not men are doing the fighting, but it is the Son of Jehovah God, Christ Jesus the great Warrior, who does the fighting, and who vindicates the name of Jehovah, “And the Lord shall be seen over them, and his arrow shall go forth as the lightning: and the Lord God shall blow the trumpet, ami shall go with whirlwinds of the south. The Lord of hosts shall defend them; . . . And the Lord their God shall save them in that day as the Hoek of bis people.” (Zech. 9:14-16) “He shall call upon me, and I will answer him: I will be with him in trouble; I will deliver him, and honour him.” (Rs. 91:151 When in the midst of the battle the Lord causes section after section of the Devil’s forces to be destroyed the faithful followers of Christ Jesus will be singing the praises of Jehovah and his great Field Mar.-hal, even as the Israelites sang when God delivered them in times of old. (2 Chron. 20:22-24) These truths, now understood by the grace of God, give great comfort and hope to the remnant, and for which they are exceedingly grateful to the Most High.
22	The scene now changes. Nebuchadnezzar, who pictured regal power and who up to this point stood for or pictured Satan, now no longer pictures Satan. The regal power passes completely out of Satan’s hands at Armageddon and Christ Jesus becomes the absolute ruler. “'Then Nebuchadnezzar came near <o the mouth of the burning fiery furnace, and spake,
312
WATCHTOWER
BitOOKLYN, N. Y.
and said, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-ncgo, ye servants of the most high God, come forth, and come hither. Then Shadrach, Meshach, and Abcd-ncgo came forth of the midst of the fire.” (Dan. 3:26) Here Nebuchadnezzar pictures the world’s new overlord in whose righteous hand regal power is now placed. Seeing that Nebuchadnezzar is used to make a prophetic picture, that without doubt is the reason why Nebuchadnezzar was not destroyed when his mighty men fell at the mouth of the furnace and were destroyed by the flames thereof. Now, as the prophetic picture appears, Armageddon is done, and the fire of battle has ceased, and Christ Jesus, the great Righteous Ruler, is in complete charge, administering justice to the people. Nebuchadnezzar did not call forth from the furnace the one whom he saw there described as ‘looking like the Son of God’, for the manifest reason that Christ Jesus was the one and now at this point Nebuchadnezzar represents that same one, Christ Jesus himself. Christ the King had proved the integrity of his servants and the supremacy of Jehovah, which he will do at Armageddon. Now, as Nebuchadnezzar called forth the three mon, even so Christ Jesus calls forth the faithful to his service. The coming forth of Shadrach, Meshach and Abcd-ncgo from the midst of the fire pictures the survivors of the remnant who pass through Armageddon and who perform some service on earth thereafter. In the fight at Armageddon Satan’s crowd will all be confounded and put to shame, but the faithful remnant of Jehovah will be saved and will greatly rejoice; and this is further supported by the prophecy of Isaiah 45:16,17.
23	On another occasion Jehovah caused a similar picture to be made. The Israelites, under the leadership of Moses, were safely delivered from the Red sea. This was by the grace of God, of course. When the Israelites reached the farther shore and beheld the forces of the mighty Pharaoh going down under the waves of the sea, with great gladness and gratitude they raised a song of praise to the name of Jehovah. Even so will the faithful remnant sing the praises of Jehovah when they witness the destruction of the enemy’s forces. ‘‘I will sing unto Jehovah, for he hath triumphed gloriously: the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea. Jehovah is my strength and song, and he is become my salvation: this is my God, and I will praise him; my father’s God, and I will exalt him. Jehovah is a man of war: Jehovah is his name. Jehovah shall reign for ever and ever.” —Ex. 15:1-3,18, A.R.V.
24	Another example of God’s protection and preservation of his faithful servants is that of Jeremiah, who survived Jerusalem’s destruction and who was released from prison and given his freedom, and who thereafter rendered further service to the name and honor of Jehovah.—Jer. 40: 1-6.
2	’ The end of Armageddon will surely be a time of great rejoicing in heaven, when the victory of Christ Jesus over Satan is complete and the name of the
Most High is given its proper place in the mind of every creature that lives. All who survive Armageddon will look with awe and reverence and devotion upon God and his great King, even as those who stood with Nebuchadnezzar no doubt looked with astonishment upon the throe Hebrews brought forth from the furnace. ‘‘And the princes, governors, and captains, and the king’s counsellors, being gathered together, saw these men, upon whose bodies the fire had no power, nor was an hair of their head singed, neither were their coats changed, nor the smell of fire had passed on them.” (Dan. 3:27) The governors and captains and counselors, etc., described in the preceding verse, here represented the members of the heavenly court of Christ Jesus. They see the golden image, picturing Satan’s organization, is gone for ever and that Satan and his organization arc now completely done for. As there was great rejoicing in heaven when ■ Satan was cast out, so doubtless there will be even greater rejoicing when his organization is completely destroyed. (Rev. 12:12) The three faithful Hebrew witnesses of Jehovah, upon whose bodies the fire had no power, represented those who will be seen rejoicing. Not a hair of their heads was singed; and why? Because, as the Lord has promised his faithful ones, ‘‘the very hairs of your head arc all numbered.” In the day of fiery trials Jehovah’s witnesses faithfully perform their service and rejoice therein, giving praise to God for the privilege; and now, at the end of Armageddon, Christ Jesus calls them forth and acknowledges them before his Father even as he promised long ago: ‘‘But the very hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear ye not therefore; ye are of more value than many sparrows. Whosoever therefore shall confess me before mon, him will I confess also before my Father which is in heaven.” (Matt. 10:30-32) Satan kindled the fire and heated the furnace, and sent forth Gog as his chief to bring together all of his forces, and heaped fuel upon the flames, the purpose being to ‘cut off the faithful from being a nat'on’; but Satan shall come to an ignominious end, and Jehovah’s witnesses, still wearing their unsoiled and unsinged garments, will for ever proclaim the praises of the Most High.—Ps. 83:4-18.
2G	Following Armageddon is the time when every knee shall bow and every tongue shall confess that Jesus Christ is Lord and Ruler of the world, and all this to the glory of Jehovah God. This is pictured in what followed, to wit: ‘‘Then Nebuchadnezzar spake, and said, Blessed be the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, who hath sent his angel [Christ Jesus], and delivered his servants that trusted in him, and have changed the king's word, and yielded their bodies, that they might not serve nor worship any god except their own God.”—Dan. 3:28.
2T	At this point Nebuchadnezzar continues to picture regal power* residing in and exercised by Christ Jesus, who will bless and glorify the name of Jehovah God for his great act of deliverance of the earthly part of
October 15, 1934
WATCHTOWER
313
his organization, and the complete destruction of the archenemy and his organization. The remnant on earth, together with the Jonadabs, are the people of God who survive Armageddon, and these will bless and praise the name of Jehovah, giving thanks for their deliverance, just as the Israelites sang the song of deliverance under the leadership of Moses on the bunks of the Red sea, as hereinbefore stated. These truths are now revealed by the Lord to the faithful remnant at the temple in order that they might have comfort and hope. Those on Jehovah’s side realize today more than at any time heretofore that they are not fighting against human creatures, but that their fight is against the host of unseen wicked spirits under the chief command of Satan. The faithful therefore follow the commandments of the Lord given through his Word, and hence they don the whole armor of God; and in doing this they show their faith in God and his gracious provision for them.—Eph. 6:10-18.
w Their deliverance will not come by reason of their own efforts, but will come by reason of God’s loving-kindness for them: “The angel of the Lord eneampeth round about them that fear him, and dclivereth them.” (Ps. 34: 7) When Armageddon is done these faithful ones will appreciate Jehovah’s provision for them more than they can now possibly appreciate the same, and they will acknowledge Jehovah’s gracious provision for them and will continue to praise his name with songs of joy.
20	The three faithful Hebrew men trusted in God, who, according to the foregoing text, “changed the king’s word.” Another translation renders that part of the text in this manner: “When the word of the king they transgressed.” (Ilnth.) “And had transgressed the king’s word.” (Lccscr) This has reference to the king Nebuchadnezzar when he stood for or represented the Devil and the three faithful Hebrews did there ‘change’ his word, or ‘transgress’ it; otherwise they would not have been thrown into the furnace. Even so in this day, the faithful remnant change or challenge the word of Satan and his earthly representatives by boldly declaring that Satan and the earthly rulers, his representatives of the present time, do not constitute the higher powers or supreme authority, but that Jehovah and Christ Jesus are the higher powers and that they, as Jehovah’s witnesses, will boldly declare the truth, and that they will obey the word of Jehovah and Christ Jesus, and not that of men. By their bold and fearless stand these witnesses put themselves entirely on God’s side and they put a different face on the “king’s word” as to its power and application. Not for self-gain do the.v do this, but, prompted by their love for God, the faithful remnant now ‘yield their bodies’ to Jehovah, even as the faithful witnesses, the three Hebrews, permitted their bodies to be cast into the fire rather than to deny Jehovah. The faithful now yield their bodies that they might not serve any power1 that is opposed to Jehovah God; and, in order for this yielding to be
acceptable, it must be prompted by love, which is an unselfish devotion to Jehovah: “And if I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and if I give my body to be burned, but have not love, it profiteth me nothing.” —1 Cor. 13:3, A.ll.V.
30	It was the question of their integrity and devotion toward God that led the three Hebrews into the fiery furnace. It is a question of their maintaining their integrity toward Jehovah God that is the inducing cause that leads up to the battle of Armageddon and the persecution upon the faithful which precedes and accompanies that battle. If such question had not been involved Jehovah could just as easily have demonstrated his power at Eden by there destroying Satan. Jehovah waits till Armageddon to execute Satan and his host of rebels, in order that Jehovah’s witnesses might first declare his name throughout the earth, thereby furnishing them an opportunity to prove their integrity toward God and to prove Satan a liar, and then he exercises his power by destroying Satan’s organization. The integrity of these witnesses involves the word and name of Jehovah, and to those who really love him he gives opportunity to prove their integrity and their love. In goodness toward his children who are now on the earth Jehovah long ago pictured the importance of maintaining integrity toward him by permitting these three Hebrew men to be cast into the fiery furnace and a record thereof to be made and preserved, and this he did to aid and comfort the remnant. Today, when the faithful remnant read the many marvelous things recorded in the .Scriptures they can truly say: ‘These things were written long ago, and are now made known to us in these last days that wc might, while patiently pursuing the way God has marked out for us, be comforted, and that wc might have hope of complete victory through Christ Jesus our Lord.’ (Rom. 15:4) As the remnant read these precious truths from the treasure house of Jehovah they do joyfully and thankfully exclaim: ‘Surely our God is feeding us upon food that is convenient for us; he has spread a feast for us while we are surrounded by the enemy.’ Let the remnant now rtjoiee and confidently and patiently march on to Armageddon. Jehovah will gain for himself the victory by his strong right arm, Christ Jesus.
31	Then Nebuchadnezzar promulgated a decree; “Therefore I make a decree, That every people, nation, and language, which speak any thing amiss against the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, shall be cut in pieces, and their houses shall be made a dunghill; because there is no other god that can deliver after this sort.” (Dan. 3: 29) That decree was against anyone who should become God's enemy, and foreshadows the decree of Christ against those who become Jehovah’s enemy after’ Armageddon. It will then be a serious matter to speak against Jehovah God. Christ Jesus the great King sanctifies Jehovah’s name and promulgates his decree in that behalf, even as he once taught his followers to pray, “Hallowed be
314
OTSe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
thy name.” During the reign of Christ Jesus all who live must render faithful service to Jehovah; and those who refuse will be cut off. (Isa. 65:20; Ps. 145:20) The decree of the king was, “[They] shall be cut in pieces, and their houses shall be made a dunghill,” At the conclusion of the thousand-year reign of Christ, Satan, Gog, and all of those that deceive and follow Satan shall come forth and be brought together and will speak against Jehovah and his kingdom, and then they shall be “eut in pieces”, that is, killed in no gentle manner, being destroyed in the second death. (Rev. 20:7-10) This is also pictured by the act of Jehu in making the house of Baal a “draught house”, that is, a place of decomposition or rot. (2 Ki. 10:27) “The name of the wicked shall rot.” (Prov. 10:7) The place where the wicked existed, even the very memory thereof, will become foul; but the name of Jehovah is forever clean and holy, and will thus continue without reproach: “And they shall go forth, and look upon the carcases of the men that have transgressed against me; for their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched; and they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh. Isa. 66:24.
32	“There is no other god that can deliver after this sort,” said the decree of the king. Jehovah’s unmatched power of deliverance at Armageddon will prove his supremacy and that nothing can successfully resist his power. Now it is seen that the crucial test must come just before and at Armageddon, and in that test the faithful have the assurance that almighty power will be used in their behalf. (Deut. 33:27) Jehovah will make it plain to his people now that the only place of safety is in his organization. Into this he has brought his anointed ones, and now their loyalty and fidelity to him is permitted to be tested, and in his loving-kindness he gives to the anointed advance information concerning their protection and deliverance, that they may remain firm and steadfast on his side during the fiery test. Such evidence brings great comfort to the remnant and enables them to patiently pursue the course which is now set before them. The Jonadab class, having taken their stand on the side of Jehovah, may also be subjected to some severe trials, but they too will find protection and safety only by remaining true and faithful to God and Ids organization.
23 Ilananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, the Hebrew names of those three men cast into the furnace, and whose Babylonish names were Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, wore without doubt used to foreshadow those of the faithful remnant on earth who maintain their integrity toward God in the day of crucial trial just preceding and at Armageddon. The picture there made shows Jehovah's continued favor to those who remain faithful and true to him: “Then the king promoted Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, in the province of Babylon.” (Vs. 30) That promotion of the three Hebrews suggests further privileges of service that God will give to his faithful remnant on the
earth immediately following Armageddon. That service, to be sure, will be temporary, but it seems reasonable that God would have some service performed on earth by his faithful remnant at the beginning of the reconstruction work in connection with those faithful men of old who shall become the visible governors on earth. It will be a great privilege to personally meet these new governors at that time and have some communion, fellowship and service with them. That will be a happy time.
31 That the promotion of the three faithful Hebrews foreshadowed further service on earth for the remnant after Armageddon is supported by what came to pa.-s on Mordecai, who was advanced to a position of unusual honor in the realm of the king in his time. “For Mordecai the Jew was next unto king Ahasuerus, and great among the Jews, and accepted of the multitude of his brethren, seeking the wealth of his people, and speaking peace to all his seed.” (Esther 10:3; see L‘reservation, page 166) Probably Mordecai and the three faithful Hebrews together with Daniel will he among those who are resurrected and who meet with the faithful remnant on earth immediately following Armageddon and who participate in the work of speaking peace to the people, and directing them in the way of peace and prosperity, all of which they will do, to be sure, under the direction of Christ Jesus, the great King. All of that shall be done to the praise and glory of Jehovah God. The temple work on earth after Armageddon will be followed by a change of the remnant from human to spirit organism and to the realm of far greater opportunities of service to the Most High. Paul must have had a vision of these things when, moved by the holy spirit, he wrote to his brethren in Christ, to wit: “For our light afilietion, which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory; while we look not at the things which are seen, but- at the things which are not seen: for the things which are, seen are temporal; but the things which are not seen are eternal.”—2 Cor. 4:17,18.
33 Seeing the great and crucial test that must come to those who remain true to the end, the apostle, under inspiration of the holy.spirit, also said: “For I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.” (Rom. 8:38,39) Such faithful ones will participate in the vindication of Jehovah’s holy name.
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
IT 1. Explain tho necessity fur the sufferings to which Jesus was subjected. Who else will suiter in similar manner, and for what purpose? How will these regard such afilictimr, and why?
2-4. What is tho prophetic position of Nebuchadnezzar .'it this point in the prophecy, and Imw is this «!i-u iminwl 3 By what procedure did the Devil’s earthly icpK'Sent.-ttn-s affect an attitude of fairness toward these three men, and
October 15, 1934
WATCHTOWER.
315
for what purpose was this done? How does this find a parallel today? Relate other instances of similar procedure recorded in the Scriptures,
? 5, 6. In the light of Romans 15: 4, and of the great rovela-tion of Jehovah’s purposes at the present time, what may the remnant expect from the enemy? How will this prophecy now serve to strengthen the faithful?
K 7, 8. Describe the situation for which the prophetic declaration of verse 17 was provided. Apply the expression “But if not’’, in this connection, together with the further emphatic assertion of verso 18.
f 9, Describe the occasion on which the words of Acts 4: 19 and 5: 29 were spoken. How do these words find application at the present time?
V 10-12. Why does Jehovah’s witnesses’ firin stand for God and his Word bring opposition from the earthly rulers, and particularly from the clergy? Apply verso 19.
f 13-15. What lesson lies in the failure of Nebuchadnezzar’s supremo effort to destroy those three faithful men? In the test made by Elijah before Ahab! What seems to bo foreshadowed by the procedure described in verse 20, and how would this compare with tire condition that obtained in 1918? Point out Jehovah’s hand in relation to the activities of the enemy’s forces, as also foretold in Ezekiel 38: 16.
T 10. Explain and apply verse 21.
t 17, 18. Referring to verses 19-21: Compare the purpose with the outcome of what was here done. What lesson for the faithful is seen in. verse 22?
If 19-21. Account for Nebuchadnezzar’s so early observing what
was taking place in the furnace, and for his astonishment and anxious inquiry. What did Nebuchadnezzar see in the furnace? and what do the faithful now see in the prophetic record thereof? Quote additional scriptures assuring the remnant that Jehovah will protect and deliver them from the power of the enemy.
IF 22. What change of scene here takes place? Apply the prophetic picture presented in verse 26.
IF 23. Describe the occasion for the words of praise recorded at Exodus 15: 1-3,18.
f 24. Relate the experience of Jeremiah (40: 1-6) as a further example of God's protection and preservation of his faithful servants.
If 25. What is foreshown in the record of verse 27?
y 26-29. Explain and apply verse 28.
If 30. Why did Jehovah approve the position maintained by Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego? and what is the lesson presented therein for the faithful today?
f 31. Nebuchadnezzar then made what decree? and against whom? How docs this find application as a prophecy? Quote other scriptures declaring the judgment awaiting those who oppose God.
fl 32-34. What is pictured in the deliverance “after this sort’’ and in the king's promoting these three faithful men? Point out the harmony therewith of the prophetic record at Esther 10:3 and of Paul’s words at 2 Corinthians •4: 17,18.
J 35. To what did Paul refer in Romans 8: 38,39? and why is it that ‘none of these things shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord’?
JEHOVAH
hath made himself known, he hath e-rreuted judgment: the wicked is snared in the work of his own hands. The wicked shall he turned back •unto Shrol, erin all the nations that forget God. For the needy shall not aliray be forgotten, nor the espretation of the poor perish for ever. Arise, () Jehovah; let not man prevail: let the nations be judged in thy sight. Put them in fear, O Jehovah: let the nations know themselves to be but men.—David.
AN ASSYRIA IN MODERN STYLE
ANCIENT Assyria was a powerful political organization, with the political rulers in the van. The great power, however, was really exercised by the commercial interests. The political power or representative was in fact the spokesman for the commercial power. Great military organizations were formed and employed to enforce the decrees of the rulers. The Devi' religion furnished the camouflage for the bloody and cruel operations of that organization. This was done, as the prophet Nahum (3:4) says, “because of the multitude of the whoredoms of the wellfavoured harlot, the mistress of witchcrafts, that selleth nations through her whoredoms, and families through her witchcrafts.”
“Christendom/’ so called, is modern Assyria, corresponding so exactly that it seems certain that God caused the record of ancient Assyria to be made prophetically foretelling the condition on earth at the present time. Today the politicians of the nations of earth are in the van and are speaking great swelling words of their ability to adjust the difficulties of the world and to establish a satisfactory condition. The power behind these political rulers and spokesmen is
the great commercial factors of the world. It is the latter that really provide the means for the mighty military machines to enforce the decrees of the rulers.
As the political and financial element of ancient Assyria adopted the Devil religion of that time, even so the religious element of “Christendom” today ably supports the political and financial factors in world policies. Catholies and Protestants, Jewish rabbis and all other “approved” religionists, join together in extolling the virtues of the modern ruling powers, and boast of the ability to establish peace on earth anti good will toward men.
Ancient Assyria was a “bloody” organization. (Nah. 3:1) There is more human blood properly charged up to modern Assyria, otherwise called “Christendom”, than to any other period of the world’s history. In the World War millions of people poured out their lifeblood, and many more millions have been the prey of the great military powers of ‘ ‘ Christendom ’ ’.
Ancient Assyria was, according to the prophet’s words (Nah. 3:1), “full of lies and robbery.” The sixteen years immediately following the World War
316
STIe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
have been made prominent by the clivers fraudulent and false schemes to exploit and rob the people. The farmer has been exploited and .robbed by schemes of the financiers, in which the other two ruling factors have rendered aid in wrongdoing. The burden of taxation has been greatly increased, and many persons have lost their homes and lands by reason of exorbitant and unreasonable tax burdens placed against their property for public improvements. Public officials have become the bosses of the people instead of being servants of the people. The great financiers name the political candidates and permit the people to go through the form of voting for them, and then elect those whom the financial power desires. This is particularly true in America. The great financial institutions control the food and raiment supply that the people must have for their maintenance and support.
Material wealth was never so great as it. is in modern “Christendom”, but this wealth is held by a few. Every nation is bristling with guns, warships, aircraft and high explosives, and other means for the destruction of human life.
The political rulers are making peace pacts and thereby claiming that they will outlaw war, while at the same time every nation of “Christendom” is making greater preparations for war than at any time past. In this policy the political clement is strongly supported by the commercial and the religious element.
The religious clement of “Christendom”, while claiming to follow Christ, deny his second coming and his kingdom, and refuse to hear and obey the Word of God. The clergy and religious leaders are proud, haughty, boasters, false accusers of those who serve God, and despisers of all who diligently seek to tell the people the truth in the name of the Lord God. Being a factor of Satan’s organization, the religionists are supported by the other ruling factors because the latter believe it expedient for them so to do.
The apostle Paul wrote a prophecy which is in this very day coming to pass, even as he said: “This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come. For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, traitors, heady, highminded, lovers of pleasures more than lover's of God; having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof: from such turn away.”—2 Tim. 3:1-5.
From the Scriptures it is now clear that the three ancient world powers, namely, Babylon, Egypt, and Assyria, emphasize the three elements of Satan’s visible organization. With Egypt the commercial power was the greatest; with Assyria the political power excelled; with Babylon the ecclesiastical element was to the fore. Thereafter these three ruling elements, namely, the political, financial, and religious, were manifested in all succeeding world powers. Medo-Persia, Greece and Home followed in the order named. Each
of those world powers practiced the Devil religion. The religion of ancient Home was called pagan. In the course of time the stronger political rulers of Rome adopted the “Christian religion” and carried into that organization, so formed, many of the ceremonies practiced by the pagans. Rome became a great military power, and her commercial and political and religious interests walked hand in hand in oppressing the people.
Then came the British Empire (including America) as a mighty world power, and in this the three elements, commercial, political and religious, have formed the ruling factors, and continue to rule. It too has become a tremendous commercial power and a great and cruel military^ power, and the religionists form a part of the government. Surely it could not be said that any of these world powers is any part of God’s organization. Since there are but two great organizations, namely, God’s organization and Satan’s organization, this empire must of necessity be of Satan's organization. Exactly the same is true concerning America, where the three elements of Satan’s organization rule the people.
The World War produced a condition making possible the formation of the eighth world power, to wit, the League of Nations, and that was foretold in prophecy. (Isa. 8: 9,10; Rev. 17: 9,11) That alliance or pact was formed by the political clement, aided and supported by the financial and military factors, and fully supported and approved by the religionists of “Christendom”. The latter openly declared in tlie year 1919 that 'the League of Nations constitutes God’s kingdom on earth’ and substitutes for it. Can it be honestly contended that the League of Nations constitutes any part of God’s organization? If not, then certainly it is of Satan’s organization. Yet now the League of Nations, Inc., organized in America, makes appeal for America’s entry into the League and, referring to the League, says: “In a world as dark as this, why blow out the only light there is?” thus denying the King, Christ Jesus, who said: “I am the light of the world.”
In the year 1914 Christ Jesus was placed upon his throne by Jehovah God. That same year the World War began, and during that war the hatred of combined “Christendom” was made manifest against ail who sincerely served Jehovah God. The great Prophet of God foretold that condition when he said: “And ye shall be hated of all nations for my name’s sake.”— Matt. 24: 9.
It was in A.D. 1918 that all the nations of “Christendom” involved in the World War openly expressed and manifested a hatred against those who insisted on serving God and telling the people of his coming kingdom for their blessing. These humble followers of Christ were haled into court, were tried upon false charges and perjured testimony, and were wrongfully convicted. Many were imprisoned, others beaten, and others killed. They were thrown into military prisons
October 15, 1931
WATCHTOWER.
317
and grossly illtreated because they humbly asked the privilege to serve God and tell his Word of truth and obey his injunction not to kill. Such hatred could have been' expressed only by Satan’s organization and instigated by Satan himself.
The ‘seed of Satan’ and the ‘seed of the woman’, which God had foretold would be at enmity with each other, were at that time brought forth and made manifest, and Jehovah said that there would be enmity between them, and that the ‘seed of Satan would bruise the heel of the seed of the woman’. (Gen. 3:15) Christ is the ‘seed of the woman’, and his last faithful followers on earth constitute the “feet of him”, including the heel. (Isa. 52: 7) That prophecy long ago uttered began to have its fulfilment in the year 1918. Since then the two great signs in heaven have appeared, namely, the sign of God’s organization (his “woman”) and the sign of the Devil’s organization (the “great red dragon”).
The latter great “wonder” or sign, which appeared after 1918 to those who by the grace of God have been enabled to see heavenly things, is Satan’s cruel, blood-guilty organization standing ready to devour the Kingdom of God, represented by the “man child” which was born to God’s “woman” or organization in A.D. 1914. (Rev. 12:1-4) It is well known to all that the clergy and religious leaders of “Christendom”, so called, hate, and violently oppose those who insist on telling the people that .Jehovah is God, that Christ is King, that his kingdom is here, that Jehovah has set him upon his throne, and that shortly he will establish a righteous government and destroy all wickedness. The Devil bates those who faithfully represent Jehovah, and seeks to devour them; and the clergy and religious leaders of “Christendom” also hate them, because such clergy and leaders do the will of their father whose children or “seed” they are.—John 8:42,44.	.
Ancient Babylon overthrew Assyria and absorbed it. Satan has made “Christendom” a part of Babylon which is his organization, and therefore the name Babylon applies to “Christendom” because it is of Satan’s organization. Through the false religionists of Satan’s organization, the political and commercial rulers of earth have been drawn into that wicked system. The Lord makes it evident that they have been deceived, because he says that in his due time these shall awake to the truth, in a measure at least, and rid themselves of the vile religious system.—Rev. 17:12,16.
Prior to the World War the moral conditions of the earth were bad enough, but all will agree that since the World War the moral degeneracy is far worse. There is great corruption in public official places. The exploiting of the people is boldly carried on; the public press is full of accounts of crime and scandal. Even the vice among young students has become such that it is appalling and causing great concern to parents. Many honest persons joined in the effort to prohibit the manufacture and use of intoxicating liquors, be
lieving that in so doing they would aid the moral status of the people. The facts show that the Devil seized upon this condition to increase immorality and debauchery.
Prior to the World War it was thought to be wrong for men to indulge in the use of tobacco and liquor. Since the war women use both tobacco and liquor, many even more freely than men, and this is extended even to young girls and boys in the public schools. Because of these alarming conditions many good people are now seeking earnestly to find the remedy. There must be a reason for this terrible condition. There is a reason, and the Lord God’s great Prophet assigned that reason, and it is this:
In A.D. 1914 Jehovah placed his King upon his throne. (Ps. 2:6) There followed a war in heaven, with Christ Jesus and bis angels on one side against Satan and his angels on the other side, which war resulted in the casting of Satan out of heaven. (Rev. 12:7-9) Then it is recorded that, because Satan was east out of heaven, there was great rejoicing; and at the same time it was announced: “Now is come salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ.” (Rev. 12:10) Then says the prophet of God: “Woe to the inhabiters of the earth, and of the sea! for the devil is come down unto you, having great wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a short time.” (Rev. 12:12) Thus the prophecy shows that the Devil is now devoting his entire attention to the things of this earth. The “i>i-liabiters of the earth” are those who control the affairs of the earth; and, in fulfilment of this prophecy, at this time there is great perplexity and distress amongst those who do rule, and they are unable to ascertain the reason why. (Luke 21:26) The “sea” in this prophecy represents the masses of humanity who are alienated from God and exploited by the ruling powers, and the condition of whom groves worse day by day. This explains the reason wlqv there has been such a great moral degeneracy during the past ten years and more.
The evidence is conclusive that Satan’s organization is now in control of'the affairs of earth. The great Prophet of God foretold this condition, and it has now come to pass. Carrying out his well laid plan Satan is now desperately trying to turn all the peoples of earth away from Jehovah God and to plunge all humanity into the depths of wickedness. Ue knows that the climax is at hand: hence his desperate deeds of corruption and debauchery.
Politicians and commercial giants may try to reform the conditions; the elergy may talk of bringing about ideal conditions on earth; and all together they may make peace pacts and declare that they will bring about lasting peace, but the joint efforts of all will fail. There is no power on earth now that is able to remedy earth’s evils. Satan’s organization is in control, and the people’s hands are shackled. There are many people of good will, outside of the church
318
THe WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y.
denominations, who by their combined efforts will try to remedy present conditions; but they cannot. There is a remedy, and it is complete. It is the only remedy; and it is of much vital importance that the peoples of the nations of earth now be given an opportunity to know what that remedy is.
To give such information is the very purpose of the publicity work of Jehovah’s witnesses. It is of vital importance that the people know the cause of the evil, before they can appreciate how the evil can be eradicated. When we see what constitutes Satan’s organization, how cruel, wicked, harsh, bloody, immoral and powerful it is, then we can begin to see the necessity
of a greater power than it to destroy it. At once it becomes apparent that no human powers could accomplish this end. When we see also that the so-called “Christian religion” or “organized Christianity” upholds, aids and supports in carrying on this devilish and oppressive system, then we may know that “organized Christianity”, so called, is not God’s religion, but the religion of the Devil; and we may know it is a part of the Devil’s organization. It is therefore apparent why the clergy and religious leaders of today oppose the truth that is being promulgated by a company of humble Christians who are generally known as witnesses of Jehovah God.
O JEHOVAH GOD
of hosts, who is a mighty one like unto thee, 0 Jehovah? Thy faithfulness is round about thee. Righteousness and justice are the foundation of thy thione: lovingkindness and truth go before thy face. Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound: they walk, () Jehovah, in the light of thy countenance. In thy name do they rejoice all the day. Thou art the glory of their strength.—Psalmist.
PLACE OF THE SIN-ATONEMENT
THROUGH the prophet Moses at Mount Sinai in Arabia Jehovah God issued a command and set of instructions to the Jewish people to build a sacred structure, “the tabernacle of the congregation.” “And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Speak unto the children of Israel, . . . and let them make me a sanctuary: that I may dwell among them. According to all that I shew thee, after the pattern of the tabernacle, . . . even so shall ye make it.”— Ex. 25:1,8,9.
The tabernacle may be properly described as a house constructed of boards set on end, in sockets of silver, and fastened together and then covered or overlaid with gold; and over this house of wood was stretched a tent or covering.
The measurements of the tabernacle are in cubits. There was a cubit of twenty-one inches measured by six handbreadths at three and one-half inches to the handbreadth. The prophet Ezekiel mentions a cubit of the altar seen in his vision as “the cubit and an hand breadth”. The weight of the evidence, however, seems to favor the conclusion that the tabernacle structure was built and measured according to the eighteen-inch cubit and hence was fifteen feet wide, fifteen feet high, and forty-five feet in length.
There were two rooms or compartments of the tabernacle, divided by a heavy curtain or veil. The one farthest from the entrance, and on the west side, is called the “holiest of all”, and was fifteen feet long, fifteen feet wide, and fifteen feet high. The other compartment was thirty feet in length, fifteen feet wide, and fifteen feet high, and is called “the holy”. The
veil that separated the holy from the most holj' was hung upon four pillars of shittim wood, which were overlaid with gold. This veil was made of blue, purple and scarlet, and fine twined linen, with figures of the cherubim beautifully and cunningly interwoven therein.—Ex. 26:31,32.
The way or entrance into the holy is called the door of the tent. This was made of cloth or curtains of blue, purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen wrought with needlework, hung over five pillars of shittim wood overlaid with gold.—Ex. 26: 36.
The apostle Paul gives a description of the furnishings of the tabernacle, saying: “For there was a tabernacle made; the first, wherein was the candlestick, and the table, and the shewbread ; which is called the sanctuary. And after the second vail. The tabernacle which is called the Holiest of all; which had the golden censer, and the ark of the covenant overlaid round about with gold, wherein was the golden pot that had manna, and Aaron’s rod that budded, and the tables of the covenant; and over itthecherubimsof glory shadowing the racrey seat; of which wo cannot now speak particularly.”—Heb. 9: 2-5; Ex. 40:19-29.
The tabernacle was the place of meeting het ween God and the Israelites; and this was manifested by the supernatural light which appeared in the “holiest of all”, between the cherubim, and which represented the divine presence. There was no other light in the most holy. In the holy or first compartment was a candlestick, which was kept lighted; and it was the only light therein. The heavy cloth covering of the tabernacle or tent excluded all light from the outside.
October 15, 1934
WATCHTOWER.
319
The tabernacle was surrounded by a yard or court. This was seventy-five feet wide by one hundred and fifty feet in length, and was formed by a linen curtain round about, suspended from silver books fastened in the tops of wooden posts, which posts were set in sockets of copper. It was braced with cords fastened to pins. the tabernacle tent was braced in the same manner. This court was not a part of the tabernacle, but surrounded it, and was used in connection with the tabernacle. It was called ‘ ‘ the court of the tabernacle”. The entrance thereto was on the east and was designated “the gate”. This was made of white linen interwoven with blue, purple, and scarlet.—Ex. 27: 9-18.
Inside the court and before the door of the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation was placed the altar upon which was burned the sacrifice. With the altar were the various firepans, fleshhooks, and other necessary utensils. This altar was made of wood and covered with copper, and was known as the brazen altar.
Between the brazen altar and the door of the tent of the congregation was placed the laver. (Ex. 40: 5-7,29, 30) The laver was made of copper; and in it was placed water for Moses, Aaron the priest, and his sons to wash their hands and feet thereat.
The Scriptures frequently use the expression, “before the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.” It is quite certain from the Scriptures that the “door” always means the entryway into the tabernacle proper, and never the entrance-way into the court. The court was relatively unimportant in the eyes of the Jews; for they had free access to it on all days except the atonement day. (Lev. 1:3; 12:6; Num. 6:13-18) They were particularly concerned about the tabernacle, because this was the meeting-place between them and Jehovah.
In the scripture which describes the people of Israel as being gathered together “before the door of the tabernacle of the congregation”, the reference is evidently to the assemblage of the people to the east of that sacred structure, instead of being scattered about it on all sides ns they would Ire if in their tents regularly occupied by them. It seems also quite evident that the gateway or entrance into the court was lifted or left open on such occasions, so that the tabernacle structure was in full view of the representative men who stood before the entrance.
All the ground within the enclosure of the court hangings, including, of course, the ground upon which the tabernacle was situated, was holy ground. This was particularly true at the time of the ceremonies of the atonement day, once a year.
The Israelites were encamped about the tabernacle in regular order. This was because of God’s command. “And the Lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying, Every man of the children of Israel shall pitch by his own standard, with the ensign of their father’s
house: far off about the tabernacle of the congregation shall they pitch.”—Num. 2:1, 2.
The camp of the tribe of Judah had the position of favor on the east side, toward the rising of the sun. Looking toward the tabernacle enclosure, the tribes of Zebulun and Issaehar were respectively on the left and the right of Judah on the cast side. On the north were the tribes of Dan, Asher and Naphtali; on the west, Benjamin, Ephraim and Manasseh; on the south, Reuben, Gad, and .Simeon.
The families of the tribe of Levi were given preferential positions near to the tabernacle. The family of Gershon pitched on the west side of the tabernacle enclosure; on the north were the Merarik-s; while on the south were the sons of Kohath located. .Moses and Aaron were grandsons of Kohath; and they and Aaron's sons were stationed immediately to the cast of the tabernacle entrance, because they were separated from their brethren, by special anointing with the holy oil, to do the work of sacrifice, particularly the atonement-day sacrifices which constituted the special sin-offerings.—Num. 3:14-38.
Jehovah caused a priesthood to be selected, anointed and installed in connection with the tabernacle service. A priest is an official servant of Jehovah God. In organizations made by men priests are often appointed by men, or by themselves, and use their office for a selfish purpose, sometimes for commercial purposes. Oftentimes a priesthood of Israel degenerated into that. But such was not the purpose of Jehovah God. No man has authority to take such honor unto himself. The apostle Paul writes to this effect, saying: “And no man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron.” (Jlcb. 5:4) The priest used in connection with the tabernacle service was the servant of Jehovah God. He performed the duties the Lord assigned unto him. God's law required him to he selected from the tribe of Levi. Aaron was the first high priest. Ills sons were priests under him.
God’s instructions to Moses were these: “And thou shalt bring Aaron and his sons unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and wash them with water. And thou shalt put upon Aaron the holy garments, and anoint him, ami sanctify him ; that he may minister unto me in the priest's office. And thou shalt bring his sons, and clothe them with coats: and thou shalt anoint them, as thou didst anoint their father, that they may minister unto me in the priest’s office; for their anointing shall surely be an everlasting priesthood throughout their generations.”—Ex. 40:12-15.
The anointing of the priesthood and the garments with which they Were clothed all symbolically testified that they were officiallj’ the designated servants of -Jehovah. They were formally inaugurated or installed into office; and on that occasion all of the congregation were gathered together before the door of the tabernacle; and then Moses informed the people
320
THe WATCHTOWER,
Brooklyn, N. Y;
what the Lord had commanded him to do with reference to installing the priesthood. (Lev. 8:2-5) Then Moses proceeded to consecrate and inaugurate the priests, as described in the book of Leviticus, the eighth chapter.
In this ceremony it is important to notice that the anointing oil was poured upon the head of Aaron but not upon his sons. This testifies that Aaron was the head or high priest, and that his sons were underpriests. Together they represent or picture the new creation of God, both the Head and body thereof, in the course of development, and while on the earth. Not only were the priests officially anointed to serve Jehovah in an official capacity, but the service which was performed in connection with the consecration and institution of the priesthood foreshadowed that the ones whom they represented must enter into a covenant with Jehovah, be wholly and unreservedly devoted to him, and serve him in obedience to his commands.
There are many pictures and details in connection with the building of the tabernacle, the inauguration of the priesthood, and the sacrifice; but the one which is particularly germane to the question of the sinoffering in behalf of mankind was that which took place upon the day of atonement.
Jehovah gave command that the tenth day of the seventh month of each year should be a day of atonement for the Jewish nation. “For,” said the Lord, “on that day shall the priest make an atonement for you, to cleanse you, that ye may be clean from all your sins before the Lord.” (Lev. 16:30) On that day the priest who had been anointed and consecrated to serve in the priest’s office must be clothed with the linen garments. These may be properly designated as the garments for sacrifice.
Whatever assistance or service the underpricsts rendered, the command of Jehovah was positive that the high priest alone had access to “the holiest of all” on the day of atonement. Even the high prie t mibt not enter “the holiest of all” on that day except in exact compliance with the prescribed law. If he failed to comply with the law the penalty was death. (Lev. 16: 2) The strict observance of God’s command in this connection indicates the great importance of the picture about to be made. Jehovah used Moses to instruct Aaron, the high priest, what he should do on this important occasion.—Lev. 16:3-5.
SERVICE APPOINTMENTS
T. E. BANKS
J. C. RAINBOW
Hartford, Conn.......Nov.	J, 2
New Haven, Conn........"	3,4
Clin wood, N.J.........”	<i, 7
Brooklyn, N. Y.........”	8, 0
Now York. N.Y.........."	10,11
Newark, N.J............”	13,14
Montclair, N. J........"	15,10
G. II. DRAPER
Atlantic City, N.J. ..Nov. 17, IS Philmldpliiti. Pa......”	20.21
Washington, D. C.......”	22.23
Norfolk, Vu............”	25. 2G
Lyndibnrg, Vn..........”	27,28
Roanoke, Va............”	21), 30
Salisbury, N. C......Dec.	1, 2
Areola, III		...Nov.	1
Di’e.imr, HI		1 9	2. 3
Pana, III		It	4
Mattoon, Ill. 				M	(1
Neoga, 111		11	7
Martin.Hville, III		»»	8
Willow Hili. Ill		11	9
Flat Kook, III		.... ”	10
Lawn neev ille, III. .	»>	11
Sumner, 111		11	13
West Xah*in. Ill		11*	1 t
Bellmont. HI		>»	15
Flora. Ill		.... ”	10
Kinard, III..........Nov.	17
Junction, HI..........."	is
Harrisburg,, ill......."	20
White Ash, 111.........”	21
Frankfort. Ill.........”	22
Carbondale, HI.........”	23
Christopher, HI........”	21
Swanwick, III..........”	25
Addieville. Ill........"	27
Mt. Vernon, HI........’’	28
Dix, 111...............”	29
Centralia. Ill.........”	30
Salem, Hl............Dec.	1
Clinton, Okln.........Nov. 1
Hydro, Okla		... ”	2
I.iHikiba, Okla		... ”	3
A|»arh?t Okla		... ”	4
Hobart. Okla		...”	6
Altus Okla		... ”	7, 8
Cliattiuioogn, Okla. .	... ”	9
Waurika. Okla		... ”	10
Wilson, Okla		" n
Diim-an. Okla		... ”	13
Chickasha, Okla		... ” 14, 15
Amber, Okla.........Nov.	1(1
Oklahoma City, Okla. ”	17111
Mays) ilia, Okla......”	21
Wynne W<x>d, Okla.....”	22
Ada, Okla.............”	23
Tecumseh, Okla........”	24.25
Weleetka. Okla........”	27
Chandler. Okla........”	28
Drumright. Okla.......”	20
Perkins, Okla........ ”	30
Stillwater, Okla....Dec.	1
W. J. THORN
Tarrjtown, N.Y.		Nov.	2
Yonkers, N. Y			”	3, 4
Jerncy City, N. J.		” G, 7
Bayonne, N. J			”	8. 9
Elizabeth, N'. J. ..		” 10,11
N<*wutk, N.J			 ” 13,11
IHoomtieki, N. J. ..		” 15, Hi
Passaic, N.J..........Nov.	17, IS
Monlel.iir. N.J.........”	20
Garlidd, N.J............”	21
Paterson, N.J...........”	1’2,23
Park lodge, N. J....... ”	24. 25
Dover. N. J.............”	27, 28
Plainlidd, N. J.........”	2t>, 30
A. II. MACMILLAN
Schenectady, N. Y..Nov. 3, 4
Albany, N. Y. __________”	0, 7
Troy, N. Y.............."	8, 9
Pittsfield, Mass........"	10.11
Greentield, Mass........”	13,14
Springfield, Mass.......”	15.1G
Worcester, Mass.........”	17,18
Leominster. Mass. ... Nov.	20. 2t
I.owcll. Mass..........”	22.23
Manchester, N. H.......”	24. 25
Portland, Me...........”	27.28
Lewiston. Me...........”	29
Auburn, Me.............”	30
North Jay, Me........Dec.	1
S. H. TOUTJIAN
Havana, Fla..........Nov.	1
Bascom, Fla............."	2
Marianna, Fla...........”	3
Lynn H-iien, Fla........”	4
Ponce de Leon, Fla.	.. ”	«
De Fnniak Sp'g.s, Fla.	”	7
Pensiicola, Ha.......” S. 9
Silver <1)11. Ala.......”	10
Fairhope. Ala...........”	11
Mobile. Ala.............”	13,14
Bay Minette. Ala....."	15
Brewton, Ala............”	1<>
Amlalm-la, Ala.......Nov.	17
OPP. Ala..............  "	18
Elba, Ahi..............”	20
Geneva. Ala............”	21
Slocomb, Ala...........”	22
laifaula, Ala..........”	23
Vuion Springs. Ala. ”	24
Montgomerv, Ala....” 25,23
Marbury, Ala..........’’	28
Eclectic, Ain......... "	29
Notasulga, Ala.........”	30
Auburn, Ala..........Dec.	1
G. Y. M’CORMICK
El Centro, Calif		..Nov.	2
8an biogo, Calif		»>	3,4
Encinitas, Calif		o	6
Escondido, Calif		it	7
Riverside, Calif		i>	8,9
Santa Ana, Calif			10, 11
Fullerton, Calif. 		»»	13, 14
Long Beach, Calif..Nov. 15, 1R
Rosemead, Calif........” 17.18
.Monrovia. Calif.....” 2<>, 21
Pasadena, Calif......." 22. 23
Los Angeles, Calif. ...”	24.25
Glendale, Calif......." 27. 28
Ventura, Calif......Nov. 29,30
J. C. WATT
Colling, Mich.........Nov.	2
Marlette, Mich..........”	3
Durand. Mich............”	4
Saranae. Midi. .........”	0
Edrnore, Mich...........”	7
Mt. Pleasant. .Mich.....”	.8
Grand Rapids. Mich. 9.10
Muskegon, Mich......" 11,12
Holland, Mich...........”	14
Allegan, Mich...........”	15
Hastings, Mich.......Nov.	1G
Battle Creek. Midi....."	17, IS
Kalamazoo, Midi........”	20.21
South Haven. Midi......”	22
Benton Harbor. Midi. ”	23,2 1
Cassopolis, Mi. li....."	25
Three Rivers. Mich.....”	27
Coldwater, Midi........”	28
Tccunvdi, Midi.........”	29
Deerfield, Mich........”	30

Vol. LV
Semi-Monthly
No. 21
NOVEMBER 1, 1934
CONTENTS
335
Wi Hit.'!
Feast of Conspirators (Part 1) Epitome .......................
Belshazzar and His Feast ....
Handwriting .................
323
323 32d
©WTB.cTS^;^'
are my witnesses saithJEKov MlamOod Iss. 43:12
(ashman,&hat of theffigW*
isaiah
Questions for Study ..............  331
Christians Persecuted: Why Permitted 332


Letters ..........................
Jehovah’s Provision ............
Phonograph and Keeords a Blessing Gratitude to Jehovah for Light . Not Defeated ................
Radio Service__________________
Atlanta Convention ............
The Servant’s Testimony Period 1 ‘ Angels ’ ’
331
334




eKe WATCHTOWER.
Published Semi-Monthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N. Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford President W. E. VAX Amburgh Secretary "And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.”~ Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is tho only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, tho Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that tho Logos was the b.’ginnirg of liis creation and his active agent in tho crea’ion of all things; that tho Logos is now tho Lord Jesus Ch ri ri in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created tho earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man wilfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that Ly reason of Adam’s wrong act all men aro born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was mado human, and tho man Jesus suffered death in order to produce tho ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH'S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus i3 tho Chief Officer thereof and is tho rightful King of tho world; that tlio anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus aro children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and aro his witnesses v.hoso duty and privilege it is to testify to tire supremacy of Jehovah, declare liis purposes toward mankind as expressed in tho Bible, and to bear tho fruits of tho kingdom before all who will hear,
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and the Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throno of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to tho establishment of God's kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of tho peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ which has now begun; that tho Lord’s next great act is tho destruction of Satan’s organization and tho establishment of righteousness in tho earth, end that under tho kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall bo restored and livo on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
TUTS Journal is published for the purpose of enabling tho people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expr, ssed in tha Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah's witnesses. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in tho Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bibla as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his Beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of tho Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns aro not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Brich
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreicn, §1.50; Great Beitain, Aur.ntAr.AsiA, and South Africa, 7s. American rmiiftar.ccs should bo made by J!vprc.‘.< or Postal Alon'w Qrder, or by H.iul: Liraft. Canadian, Lriti-Ii, South African 0r.1l Austr.tlas-k'-n remittances should ba mado direct to the r.'-pc-'tiwo branch cilices. licmittanrcs from coimliics other than llmio mentioned may be made to tbo Brooklyn oilice, but Ly International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British ....... , . . 3t Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England Canadian................40 Irwin Atomic, Toronto, Ontario, C.mad.r
A ustrala .tan . . 7 r.eresfcrd Hoad, Stratldleld, N. S. W., Australia South African .... Bo.,ton Hou .e, Capo Town, South Africa Picasa address the Society In every case.
(Translations of thia journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the P.ible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay the subscription i>rha may have The Matchloicer free upon written application to tin publishers, mafia once each year, stating the reason for >.0 re-qiicsling It; \Vo are glad to thus aid tho needy, hnt tho written application once each year is required by the postal regulations. Police to Subscribers: Acknowlcilgment of a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Chance of addrert, when requested, may be expected to anpear on atldrii.t label with! 1 one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of oxnirnl ion) will be sent with tho journal ono month before tho subscription expire:!. Entered as Second Class Mail Matter at Brooklyn, N. Y., Posiofflcc.
Act Of March 3, 1VT3.
ATLANTA CONVENTION
The Atlanta service convention will be on November 23, 24 and 25; headquarters Ansley Hotel, root garden. Meetings Saturday and Sunday will be held in tho City Auditorium. These meetings will be addressed by various brethren, including the president of the Society.
It is hoped that many of tho pioneers in the south may be able to attend. Sleeping quarteis arc being provided for a hundred or more pioneers. Pioneers will make no arrangements for quarters until seeing convention committee. A credit of $25 will be allowed to each pioneer on book account to help paj' expenses to the convention. Let all the Lord’s people present this matter before the throne of giace for his blessing that there niay be a splendid witness to the honor of his name. Address all communications to Clifton R. Thomas. Chairman Convention Committee, 1391 Belmont Ave., S.W., Atlanta, Ga.
THE SERVANT’S TESTIMONY PERIOD
This period embraces the nine days of November 24 to December 2 inclusive. Seeing that it is Jehovah's will that the feet members of The Seivant of Jehovah shall, without delay, give a witness to ami concerning the unseen creatines that now have to do with things pertaining to this earth, the new booklet Angels will be specialized on as for distribution
during this period. Let all who have taken a stand on tl>« side of Jehovah to servo him make preparati<.n promp ly io have supplies, time and territory for this epi’crrl witnc.-s. Reporting results for the entire period is an item of impelliinee. Let Jehovah’s witnefses and Jonadubs alike report direct to the Brooklyn office if not working in territory under one of the Society’s branches.
“ANGELS”
Wicked spirit creatures have afilieted the human rare for many centuries. It is of the greatest importance tlmt mankind should understand the origin of those wicked creatures, their methods of operation, ami the power they < xereisc over the men and nations of tire world. It seems the Lord's duo tuna to reveal these truths. The booklet Angels gives the Scriptural proof ami is now ready to be released to the people. Tho remnant should study its contents carefully and he diligent to get the booklet into the hands of every person of good will and t-Il who are seeking the truth. The Jonadabs should join in this witness work and distribution. The climax of the greatday of God Almighty is rapidly approaching, ami a knowledge of the truth is essential to all who would receive protection. The booklet will bo translated and published iu many languages. The Society will supply the demand as rapidly as possible.
Vol. LV
November 1, 1934
No. 21
FEAST OF CONSPIRATORS
“For they ent the bread of ivickedness, and drink the wine of violence.’’—Prov. 4:17.
PART 1
JEHOVAH has forewarned the remnant that the ‘seed of the Serpent’ would form a conspiracy and carry it out to the limit of his ability, the purpose of which conspiracy is to destroy Jehovah’s anointed. To the witnesses of Jehovah now on earth is committed the testimony of Jesus Christ, and because they try to fulfil their commission they arc hated by the Devil and all of his offspring. (Rev. 12:17; L’s. 83:2-5) Those in the conspiracy are attempting to cut off Jehovah’s anointed from being a nation; and this wicked crowd of conspirators is composed of Gog and a host of wicked spirit creatures who joined Satan in his rebellion at Eden and who continue to fight against the anointed; and of those on earth, the religious, political and commercial elements that operate, performing their respective parts, all of which is under the direction of Satan the Devil; hence all of these conspirators are the ‘seed of the Serpent’. Satan is proud, haughty, arrogant and austere. All of his offspring are likewise disposed. It is the divine rule that pride goes before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall. (Prov. 16:18) In keeping with this rule Belshazzar the king of Babylon held a great feast, at which he and his assembled guests became very drunk. The feast was an occasion for much swaggering and boasting and great hilarity and carousal. The proverbial fall of the king of Babylon and his followers quickly came thereafter.
EPITOME
2 Let the anointed remnant now on earth take comfort in this fact: that the divine record of Belshazzar's feast was kept and preserved until this day for their learning and that, the fulfilment of this prophetic picture having now begun, the understanding thereof gives strength to their hope of ultimate triumph through Christ Jesus, who leads the army of Jehovah against the enemy. In this prophetic picture Belshazzar represented the earthly offspring of the Devil, that is to say, the visible part of the ‘seed of the Serpent’, and he and his allies are in the conspiracy under the leadership of Gog; the “lords” picture all who are in the League of Nations or like com
323
bines; the golden vessels used at the feast, out of which the wine was drunk, pictured the remnant, Jehovah's witnesses, who are wholly devoted to him, which Sa-tan.’s crowd expect to completely discredit and then to destroy ; the fingers of the band that wrote upon the wall pictured Christ Jesus, to whom Jehovah has committed the testimony which must be delivered before the fall of Satan’s organization; Cyrus, the invading king, pictured Christ Jesus, the victorious Warrior who will clean out Satan’s organization. The fulfilment of this prophetic picture begins a short time before Armageddon and is concluded at Armageddon. The fulfilment has now begun, and hence it appears to be the will of God that his anointed remnant should have an understanding of the prophecy.
BELSHAZZAR AND HIS FEAST
8 Belshazzar was a son (or grandson) of Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon. (Dan. 5:2,18) Satan’s organization is named “Babylon”; hence Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon would picture Satan himself, while Belshazzar, being his son, would represent the earthly seed of Satan, particularly the rulers of “Christendom”, which are made up of the religious, political and commercial elements, the latter being the principal ones of the religious flock. “Belshazzar” means “prince of Bel” or “whom Bel favors”, and hence pictures “Christendom”, which is now drunk on Babylon’s wine, and under the leadership of Gog, the invisible field marshal of Satan who is assigned to lead the army of Satan at Armageddon. “Bel” was the chief god of Babylon, and hence means Satan himself. “And I will punish Bel in Babylon, and I will bring forth out of his mouth that which he hath swallowed up; and the nations shall not flow together any more unto him; yea, the wall of Babylon shall fall.” (Jer. 51:44) In the first year of Belshazzar's reign Daniel had a drcam in which dream or vision he beheld four beasts, picturing the earthly ruling powers of Satan. (Dan. 7:1-3; see The Watchtower, 1933, page 180) In the third year of Belshazzar’s reign Daniel had a vision of the defiling of God's sanctuary
324
SFIie WATCHTOWER.
Beooklin, N. Y.
and its later vindication.—Daniel 8; see The Watchtower, 1933, pages 179-1SG, 195-202, 211-219.
1 The time of the fulfilment of the prophetic picture of the feast of Belshazzar seems to be shortly preceding Armageddon. The record thereof as set forth in the fifth chapter of Damiel begins in this manner; “Belshazzar the king made a great feast to a thousand of his lords, and drank wine before the thousand.’’ (Dan. 5:1) This feast was held in the king’s palace, and on the very night that Babylon was overthrown by the Medes ami Persians, and hence must picture a time after Christ begins his reign and is sent forth to oust the enemy and shortly preceding the battle of the great day of Cod Almighty. That definitely fixes the time of the fulfilment of the prophetic picture aft' r 1914 and shortly before the battle of Armageddon; hence both the scripture and the physical facts show that the prophecy is now in course of fulfilment.
5 The Chaldaic word for “feast” is lichem, meaning “common eating together”. “A feast is made for laughter, and wine maketli merry; but money auswer-eth all things.” (Ec.cl. 10: 19) The greed for gain and power brought these, feaslers together in a great carousal or common drunken revel. The love of money, the root of all evil, brings into a common assembly those of all nations bent on reproaching the name of Jehovah and doing violence to those who serve God, which even now exists amongst the nations of “Christendom”. At the time of Belshazzar's hast war was on between the Chaldeans on one side and the Medes and Persians on the other, and doubtless the feast was held by Belshazzar that he and his men might for a time forget what was going on outside Iheir fortification and to afford them opportunity to further devise deeds of wickedness. (Prov. 4:17) Bread (lechem) eating well pictured the eating of the common bread of conspiracy against Jehovah’s “hidden ones”. (Ps. 83:3) “Have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge? who eat up my people as they eat bread, and call not upon the Lord.” (Ps. 14:4) The Chaldeans were eating behind the walls of the city, and hence in secret; and, being in secret, it was pleasant to them. (Prov. 9:17) The word “feast” in the Hebrew is derived from the word meaning “to feed on”, figuratively “to consume”, and by implication “to battle”, as in destruction.
8 Today “Christendom” is in great fear and trepidation because of seeing the on-coming battle of Armageddon. They know something terrible is impending, but they have not the knowledge of God’s Word or faith in it to determine what it is. Like Pharaoh and his crowd in Egypt during the ninth plague, they are in great darkness. Even the pope is saying that his “holy year” proclamation has failed to bring forth fruit, ami has closed up the wall with golden bricks and called upon his allies to pray that Armageddon may be averted. He does not realize that Armageddon will be fought by the powers of Jehovah God. The
rulers who sense the approaching battle or great trouble would like to minimize it and its frightful results, and hence they are drinking and eating together, which furnishes them some relaxation while they arc discussing and considering ways and me m.; for the elimination of Jehovah’s witnesses. It is noticeable at this time that in every nation the ruling powers are following exactly this course. Belshazzar assembled a thousand of his lords, symbolically meaning the fullness or completeness of the earthly part of Satan’s organization. Antitypically it is now a great feast embracing all of “Christendom” and its dependencies, all of which are brought into the conspiracy against Jehovah and his anointed, that is to say, against all who are in line for the kingdom rnd who faithfully serve Jehovah God. Satan employs Lis ‘three frogs’ to gather the nations together for 1 tie battle. (Rev. 1G: 13-16) The.-.e magnates or “lord:,” more particularly picture those in the inner circle ci' “Christendom” who, together with the king or chief officers, control or rule the people. They consume i.wli wine at their feast, to give them fresh courage. Their hearts are heavy because of what, they sense is approaching, exactly as Jesus foretold, and hence Satan sees it is well to ‘give wine unto those of heavy hearts’. (Prov. 31:6; Luke 21:25,26) It is the “wine of violence” directed against Coil’s people and Ills cause. Satan having lost out in the battle in heaven, ins cohorts on earth now need wine to cheer them, because now is a time of “woe to the inliabiters [rulers] of the earth”. (Rev. 12:12) They arc seized with perplexity and distress. The “thousand of bis lords” al-o well picture the “ten kings” which “receive power as kings one hour”, which time ends at Armageddon. “These have one mind | to form and carry out t he conspiracy against God's chosen ones], and shall give their power and strength unto the beast. ’These shall make war 'with the Lamb.”—Rev. .17:12-14; see Litflit, Book Two, pages 1(15, 106.
7 The place or seat of Belshazzar at the feast would be at the head of the banquet hall or table, and he would doubtless be surrounded by a select company, with plenty of secret service men in the wings of tr.c stage, well armed. His wine was red, and doubt le s his eyes also were red. “Belshazzar, whiles lie tasbd the wino, commanded to bring the golden and silver vessels which his father Nebuchadnezzar had taken out of the temple which was in Jerusalem; that the kin?, and his princes, his wives, and his concubines, might drink therein.” (Dan. 5:2) The excessive wine of Babylon had stimulated and heated Belshazzar, ami now he felt strong and well able to carry out the will of his father the Devil. Hence his actions became reckless, malicious and regardless of the rights of others. Here again we must emphasize the fact that the Devil’s primary purpose on all occasions i-, to reproach the name of Jehovah God; and he was using Belshazzar on the occasion here considei vd to do that very thing. Full of wine, and reckless, Belshazzar
November 1, 1934
WATCHTOWER
gave command that the golden and silver vessels which his father had stolen from the temple at Jerusalem should be brought out and set before his guests, and out of which they were to drink. The golden vessels here mentioned represented those who are now diligent in putting forth their best endeavors to honor the name of Jehovah. The modern use of “wine” by the antitypical Belshazzar crowd finds its potency in the expression of Satan’s will in such things as the League of Nations, the World Court, peace pacts, “holy year,” international arms conferences, and like arrangements, employed for self-preservation and prosperity. Gog, Satan’s field marshal, puts the evil suggestions into the heads of the leaders of “Christendom”, and, of course, all such is inspired by Satan himself, as he is the chief one, sitting in his high and lofty position to direct the movements against Jehovah’s anointed ones.
s The vessels of the temple of Jerusalem were for the sacred use in the service of Jehovah, and not for any selfish pleasure, which latter use would bring further reproach upon Jehovah's name. These vessels Belshazzar’s father had stolen from the temple and brought to Babylon, and now Belshazzar would desecrate them at his carousal. Belshazzar’s father had been guilty of great effrontery when he robbed the temple of these vessels, and now the use of them by this infidel, drunken crowd would add insult and bring further reproach upon Jehovah’s name. At the present time “Christendom’s” elect, which are the visible ‘seed of the Serpent’, would bring greater reproach upon Jehovah’s name by persecuting and humiliating and improperly ill-using God’s faithful remnant who bear testimony to his name and his kingdom and which faithful witnesses are declaring the day of God’s vengeance against Satan’s organization. Modern Babylon, or "Christendom”, would desecrate these chosen vessels of the Lord by using them in a ridiculous manner, and thus in their carousal would make a merry time with them. It is noticeable at this time that the mouthpiece (or publicity agents, to wit, the pnblie press) of “Christendom” takes great delight in ridiculing and holding up to scorn Jehovah’s witnesses. ‘The king’s wives,’ mentioned in the account of the feast of Belshazzar, means the clergy who are married to the state or political power of the earth; and “his concubines” means the modern “Judas” company, or ‘sons of perdition’, who are not recognized as wives of the political element but who hire themselves out to the state or political ruling power for their own pleasure, to be used as instruments to bring about humiliating action against Jehovah’s witnesses. The “Judas” class, who are also in the conspiracy, now participate in the overt acts against the anointed of the Lord and seek means not only to interrupt the Lord’s work but to put Jehovah’s servants in embarrassing positions and cause violence to be inilieted upon them.
• The army of Cyrus, at the time of the feast, was
invading Babylon, and Jehovah had caused his prophet to say concerning this: “He shall let go my captives, not for price nor reward.” (Isa. 45:13) This prophecy, of course, applies to Christ Jesus, whom Cyrus foreshadowed, while Belshazzar, who now had possession of the vessels of the temple, foreshadowed the rulers of “Christendom” desiring to restrain Jehovah ’s witnesses and prevent them from being properly used and to cause them to be used for an improper and unholy purpose. Also, Jehovah’s prophet said concerning the Devil, acting by his earthly agents, that he “opened not the house of his prisoners” (Isa. 14:17), meaning the ‘vessels of silver’, which representatively stand for the “great multitude”, who are now held in the prison house of “Christendom”, or modern Babylon. “Christendom” now resists the kingdom of Christ Jesus, the Greater Cyrus and invading King, and also refuses to permit Jehovah’s witnesses full freedom in their activities of service, while at the same time Babylon holds the “great multitude” in “the prison house” and restrains and pievents them from going free from “the prison house”. —Isa. 42:7.
111 All of Satan’s organization is against Jehovah’s anointed, who are pictured by the “golden vessels” mentioned in the prophecy. The religious leaders, the political bosses, and the commercial giants are the favored ones of “Christendom”, while the smaller fry, the strong-arm squad and the hangers-on do the heavy work and apparently the dirtier, contemptible work. “Then they brought the golden vessels that were taken out of the temple of the house of God, which was at Jerusalem ; and the king, ami his princes, his wives, and his concubines, drank in them.” (Dan. 5:3) It may well be .surmised that those that brought out these vessels did not handle them in a kind and delicate way. Today it is the strong-arm squad, acting on orders, that bring forth the “golden vessels” of the Lord, that is to say, the faithful remnant who arc Jehovah's witnesses; and they do not handle them in any soft and delicate way, but rudely, and speak to them with harsh and angry words. These, faithful ones arc, by Jehovah’s grace, maintaining their integrity toward him and have obeyed his commandments to ‘buy of him gold tried in the fire’. (Rev. 3:1>>) Each one of the faithful remnant is a ‘vessel unto honor, sanctified and made meet for the Master’s use’ and engaged in a good work. (2 Tim. 2: 20, 21) Be it noted in the prophetic account that the “silver vis-sels” mentioned in the prophecy were not brought out, but only the “golden vessels” were brought out. The “silver vessels”, representing the “great multitude”, are held in custody in the prison houses as prisoners, and these in due time must take their stand for Jehovah even at the cost of their lives; but that time has now about arrived. (Rev. 7:9-14) The brineiiig of these golden vessels out would mean the bringing of them into view and exhibiting them to the drunken revelers. Likewise, antitypieally, Jehovah’s witnesses
326
Tfe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
are brought forth and exposed to the view and exhibited before the drunken revelers of “Christendom”. The purpose of this part of the conspiracy is to make Jehovah’s witnesses the center of ridicule and reproach by centering attention upon them while the revelers attempt to make them appear ridiculous. The king, and his princes, wives and concubines, drank wine out of the golden vessels; showing that the entire crowd of modern times indulge in overt acts in furtherance of their wicked conspiracy. The revelers, both ancient and modern, being drunk with the wine of Babylon, they get cheer and hilarity’- out of misusing Jehovah’s witnesses. Jn this manner those of “Christendom” show themselves as being on the side of God’s vilifiers; and thus they don the garments of Baal and mark themselves for the slaughter that must shortly follow at Armageddon. (2 Ki. 10:18-27; Jer. 25:33-36) All nations of “Christendom” now hate Jehovah’s witnesses, as Jesus foretold, and all are engaged in a conspiracy and are doing what they can to bring reproach upon Jehovah’s name by ill-using such witnesses.
11 The wicked one Satan, who commercialized the human race and debauched the whole world, has poured the potion for his earthly representatives who are doing his will by persecuting Jehovah’s witnesses. “They drank wine, and praised the gods of gold, and of silver, of brass, of iron, of wood, and of stone.” (Dan. 5:4) It is the wine of Babylon that is being drunk out of the golden vessels from Jehovah’s temple, and this adds to the hilarity of the rulers, and they get a great thrill out of it, and this induces them to praise everything except Jehovah and those who arc on his side. The language of this part of the prophecy further identities the revelers as the ‘seed of the Serpent’ and the worshipers of the Devil and his organization. In the divine record concerning the dream of Nebuchadnezzar recorded and interpreted by Daniel (see Daniel, chapter two) the organization of Satan was pictured by a great metallic image, the gold thereof picturing the Devil himself, while the other metals, in their order, pictured other portions of Satan’s organization; hence these revelers at Belshazzar’s feast give praise, -while drinking, ‘to the gods of gold, silver, brass, iron, wood, and stone,’ and thus they identify themselves as a part of Satan’s organization that is fighting against Jehovah and his kingdom. The modern “Chaldeans”, that is to say, “Christendom,” revere and worship the strong ones of the world organizations, and with trembling voice and hypocritical hands uplifted thej' cry out concerning the League of Nations, ‘It is the only light that there is’; and thus they ‘change the truth of God into a lie, and worship and serve the creature more than the Creator’, even though outwardly, hypocritically and fraudulently they claim to represent the kingdom of Christ.—Rom. 1:25.
11 It was in 1928 that the seventh “plague” was poured out, and in the year following the great com
mercial crash began; and yet the Babylonians, that is, those of “Christendom”, have not changed their worship nor repented of their wicked works. “And the rest of the men which were not killed by these plagues, yet repented not of the works of their hands, that they should not worship devils, and idols of gold, and silver, and brass, and stone, and of wood: which neither can see, nor hear, nor walk: neither repented they of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of their fornication, nor of their thefts.” (Rev. 9: 20, 21) Now, -with the- ever increasing proclamation of the truth, the rulers in “Christendom” have an opportunity to see what is right, but they continue the persecution of those faithful and true witnesses of Jehovah. Those composing “Christendom’s” oruanization like to pose as the law-abiding, peace-making and prosperity-making crowd, and to this end they seek and use the law-making and law-enforcement powers to bring the anointed ones of God into disrepute and to subject them to great humiliation. They take this course of action upon the false pretext and false claim that Jehovah’s witnesses are a menace to the peace of the existing governments. The truth of God’s Word when told relleets very unfavorably upon the iniquitous doctrines and work of those who rule in “Christendom”, and in their anger and in furtherance of their conspiracy they enact laws to prevent the telling of such .Scriptural truths to the people, and take whatever course they can to cause the truth to he suppressed. They conspire together to destroy freedom of speech, freedom of press, and the free expression of one’s understanding of God's Word; and all of this they do upon the wrongful claim that such is necessary in order to maintain the peace of the state. They wrongfully use Jehovah’s anointed vessels of gold, that is to say, his witnesses, and they would prevent the delivering of the testimony of Jesus Christ which God has commanded now must be delivered. They are foolish in believing that they can defeat Jehovah and put him to greater shame. Jehovah now has the entire drunken crowd in derision. (Ps. 2:4) It is time for the handwriting concerning the wicked crowd of “Christendom” and their end to appear upon the wall. It docs appear!
HANDWRITING
13 Men sometimes make themselves drunk to drive away distress and perplexity; and for some years last past there have been great distress and perplexity among the ruling elements of the w’orld. But a dreadful shock will bring even a drunken man to his senses to some degree. That was the effect upon Belshazzar, and the picture will be fulfilled. Belshazzar and his lords were in distress concerning the approach of the Medes and Persians, and they were drunk, and continued to drink out of the golden vessels in order to bolster themselves up. Likewise the rulers of modern “Christendom”, which is Satan’s organization, misuse God's anointed in their attempt to give themselves
Novembkb 1, 1934
fffie WATCHTOWER.
327
courage; and while they are doing it they get a jolt. “In the same hour came forth fingers of a man's hand, and wrote over against the candlestick upon the plaister of the wall of the king’s palace; and the king saw the part of the hand that wrote.”—Dan. 5:5.
11 The modern application of the words “the same hour” manifestly is to the short period of time in which Satan prepares his organization for the final battle. (Ilcv. 12; 12) “And the ten horns which thou sawest are ten kings [foreshadowed by Belshazzar and his lords], which . . . receive power as kings one hour with the beast [that is, the image of the 'sea beast’, which is the combine of nations].” (Rev. 17:12) These all act together against Jehovah's anointed ones in the short time when Satan is preparing for the battle of Armageddon. “Babylon” is the name of Satan’s crowd, and stands for or represents his organization both invisible and visible, and concerning which it is written: “That great city Babylon, . . . in one hour is thy judgment come.” (Rev. 18:10,19) This is the time of the handwriting’s appearing on the wail in fulfilment of the prophetic picture; and the facts show that this time began with the London convention in 192G, al which a testimony was issued To the Rulers of the World.
15	The “fingers of a man’s hAnd”, which did the writing on the wall, pictured Jehovah’s power exercised and by his “right hand”, Christ Jesus. (Matt. 12: 28) The Lord Jesus at the temple uses the faithful remnant in connection with his work in serving notice upon the visible part of Satan’s organization, and of this fact the invisible part of the enemy organization no doubt takes notice. (2 Cor. 3:2,3) Of himself Jesus said: “If I with the finger of God |the power of Jehovah] cast out devils, no doubt the kingdom of God is come upon you.” (Luke 11:20) Concerning the third plague of Egypt the magicians said to Pharaoh: “This is the finger of God.” (Ex. 8:19) The law written on the tables of stone was'“written with the finger”, that is, the invisible power or spirit, of Jehovah. (Ex. 31:18) Thus God causes Christ Jesus to bring forcibly to the attention of the enemy notice and warning of the enemy’s early downfall. The fingers of the man’s hand “wrote over against the candlestick upon the plaister of the wall”, hence in the well lighted surface of the wall, thus forcing the revelers to see it. This illustrates how Jehovah does nothing in the dark, but that he acts against the enemy only after full warning, and he causes his witnesses to openly and aboveboard declare his judgments against the enemy. The enemy will never be able to say that they did not hear and that they unintentionally overlooked what Jehovah said to them. He illustrates this by compelling Belshazzar and his lords to take notice of the writing on the wall. It was Belshazzar’s candles that lighted the wall of his palace, and likewise today the truth of God’s Word is forced into the light which the rulers of modern Babylon, or “Christendom”, cause to burn, and they
are compelled to take notice of the message of truth whether they want to do it or not. Today the rulers exhibit perplexity and distress, and at the same time they are drinking the wine of Babylon in their efforts to hide their perplexity while they go on feverishly preparing for war. While they are thus doing Jehovah causes the message of truth to be put before them under the light, and which message in substance says to them: “Soon you will have a fight, and a losing fight.”
16	In London, England, the “seat of the beast”, a warning was sounded openly and aboveboard in May 192G, which message was heard by the ruling powers of “Christendom”, but at which they scoffed mid which they have spurned, and that message marked the beginning of their “transgression of desolation”. The handwriting, the message on the wall, was notice and warning to Belshazzar and his revelers, and corresponds with the plagues upon Egypt, which also served as notice and warning to the rulers in Satan’s visible organization. “The king saw the part of the hand that wrote,” but he did not see the power that moved the hand. Today “Christendom’s” rulers have seen Jehovah’s human agents used in serving to give them notice of warning, and they have heard the notice of warning, but they have not seen or discerned Jehovah’s spirit which moves such agents or servants to bring that notice of warning to them. The handwriting on the wall was by the power of God, and for that reason could not picture the present-day depression or bad economic conditions that affect the world. That handwriting on the wall foretold disaster to Belshazzar the king of Babylon and his army ; and in modern times the fulfilment thereof foretells the doom of Satan’s organization, which is Babylon including “Christendom”. The judgment, notice and warning must be delivered before the execution of the judgment, and that is why Jehovah’s witnesses engage in declaring the day of the vengeance of our God. Such notice must be served before the giving of the message described by the prophet: “One post shall run to mc.'l another, and one messenger to meet another, to shew the king of Babylon [Belshazzar and the modern rulers of ‘Christendom’] that his city is taken at one end [on every quarter, Ii.E.], and that the passages are stopped [surprised, ; seized, A.K.V.], and tne reeds they have burned with fire, and the men of war are affrighted.” (Jer. 51:31,32) From 192G to 1933 Jehovah’s message of warning heralded by his faithful witnesses was boldly delivered and raised high by wide publication, and thus “Christendom” was compelled to take notice of that message of warning, and which message of warning must be delivered before the fall of Babylon is complete.
17	Belshazzar and his revelers in wine were compelled to take notice of the si on or handwriting appearing on the wall, and the sight thereof somewhat sobered them; especially was that the effect upon the king. The rulers of “Christendom” have not been
328
tfKe WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
able to ignore the notice of warning that Jehovah has caused his witnesses to proclaim before them. They have been compelled to give the matter some thought; and the facts show that they have thought, and some of them have thought seriously. They have been sobered for a time, but this has served only to harden their hearts. “Then the king’s countenance [brightness, I(.V., margin] was changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so that the joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against another.’’ (Dan, 5: 6) It was in 1928 that the Lord caused his remnant to make a declaration of Jehovah’s judgment which is written against Satan and all of his organization, and to give warning that all who would live must take the side of Jehovah. That message of notice and warning was proclaimed throughout “Christendom’’, and as to the rulers thereof it somewhat loosened their joints and caused their knees to knock together. That would sober them for a time. Shortly thereafter the great commercial erash came and Babylon began to sober up a little more, and the chief ones thereof showed a dull countenance instead of a bright one. By his prophet Jehovah tells them now to howl, because their howling days are short. “IIowl ye; for the day of the Lord is at hand; it shall come as a destruction from the Almighty. Therefore shall all hands be faint, and every man’s heart shall melt: and they shall be afraid: pangs and sorrows shall take hold of them; they shall Imj in pain as a woman that travail-cth; they shall be amazed one at another; their faces shall be as flames.” (Isa. 13:6-8) While they arc howling evidently Jehovah laughs at them.— Ps. 2:4.
18	This corresponds to the prophecy uttered by Jesus, to wit: “And there shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in the stars; and upon the earth distress of nations, with perplexity; the sea and the waves roaring; men’s hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which are coming on the c-rth: for the jiowcrs of heaven shall be shaken.” (Luke 21: 25,26) Although “Christendom’s” mighty men bring forth The League of Nations compact, peace treaties, disarmament conferences, “holy year,” national recovery acts, yet their howling continues. In that period the pope regains his temporal power and the other parts of “Christendom” receive his delegates or ambassadors. He declares 1933 a “holy year”; and when he sees that has failed he continues to howl with his other allies and asks them all to pray that Armageddon may be prevented. Within this same hour, with increased zeal and activity Jehovah’s remnant places the message of the Lord God high up on the wall, and God has compelled 4 he rulers in “Christendom” to read the message although they do not understand it.
19	For many years the clergy have held the position of spiritual advisers to the other ruling elements of Babylon, or “Christendom”. True, some of these clergy are Catholics, some are Protestants, and some arc Jew’s; but all are engaged in the same business for
hire. Naturally they are now being called upon to give advice and counsel and consolation to the other rulers in “Christendom”. “The king eried aloud to bring in the astrologers, the Chaldeans, and the soothsayers. And the king spake, and said to fhe wise men of Babylon, Whosoever shall read this writing, and shew me the interpretation thereof, shall be clothed with scarlet, and have a chain of gold about his neck, and shall be the third ruler in the kingdom.” (Dan. 5:7) This description of the king’s advisers given in the prophecy shows that these advisers include not only the clergy of the various religious organizations but also the professional economists, historians, philosophers and such like in the present time, and which are designated by Babylon’s publicity agents as “tl c brain trust”, meaning, of course, those that have great “wisdom”. The seventh “trumpet” for Jehovah and against Satan and his organization was sounded in 1928, and shortly thereafter, as it should be expected, the riding powers of “Christendom” pictured by Belshazzar would begin to cry out; and that is exactly what did come to pass. In 1928 a world conference was held in Paris, and another in London the next year, for the evident purpose of ascertaining the meaning of the threatening conditions anil of the signs, notices or declarations that had been given. That was after the “sign in heaven, great and marvellous”, had appeared. (Rev. 15:1) The time having arrived to vindicate Jehovah’s name, his witnesses would came the trumpet to sound and to give notice, and discomfort came to the earthly rulers as a partial re .till there-of. King Belshazzar appealed to his own advisers for help, and even so the rulers in “Christendom” in modern times have assembled its “wise men” that wisdom might result from such multitude of counsel and that they might determine what to do. Of course, none of Jehovah’s witnesses would be called to such a conference; for such conference is anti-God and anti-kingdom, and Jehovah’s witnesses would not be wanted there, neither would they want to be there.
20	The handwriting on the wall at Belshazzar’s feast was in a foreign language, a language not known to Belshazzar, and, even if he could read it, he was not learned therein and was not able to interpret the same. Likewise the ‘seven angels having the seven last plagues’ were messengers not of a human organization, and consequently the message was not of human interpretation. The rulers of “Christendom” saw the activities of Jehovah's witnesses and heard what they were declaring, but the force and significance of their message needed some explanation or interpretation. Belshazzar wanted an explanation of what he saw on the wall, and in modern times “Christendom’s” rulers want to know the meaning of the present-day events, including what Jehovah’s witnesses declare, and to find this out they ask their own clergymen and “wise men”. No doubt the activities of these faithful witnesses have been frequently discussed in The secret conferences of the “wise men” of the modern day.
November 1, 1934
tffie WATCHTOWER.
329
The “Monday Morning Ministerial Conferences” have often been occupied with a consideration of these matters without reaching any satisfactory conclusion. When it appears that the public press, which is the advertising part of Satan’s visible organization, begins to give attention to what Jehovah’s witnesses are doing, then it must be known for a certainty that the “wise men” of “Christendom” have been discussing the matter.
21	Belshazzar sobered up for a brief season and had his counselors brought in. “Then came in all the king’s wise men: but they could not read the writing, nor make known to the king the interpretation thereof.” (Dan. 5:S) They must have been a sorry lot when they, composing the “brain trust” of his administration, appeared before the king, and not one of them able even to read the handwriting, much less to make known the interpretation thereof. The same thing is true today. The wise counselors of “Christendom” are unable to read the signs or interpret the same because they ignore (Jud’s Word. Especially since 1929 the ruling powers of “Christendom” have appealed to the “wise men” of their own organization to place a construct ion upon or explain what is the meaning of the ‘signs and wonders in heaven’, that is to say, the declarations made by Jehovah’s witnesses and their continuous work in bearing witness to the people, and what relation the same has to the distress and perplexity upon the earth. But none of the wise men of Babylon can read or interpret the same, because it is all foreign to them. Their Bibles do not read that way. One is reminded of the words of Jehovah’s prophet applying to the same crowd, to wit: “And the vision of all is become unto you as the words of a book that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned, saying, Bead this, I pray thee: and he saith, I cannot; for it is sealed.” (Isa. 29:11) The advisers of Belshazzar undoubtedly attempted to advise, him, but, being careful to make no guess that would worry the king, they were anxious to tell the king, and did tell him, that “everything will be all right; behold the strength of our walls”. They, being in the service of the Devil, of course, would be unable to have any knowledge of the secrets of Jehovah. (Ps. 25:14) Likewise in modern times, the “wise men” of “Christendom” are careful to predict nothing that would be offensive to the political and financial ruling element; hence they say: “Give no heed to these foolish Jehovah’s witnesses, because every day and in every way the world is getting better. Everything will be all right. Behold the strength of our great institutions. We must stand for ever.”
23	The declarations of Belshazzar’s wise men did not please him; and it is just the same today. The wise men of “Christendom” cannot give any answer that is pleasing and satisfactory to their allies. “Then was king Belshazzar greatly troubled, and his countenance was changed in him, and his lords were astonied.” (Dan. 5:9) As Belshazzar was troubled and his
countenance was dark, and his lords sat about with long and astonished faces, even so it is today. The modern “brain trust”, including the clergy, and particularly the Catholic hierarchy, make an effort and try to give advice to the political and financial ruling element, but the latter have little or no confidence in such adviee. They become more perplexed every day, and they know not which way to turn. That perplexity has continued to increase since 1929, some evidence of which is here mentioned. In June 1931 the president of the United States issued a statement strongly advocating a moratorium of indebtedness of the various governments to the United States. In July 1931 the United States and France signed an agreement concerning foreign indebtedness and the moratorium went into effect. Then followed conference after conference looking to the recovery of the common interests of the nations and an effort to prevent the disastrous effects of war. Nations of “Christendom” agreed to scrap many of the battleships and otherwise limit war preparations, and then their perplexity and fear increased, and again they feverishly rushed out to construct even more war vessels and greater war equipment than ever before. Then came the NBA scheme, and it was thought this would pull the world, and especially the United States, out of the hole. This, together with other schemes, has been launched and pushed for the purpose of slaving off the disaster. Each nation in “Christendom” promulgates its own ideas of what should be done and how it should be done. The pope puts on his “holy garments” and tries his hand in an effort to bring about peace and prosperity in his “holy year”, and finally gives that up in disgust because it brings forth neither peace nor prosperity except to the pope and the Catholic hierarchy. No other institution would be able to provide gold bricks to stop a hole in the wall, which gold bricks came to them without effort on their part, except it might be said it was some effort to don their sparkling garments and lay the bricks. These things arc here mentioned to show the perplexity of the rulers of the world and chat the adviee given them by their “wise men” or “brain trust” fails to bring forth any satisfactory results.
23	There must have been confusion among the rulers at Belshazzar’s feast, and much talk, when the wise men failed to interpret the sign-words written on the wall of the banquet room. Belshazzar had spoken his words of disappointment, and those words had been taken up and repeated by the lords, and then by the smaller fry, and then by those who were serving the wine. At any rate, the fact got out to the queen. It is quite evident that the queen did not attend the banquet, because she heard what was going on and then she appeared at the feast to advise the king. “Now the queen, by reason of the words of the king and his lords, came into the banquet house; and the queen spake and said, O king, live for e' er; let nut thy thoughts trouble thee, nor let thj- countenance
330
8Tie WATC HT0WER
Biwoklyx, N. Y.
be changed.” (Dan. 5:10) When the queen arrived at the banquet hall and beheld the troubled face of Belshazzar she greeted him in the customary and friendly way and badc him to be of good cheer, sinee she had something to suggest that might be of aid to him. Evidently she was not the wife of the king, but the mother queen, because the account of the prophecy says that the wives were there drinking wine. The mother queen seems to picture some men of the world friendly to the ruling clement and subject to them but who are entirely separate and apart from the religious frauds who pose as the spiritual advisers of the rulers. There are some men in public office wlio are friendly to the ruling powers but who have no confidence in or partnership with the hypocritical religious advisers. The queen appeared before Belshazzar but offered no explanation or interpretation of the handwriting. Having heard of the disturbed condition of the king and his lords, she had come to •suggest one who might be able to give the needed information. This indicates that she pictured some who arc in the world who are familiar with the conditions that exist and are somewhat familiar with Jehovah’s dealings with his faithful people, especially his dealings with them and their work at the time of the World War, from 1914 to 1918. It seems tho mother queen was used to bring Daniel to the favorable attention of Belshazzar, thus indicating that she represents someone that brings the attention of the ruling powers to Jehovah’s witnesses. At the time Daniel was approximately 100 years of age, and had previously served Nebuchadnezzar, and seems to have withdrawn from public service and was not on familiar or intimate terms of acquaintance with Belshazzar. The queen mother, knowing about this, came to bring to the attention of the king the man Daniel, and what he had done in previous years; and this shows that no one of the wise men of Babylon had recommended Daniel to the ruler. Likewise it shows that today not one of the “wise men” of “Christendom”, that is to say, the clergy and their allies, would recommend anyone of Jehovah’s witnesses to be calkd in and their advice asked as to the meaning of present conditions, not even so much as to suggest that they be asked as to whether the present-day events have any relationship to Jehovah and his prophecies long ago written. But today there are some men and wotntn who during the World War took notice of the treatment of those who were then faithful to God; and they also observed that such faithful followers of Christ Jesus were the only ones on earth that were then or are now qualified by the Lord to give a proper interpretation of and concerning that which now threatens the world destruction. Some of such men and women are in public office and hold positions under the ruling powers. They have a kindly feeling towards Jehovah’s witnesses and believe that such witnesses represent the Lord. Therefore they make an
honest endeavor to draw the attention of the high ruling element to such witnesses and to recommend that such witnesses are trustworthy and that it is advisable that they be heard. Such friendly ones may be called persons of good will who have faith in God and believe that he has some representatives on earth, and for this reason they favorably commend Jehovah's witnesses, even as the queen mother recommendi d Daniel to the king. In this connection we are reminded of the words of the prophet: “And kings shall be thy nursing fathers [margin, nourishers], and their queens thy nursing mothers: they shall bow down to thee with their face toward the earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet; and thou shall know that J am the Lord: for they shall not be ashamed that wait for mo.” (Isa. 49: 23) Among the ruling element there is now a division. Those of less power or importance in the world have a kindly feeling towards Jehovah’s witnesses and have exercised their influence in behalf of Jehovah's witnesses that they may have opportunity to be heard and to present their testimony concerning Jehovah and his kingdom. An example of this may be found in the fact that members of Congress in 1931 saw to it that Jehovah’s witnesses had opportunity to appear in person and give their testimony before the Congressional committee and to state the reason why they should be permitted to worship God in his appointed way without interference from others. Tho Lord will not forget such men who have shown their fairness in their desire that the truth might be heard.
21 The mother queen entered the banquet hall and greeted the potentate with the words, “() king, live for ever”; which seems to say that those of the pros' nt day whom the queen foreshadowed do not claim to be hostile to the earthly governments. They are now in position to furnish the facilities to open the way for Jehovah’s witnesses to tell God’s message before the rulers. These officers of good will are not seeking to overthrow tho present governments of earth, but they use formal words in greeting the ruling powers of earth and ask that the powers give opportunity for the testimony of Jehovah’s witnesses to be heard. As the queen mother said to Belshazzar, so these men in official positions say to the rulers of higher rank: “Let not your thoughts trouble you,” but give car to these witnesses of Jehovah and they may be able to find a solution of your difficulties.
23 Daniel’s past record was known to the queen; hence, addressing the king, she said: “There is a man in thy kingdom, in whom is the spirit of the holygods: and, in the days of thy father [Nebuchadnezzar], light, and understanding, and wisdom, like the wisdom of the gods, was found in him; whom the king Nebuchadnezzar thy father, the king, I say, thy father, made master of the magicians, astrologers, Chaldeans, and soothsayers.” (Dan. 5:11) And so today the past record of the Lord’s “faithful servant” class is knov-n by some who recommend them to the favorable cm-
November 1, 1934
WATCHTOWER
331
sideration of “Christendom’s” ruling powers. These kindly and considerate men of the official family of the present rulers recall that Jehovah’s witnesses used the Bible testimony to point out the World War and ether difficulties that then and now beset the world, and that all their efforts are put forth in the spirit of kindness, and that they exhibit the wisdom that conies from above, and not the wisdom of man. They seeing that what these witnesses of the Lord have said and are saying finds support in the Bible, the recommendation is that they be publicly heard. Before 1918 there were some in the official element who observed closely what the Lord’s devoted people were saying and doing, and it was easy to be semi that such witnesses were much more sincere and possessed much more faith than the clergymen. Many honest men have seen that the clergymen, out of cruel hatred, cause the faithful followers of Christ Jesus to be greatly persecuted and that they did so during the World War merely because such faithful ones were preaching the truth of God’s Word. These honest men in official positions took notice then, and now they well know, that the clergy are hypocrites and practice hypocrisy while they falsely charge Jehovah’s witnesses with wrongdoing and persecute them because they are doing the work of the Lord.
2C Daniel had exhibited the spirit of Goel in the day of Nebuchadnezzar; and the queen, knowing this, said: “Forasmuch as an excellent spirit, and knowledge, and understanding, interpreting of dreams, and shewing of hard sentences, and dissolving of doubts, were found in the same Daniel, whom the king named Belteshazzar: now let Daniel be called, and he will shew the interpretation.” (Dan. 5:12) This exactly describes the spirit and the work exhibited and done in the Elijah period of the church by those who were made members of the “faithful and wise servant” class upon the coming of the Lord to the temple. The governing powers were taking notice of these faithful men and women and of what they were telling about God’s kingdom during the World War, and were really afraid that there was much truth in what they said, and hence gave ear to the appeals made by the clergy that something should be done against these witnesses. On the other hand, the class of men whom the mother queen foreshadowed, and who are of less importance in governmental affairs, and arc therefore called the “weaker vessels”, take notice that the true followers of Christ Jesus, who were and are the faithful witnesses of Jehovah, had a real message from God. Still holding to that belief'these men, like the queen, recommended Daniel, that is, Jehovah’s witnesses, to the greater ruling element, saying, “Let them be called and heard.” Those who are willing to give Jehovah’s witnesses, the faithful remnant, opportunity to talk believe that if these cannot give a true interpretation of the present distressing world conditions and what the Bible has to say about the same, then no
one else can, and certainly the hypocritical clergy have made such a miserable failure in giving explanation that it is time to give opportunity for those to talk who give evidence that they are really sincere and have the spirit of the Lord and know what they are talking about. Jehovah had arranged this matter and was now causing a picture to be made and a record thereof to be kept for the aid and comfort of the faithful remnant now on the earth. This fact gives much consolation to Jehovah’s witnesses, and with eagerness they continue to seek a better understanding of the prophecy, particularly with reference to the meaning of the calling of Daniel before the king and what relation that has to the activity of Jehovah’s witnesses in the present day.
(To be continued)
.	QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
*£ 1. Acemmt for Jehovah’s now particularly forewarning the remnant concerning the activities of the 'seed of the Serpent'.
1 2. Why has Jehovah provided and preserved this record of Belshazzar’s feast! Who arc pictured in tho descriplivo record of Daniel 5:1,2? When docs this prophecy have its fulfilment?
fl 3. Belshazzar's name, his position, and his relationship to Nebuchadnezzar bear what significance?
V 4-6. What is seen pictured in the time and place of holding tliis feast? Show how other scriptures further indicate the occasion and the purpose of the feast, and that the present situation in “Christendom” fits this part of tho prophecy.
fl 7, 8. Describe the present situation as clearly fulfilling tho picture presented in verse 2.
fl 9. Apply Isaiah 45: 13 and 11:17.
fl 10. How does Daniel 5: 3 have fulfilment?
fl 11, 12. Point out how tho modern “Chaldeans” identify themselves as the revelers referred to in verse 4; abo the relationship hereof to what was foretold in Revelation 9: 20,21. On what pretext, yet for what purpose, do the rulers in “Christendom” persist in wrongfully using the ‘vessels of gold’?
fl 13-15. With scriptures to support, explain and apply verse 5. How is this related to the “one hour” of Revelation 17: 12 and 18: 10,19?
fl 16. When and how has the 'handwriting on the wall’ taken place before tho rulers of “Christendom”?
fl 17, 18. What are the facts marking fulfilment of verse 6, and of Isaiah 13: 6-8 and Luke 21: 25,26?
fl 19. How, in fulfilment of verse 7, were “the astrologers, the Chaldeans, and the soothsayers” 'called before the king’ and appealed to for counsel?
fl 20, 21. Apply verse 8.
fl 22. Point out the facts in evidence that the prophetic situation described in verse 9 has been in course of fulfilment.
fl 23, 24. Referring to verse 10: (a) Identify the “queen”, both in the prophecy and in its fulfilment, (b) In application of that which was there pictured, how did “the words of the king and his lords” come to the attention of the “queen”? and how did she 'come into the banquet loom’? (c) With illustration, apply the queen’s words of greeting and of encouragement there spoken.
fl 25. How, in the fulfilment of verse 11, is “Daniel” a ‘man in the kingdom’ in whom in former days ‘light, and understanding, and godlike wisdom was found’?
fl 26. How do the woids of the first part of ier>e 12 apply? How, in the fulnlment of the latter part of the verse, has “Daniel” been called upon ‘to show the intcipretation"?
CHRISTIANS PERSECUTED: WHY PERMITTED
PERSECUTION and sufferings are not to be desired by anyone. Everyone would rather dwell in peace and in happiness. Jesus and his true followers have been persecuted because or their loyalty and faithfulness to God. This being true, and God being all-powerful and the very expression of love, why would he permit hi.s beloved Son and his faithful followers to suffer persecution at the hands of the Devil and his representatives?
The answer is that God has not interfered with Satan's pursuing his course of willful wickedness; he has permitted him to demonstrate his malignant disposition, and to reproach God and reproach everyone who has been faithful to God, because these persecutions would furnish the opportunities for the Lord Jesus and his faithful followers to prove their loyalty and faithfulness unto Jehovah and to prove the same under the most adverse circumstances, and thereby demonstrate to all creation that God can put men on this earth who can and will maintain their integrity toward God.
Concerning Jesus it is written: “Who in the days of his flesh, when he had offered np prayers and supplications, with strong crying and tears, unto him that was able to save him from death, and was heard in that he feared; though he were aSon, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered.’’— Heb. 5: 7, 8.
If a man prefers bodily ease and comfort and peace rather than the approval of God, then he will put himself in a condition to not be persecuted; and this he may do by proving disloyal and unfaithful to God. But he who would willingly suffer the most ignominious death in order to maintain his loyalty and faithfulness to God can be for ever trusted.
Concerning Jesus it is written: “And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name: that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth; and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glorv of God the Father.’’— Phil. 2:8-11.	'
Thus did the Foundation Stone, the Chief Corner Stone, become a tried and proved Stone, as the prophet Isaiah (28:16) had foretold in these words: “Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation: he that believeth shall not make haste.” Before God granted unto the Lord Jesus the exalted reward of being the head of the great empire or kingdom of God which is to rule the earth, he put him to the most crucial test. Those who will be approved of God and become a part of the empire must follow in the footsteps of Jesus, which includes their suffering for doing right. “For even hereunto were
ye called: because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps.”— 1 Pet. 2: 21.
Why do true Christians suffer? Because God her, ehosen them out of the world and because they refuse to show allegiance unto the Devil’s organization, Jes-.s said concerning his followers: “If ye were of the world, the world would love his own: but because ye are not of the world, but I have ehosen you out of tr,e world, therefore the world hateth you. Remember the word that 1 said unto you, The servant is not greater than his lord. If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you; if they have kept my saying, they will keep yours also.”—John 15:19,20.
During the World War, from the year 191-1 to 191 t, humble Christians residing in Germany were subjected to all manner of wicked persecutions and punishment because they declined to disobey God’s command, “Thou shalt not kill.” In England, Canada and America like followers of Jesus Christ were beaten, thrown into prison, tarred and feathered, and some of them were killed, because they refused to take up arms against their fellow man and shed innocent blood. The war furnished an opportunity and an excuse for the clergy who, as the representatives of Satan, hated these humble Christians and who induced the commercial and political powers to unjustly punish Christians. Not all were persecuted because of refusal Io kill; some were persecuted merely because they were witnesses for the Lord. Men too old for war service, and women who were not at all subject to military duty, because they were Christians were hated by the Devil; and his offspring the clergy induced the persecution and imprisonment of such. For a full account of these wicked persecutions see the Golden Aye magazine, number twenty-seven.
Recently in the towns of Jersey City, Plainfield, Bergenfield, Asbury Park, and Ocean Grove, New Jersey, and in divers places in Pennsylvania and Connecticut, and other places, good men and women while engaged in an effort to do good, and while bringing comfort to the people now in distress, have been ruthlessly arrested, cursed and abused by officers, and otherwise illtreatcd, and thrown into dungeons. These men and women who have been thus arrested and persecuted arc Jehovah's witnesses engaged in the performance of their lawful and rightful duties. They are being thus wrongfully treated because they are the representatives and servants of Jehovah and arc nns-ser.gers of peace concerning his righteous government.
All true witnesses for the Lord have been classed by the Roman Catholic hierarchy as bigots, blasphemers and enemies of the state, and the charge of sedition and blasphemy is often laid against the. humble followers of Christ Jesus. Such wicked opposition to the truth, and such persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses, are made manifest today, particularly in the countries of Italy, Germany, Canada and the United States, and
332
November 1, 1934
TFie WATCHTOWER.
333
that persecution is led by the religionists of so-calkd '‘organized Christianity”, the chief instrument of Satan on earth. Many of the brethren throughout Germany have been arrested and thrown into concentration camps, and they have been in great difficulties. We are certain, however, that the Lord has permitted this for a purpose, and Jehovah’s witnesses in Germany are not discouraged. They well know that they are engaged in the work of Jehovah and whatsoever is his will is sure to come to pass.
The Christian as a witness for Jehovah can bear persecutions for righteousness’ sake without developing a feeling of bitterness against his persecutors. He realizes that God permits it even as he permitted such upon the Lord Jesus, that the loyalty and faithfulness of the Christian may be tested. He relies upon the promises of God ami rejoices.
Suffering is a part of the training of a Christian to prepare him for the kingdom of God. When he does right and suffers therefor at the hands of the Devil’s representatives, then he may have reason to rejoice. Jesus said: ‘‘Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness’ sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.” (Matt. 5:10) The Christian is aware of the fact that the Devil has reproached God ever since the time that the Devil tempted man in the garden of Eden. It is written concerning the Lord Jesus: ‘‘The reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me.” (Ps. 69: 9) The Devil reproached the Lord Jesus when he was on earth. The follower of Christ expects the same thing, and the apostle Paul plainly states (Pom. 15:3,4) that these same reproaches which fell upon the Master fall upon the members of his body, ‘‘which is the [true] church.”
The apostle then goes further and points out that it is a privilege for the Christian thus to suffer with Christ, saying: ‘‘Por unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake.” (Phil. 1:29) It is a privilege for the reason that it is a condition precedent to entering into the kingdom. On one occasion the apostle said: ‘‘We must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of God.” (Acts 14:22) Paul emphasizes this when he writes: ‘‘Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution.” (2 Tim. 3:12) Such is the manner in which the Lord has been pleased to select and give the Christians an opportunity to prove their loving devotion to him.
One who is willing to endure all manner of persecution, and even death, for righteousness’ sake can be trusted with power and authority. The apostle points out that persecution for righteousness is one of the signs by which we may know that the Lord is dealing with us as followers of Christ Jesus, when he says: ‘‘The spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God: and if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ; if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together.”—Rom. 8:16,17.
This may be followed as a safe rule: When one claims to be a Christian, and then indulges in the persecution of another in the name of Christ, that one is a hypocrite, and not a Christian. The Lord Jems did not revile, even when he was reviled. (1 Pet. 2: 23) The course of persecution and reviling, pursued by t ne. ecclesiastical systems, is therefore proof that they are of their father the Devil and his will they will do.
The true Christian does not think it strange concerning the fiery trials that come to him because of his faithful devotion to the Lord and his cause of righteousness. He ivlies upon the inspired testimony concerning persecutions, as given by the apostle Peter, to wit: ‘‘Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is to try you, as though some strange thing happened unto yon: but rejoice, inasmuch as je are partakers of Christ’s sufferings; that, when his glory shall be revealed, ye may he glad also with ix-ceeding joy. If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy arc ye; for the spirit of glory and of God resteth upon you: on their part he is evil spoken of, but on your part lie is glorified.”—1 Pet. 4:12-14.
When Jesus was finishing his earthly ministry he addressed these faithful disciples who had been with him through his trials, and said: “Ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations [trials|. And I appoint unto you a kingdom, as mj’ Father hath appointed unto me.” (Luke 22:28,29) Thus the Master showed that the empire or kingdom class would be made up of those who arc faithful to God ami faithful to him. It is not expected that there would be a great multitude of these. On the contrary, the blaster said: “Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father’s good pleasure to give you the kingdom.”— Luke 12:32.
The ecclesiastical hypocrites have made the people believe that billions will be of the kingdom of God. It is safer to follow the words of the Lord and Master, Christ Jesus. In corroboration of what the Master said, the apostle states: “It is a faithful saying: For if we be dead with him, we shall also live with him: if we suffer, we shall also reign with him: if we deny him, he also will deny us.” (2 Tim. 2:11,12) The Lord Jesus admonished his followers to fear none of these things, and then gave them this assurance: “Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life.”—Rev. 2:10.
The Devil’s organization is designated in the prophecies written before Christ and also in The Revelation under the symbol of a “beast”, and in the latter also as an ‘ ‘ image of the beast ’ ’. Those w ho are promised membership in the royal family of heaven are the ones who refuse to give any allegiance whatsoever to the “beast”, the Devil’s organization. It is written: “And I sarv thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them : and I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which had not worshipped the beast, neither his image, neither had received his mark upon
334
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N.Y.
their foreheads, or in their hands; and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years.”—Rev. 20:4.
The apostle Paul shows that all the members of the royal line are subjected to the same temptation. (Heb. 2:18) The same temptation which was presented to Eve in the garden of Eden, and to which she yielded and fell, was also presented to ecclesiastics who claimed to represent God; and to this temptation these ecclesiastical systems likewise yielded and fell. A like temptation was presented to the Lord Jesus, but he resisted it and won. All the members of the body of the royal family of Jehovah God are subjected to the same temptation. Only the overcomers are granted membership in the kingdom. ‘Overcoming’ means gaining the victory over Satan’s organization by an absolute refusal to render allegiance to any part of it, and, on the contrary, to manifest loyalty and faithfulness unto God unto the end. To such overcomers these promises are made:
“Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the temple of my God; and he shall go no more out: and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, which is New Jerusalem, which cometh down out of heaven from my God: and I will write upon him my new name.” (Rev. 3:12) ‘‘To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my' throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his throne.” (Rev. 3:21) ‘‘And he that overcometh, and keepeth my works unto the end, to him will I give power over the nations: and he shall rule them with a rod of iron; as the vessels of a potter shall they be broken to shivers: even as I received of my Father.” (Rev. 2:26,27) These are all promises by the Lord Jesus addressed to his faithful followers particularly down at this end of the age, and Jehovah God will make good every one of these promises to the faithful, for the vindication of his glorious name.
LET
JEHOVAH’S PROVISION
Dear Brother Rutiukfoiid:
We received the jihonograph and records a few days ago, and to say we were glad to got them would be putting it mildly; for we were real happy, and so glad to let someone hear the message who couldn’t read any language that we played it to some Spanish people, who had twelve children and all raised Catholic. .So I put on the record ‘ ‘ Purgatory ’ and when I played it their eyes brightened up and sanctioned every word spoken. So they gave us every penny they had, which was a fiye-eenl piece, for one of the booklets, and said that one of the children could read English. And so I played to one old man in. another place, all by himself, and he took four bound books. And so on down the line: we played the records, or, I might suy, gave the message from Jehovah through you, Brother Rutherford. I am so glad that Jehovah has made those provisions for us pioneers, that we can continue in the work.
The people around here, as elsewhere, have no money, and very little to trade. But when one is real hungry for the truth and can’t contribute anything, we never lot him go hungry: we donate something.
Now we don’t only thank you for the phonograph, but thank you for all past favors in books and your encouragement in the service, and would have written before, but know you are a busy man in the Master’s service, and we didn’t want to take any of your time, thinking you took it for granted, as we are trying our best to exist and be in the Master’s service as much as we can. We have a family of four children, and must care for them also, but try to make the Master’s service first ami most important.
In the service of our Lord and Master,
Your brother and sister,
Jay and Vida M. Crenshaw.
PHONOGRAPH AND RECORDS A REAL BLESSING
De.vr Brother Rutherford:
Grace be unto ymu, and peace!
This is an expression of thanks to Jehovah, who, through you and the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, has made it possible for a continued increase of service and a real opportunity to preach the glad tidings of the kingdom.
The pioneer work, which affords daily the privilege of cartying the message from door to door, and now the phonograph and records, which are the hist word in efficiency in spreading the message rapidly, are proof of the guiding hand of tho present King, and an inspiration to renewed energy and zeal in temple service, to scatter the coals of the over the city. The urge within me calls for an expression of one or two of the
TERS
many incidents where the phonograph did a work which otherwise would hare been impossible.
In a sawmill town in my territory, four "Holiness” preachers were holding an open air meeting on Main street. A woman living next door to tho vacant lot where tho meeting was held gladly consented for us to play the records one evening as the meeting was going on. We. set up tho phonograph on a little table on the sidewalk in front of her house, not over one hundred feet from the platform where these four preachers were using the Indian snake dance and the incantations of the African medicine man to charm an audience of at least two hundred people, all the while blaspheming the Lord by clapping of hands and shouting, "Braise you Jesus! Braise you Jesus!” It was enough to turn the stomach of any honest person. We put on the record "Jehovah”, and let it hurl the truth into their midst. It being a clear, cool night, your voice carried well into the midst of the crowd in spite of the noise. All at once it became so still you could hoar a pin drop. All that was heard was your voice declaring who Jehovah is and what constitutes real service to him. All must have hoard it plainly, even the four preachers. Suddenly, one of them, realizing what was going on, jumped about four feet into tho air, landed on the platform, clapping his hands and shouting, "Praise you Jesus!”, etc.
We played one record after another, and gradually people began to eomc from the crowd to hear the lectures. Some would come and liiten a while, and then go back. Finally a littlo man with a long flashlight came over and listened intently for a short time, then went back. A few minutes later he came over again and held his flashlight for me, while I explained the picture representing the "beast” and his number, in Light One. I made it plain about how the preacheis and politicians are working with big business. Ho took it all in, then he went back to the other meetings. The next day wo were informed that be was the city marshal, and hail been sent over to stop the phonograph from playing. But lie made no attempt to do so. We also learned that some of the crowd intended to come over and "stamp the phonograph into hell”, as they put it. But nothing was done. Tho woman who gave us permission to play in front of her house surely enjoyed the lectures. Not being able to read, naturally she got a lot from hearing them. The next day some of the "Holiness” people ordered her to leave town.
We continued to play the records until the nmeting closed; then we closed, too. In the meantime thirty-eight people camo over to hear the phonograph play. The best of all is this: The very night aft-r they closed their meeting tl.e lour preachers fell out with each other because one wanted to preach one doctrine, and another a different doctrine. Not being able to agree, three of them left town in a big huff, one remaining, who said he was going to stay in the town until the Devil was
November 1, 1934
fffie WATCHTOWER
335
run out. Three nights later the meeting died, with only fifteen present and no collection. Babylon is fallen, is fallen! So your voice over the phonograph, declaring who Jehovah God is, bis purposes, and how to truly serve him, was too much tor the worshipers of Baal. The truth put them into confusion, ami they 11 ‘d I
One other incident: On a Sunday morning, by previous announcement, we held a lecture at a country schoolhouse, following Sunday school. The preacher was there to lead the Sunday school. Gradually a erowd of sixty-seven gathered, only about a dozen of which, as admitted by the preacher, came to Sunday school, the rest coming to hear the lectures. When, in the lecture on “Soul”, the remark is made, “Why, in the face of these plain scriptures, the clergy continue to teach the doctrine of immortality of the soul,” etc., the preacher’s eyes popped out so far you could have knocked them off with a stick. He listened intently, and, at the close of the service, announced that the literature was for sale at the door of tho building, and shook my hand, saying, “1 enjojed the lectures very much.” I wonder, did ho really 1
1 surely do thank you for the use of the phonograph in our work.. It is proving to be a real blessing and inspiration to us ns well as to other hearers. By the grace of God and with his most needed help, and the prayers of the brethren, which we entreat, we hope to continue our feeble efforts to carry this glorious message and say, “Come,” to all who will hear us.
Thu members of my household, who also engage in the witness work, express their gratitude for the use of the phonograph.
In sincerity, 1 am your fellow worker,
F. J. Gkuenewald, Pioneer.
GRATITUDE TO JEHOVAH FOR LIGHT
Dear Friends:
We, the Jonadabs of . . . districts, assembled with Waldeck (Costa Rica) company of Jehovah’s witnesses, wish to express our gratitude to Jehovah God for the light he has brought to us through the medium of books, booklets anil transcription machines through your service. In thankfulness for this heart-cliecrii’.g ami nurvelous light, we wish to adopt tire Los Angeles (“World Control”) lesolution, to wit:
“ L’r.xoJi cd, That we do now take our stand on the side of Jehovah God and his kingdom; and that we will obey, servo and worship Jehovah God and his beloved Son, Cliiist Jesus, who is the rightful Ruler of the world, and we will thus participate in the vindication of Jehovah’s name.
Davhi Harrison	(Miss)	Ida Patterson
Thaddei-s pjiibips	(Miss)	Louise Baii.ey
(Mis.) Caroline Salmon	(Miss)	Emma Dixon
NOT DEFEATED
Dear Brother Rutherford:
In this town we were stopped twice on account of the clergy, but decided the last time we would not bo defeated; so wo drove seven miles to another small town. Gave a lecture that night (August 3) and had 141 listeners.
The people were much interested ami listened well.
Yours in the service of our King,
Wauchcla (Ela.) yitARi*snooTEi:.s.
(Continued from pngc 336)
Brooklyn WBBH Su 10:15am
Su (i:30ptn Mo 10:30am
Tul0:30am Tu 6:30pm
Wcl0:3oam We 0:30pm
Th 10:30am Th 6:30pm
Fr 10:30am Fr 6:30pm
Buffalo WGR Su 10:00am Elmira WESG Su 10:15am Freeport WGBB Su 9:Whun
'I’u 7:00pm Th 7:00pm
Hudson F. WGLCSu 10:15am Jamestown WOCL Su 9:.”>0am New YoikWBNXSu -2:30pm New York WOV Su 4:30pm SaranacU WNBZ Su 10:15am
Tu 4:15pm Th 4:15pm Syracuse WSYRSu 10:3Oam Tupper L. WI1DL Su 10:15am Th 10:00am
Wh. Pl’ns WFASSu 6:00pm
Mo 1:00pm Sa 9:00am
NORTH CAROLINA
Asheville WWNCTh 5:30pm Charlotte WSOC Su 10:00am Greensboro WBIG Su 9:45am Raleigh WPTF Su 9:45am
NORTH DAKOTA
G’d Forks KFJM Su 2:30pm
OHIO
Akron	WADC Su 1:45pm
We 11:15am
Akron WJTV Su 5:3'ipm We 2:00pm
Cleveland WHK Su 10:30pm Tu 11:30am Th 2:30pm
Er 7:3itpm
Cleveland WJAY Su 9:45am Columbus WAIU Su 10:00am Th 8:.15pni
Columbus WBNSSu 8:45am Mo 8:30am We 8:30am Fr 8:30am
Day ton WSMKSu 1:30pm
Mt. Grab WHBDSu 4:30pm We 4:30pm Fr 4:30pm
Toledo WSPD Su 9:30am Sa 8:30:>m
Y'oungst’nWKBN Su 10:00am
We 4:30pm
Zanesville WALK Su 10:00am
We 4:15pm
OKLAHOMA
Elk City KASA Su l:15ptn Oki ’a City KOMA Su 12:45pm Ponca City WBBZ Su 10:00am
We 9:00pm
Shawnee KGFFMo 8:45pm We 8:45pm Fr 8:45pm
Tulsa KVOO Su 10:15am
OREGON
KlamathF. KFJIMo 8:15pm Marshfield KOOS Mo 1:30pm Medford KMED Tu 1:30pm Portland KWJJ Su 9:30am
PENNSYLVANIA
Erie WLBW Su 10:45am
Glenside WIBG Su 1:15pm
Johnstown WJ AC Su 4:30pm Phil’a WCAU Su 12:00 an Philadelphia WIP Su 6:45pm Pittsb’gh KQV Su 10:30am
We 1:45pm Fr 1:45pm
Reading WEEU Su 3:45pm
We 3:45pm
Wash’ton WNBOSu 9:45am W’mspoit WEAK Su 5:30pm Y'ork WORK Su 3:00pm
PHILIPPINE ISLANDS
Manila KZEGSu 7:00pm Th 7:00pm
SOUTH CAROLINA
Greenville WFBC Su 10:00am
Spart’b’g WSPASu 6:30pin
SOUTH DAKOTA
Pierte KGFX Su 1:00pm Tu 4:00pm Th 4:00pm
Watertown KWTN Su 9:15am Wo 8:45pm Er 8:45pm
TENNESSEE
Cha’nooga WDOD Su 1:15pm Th 8:01 tarn
Jackson WTJS Su l:3opm
Wo 5:30pm Fr 5:30pm
Knoxville WROLSu 7:0i»pm
Memphis WMC Su 4:15pm
Memphis WRECSu 9:15am
TEXAS
Amarillo KGRS Su 9:00am Austin KNOW Su 10:00am CorpusChr. KGFI Su 9:00am
We 0':45pm Fr 6:45pm
Dallas	KRLD Su 10:30am
Dublin	KFPLTh 8:0(>pm
Fr 8:45am
El Paso KTSMSu l:15prn
Ft. Worth KT AT Mo 5:15pm
We 5:15pm Fr 5:15pm
Galveston KLUF Su 8:00pm We 8:00pm
Houston KXYZ Su 10:00am
S. Angelo KGKLSu 1:45pm Th 8:45am
S. Antonio KTSA Su 10:45am
Tyler KGKB Su 9:15am
We 9:lJam Fr 9:15am
■Wichita F. KGKO Su 12:30pm Th 8:45pm
UTAH
Ogden KLOSu 3:15pm
We 5:00pm
Salt L. City KSL Su 10:45am
VERMONT
Rutland WSYB Su 10:00am
Th 5:30pm
St.Albans WQDM Su 1:00pm
VIRGINIA
Ch ’lottesv. WBHC Su 10:45am Danville WBTM Su 10:15pm Lyncbb’g WLVA Su 12:45pm Norfolk WTARSu 12:30pm Petcrsb’g WPHR Su 6:45pm
We 10:00am
Richmond WRVA Su 12:15pm Roanoke WDBJ Su 12:30pm We 5:00pin
WASHINGTON
Aberdeen KXRO Su 1 :15pin Bell ’ham KVOS Su 10:00am Th 5:30pm
Seattle KJR Su 10:3i'nm
Seattle KVLMo 8:15pm
Tu 8:45pm We <8:15pm
Spokane KFIOSu 9:15am
Spokane KGA Su 5:45| m
Tacoma KV1 Su 2:45pm
Walla Walla KU J Su 7:45am Su 1:30pm
Wenatchee KI’O Su 1:0i>pm
Y'akima KIT Su ]O:0i>;im Th TiO'J.m
WEST VIRGINIA
Bluefield WHiS Su 9:00am Fr 8:0-'>aiu
Cha’ston WOBU Su 4:00pm
Fairmont WMMN Su 12:45pm Hunt'ton WS VZ Th 4:0':j.m Wheeling WWVASu lOtbU.im
WISCONSIN
LaCrosse WKBII Su 12:00 an Madison WIBA Su 10:05am Maui 'woe IVOMT Mo 7: (>'.pni Th l:0upm
WYOMING
Casper KDFN Su 10:30am Th 8:45pm
rfie WATCHTOWER.
RADIO SERVICE
The good news of the kingdom of Jehovah is broadcast each week or oftener by these and other stations at time shown.
[Current local time is shown in each instance.]
AUSTRALASIA
NEW SOUTH WALES Albury 2-AY Tu 8:45pm Coniburn 2-GN Su 7:30pm Grafton 2-GFTu 7:30pm
We 7:45pm
Gunnedah 2-MO Su 7: 00pm Lismore 2-XNWe 7:15 pm New Castle 2-1 ID Su 10: 3<)ain
Su 9:30pm Su 11:40pm We 0:30pm
Sydney 2-UE Su 9:15am W ’gaW 'ga 2-WG We 9:30um
QUEENSLAND
Brisbane 4-BC Su 10:15am Mackay 4-MK Su 10:15am Marybor’gh 4-MB We 9:45pm Rockh'pton 4-RO We 10:00pm Townsville 4-TO We 8:00pm
TASMANIA
Launceston 7-LA Fr 5:45pm
Uiverstone 7-UVWe 5:30pm
VICTORIA
Ballarat 3-BA Su 12:45pm
Bendigo 3-BO Tu 8:45pm
Hamilton 3IIASu 6:45pm
Horsham 3-USSu 7:00pm Melbourne 3-AKSu 2:15pm
Melbourne 3-AW Su 10:15nm
Sale	3 TR Su 6:30pm
Swan Hill 3-SIISu 7:15pm
WEST AUSTRALIA TCalgoorhe 6 KG Su 7:45pm Perth 6-MLSu 7:00pm
BELGIUM
Hainaut BONNE Sa 5:30pm (330 m) ESPERANCE
CANADA ALBERTA Calgary CFCN Su 5:45pm NOVA SCOTIA Sydney CJCBSu 9:00pm ONTARIO Hamilton CKOC Su 10:30am Su 1:30pm Su 8:00pm
CHINA
Shanghai XMIIASu 9:45am
CUBA
Caibarien CMIlf)
Spanish Su 7:00pm
Havana CMK Su 11:30am
Spanish Su 9:00pm
Santa Cl'a CMHISu 12:15pm
Spanish Su 11:05am
E S T H O N IA
Reval RADIO-Su 3:30pm (296.1m) TALLINN
FRANCE
Beziers RADIO-Th 8:00pm (220.1m) BEZIERS
Bordeaux RADIO- Mo 7:45pm
(237 m) SUD-OVEST
Fecamp RABIO-
(206 m) NORMANDIE
French Tu 8:00pm
Paris RADIO L L Fr 8:15pm (370 rn)
Paris RADIO- Su 12:00 nn
(312.8ra) VITUS
Th 7:30pm Sa 7:30pm
Toulouse RADIO- We 7:15pm (385.1m) TOULOUSE
MEXICO
Mexico XECW
Spanish Th 10:00pm
UNITED STATES
ALABAMA
Birm ’ham WAPI Su 12:45pm Birin’ham WBRC Su 10:00am Dothan WAGFSu l:30prn M’tgomeryWSFA Su 3:45pm Muscle S. WNRASu 6:0<>pm
Wo 8:00pm Fr 8:00pm
ALASKA
AnchoragcKFQl) We 9:30pm Ketchikan KGB (J Mo 7:15pm
Th 7:15pm Sa 7:15pui
ARIZONA
Bisbee KSUN Su 4:00pm
We 4:00pm Fr 4:00pm
Jerome KCRJ Mo 5:15pm
We 5:15pm Sa 5:15pm
Spanish Th 4:30pm
Prescott KPJM Su 5:45pm
We 5:45pm Fr 5:45pm
Tucson KGARSu 5:15pm
We 7:00pm Fr 7:00pm Yumu KUMA Su 6:15pm
Spanish Su 6:00pm
ARKANSAS
Fay ’ ville KUOA Su 12:45pm
We J1:30am Fr 4:30pm HotSp'gs KTHS Su 1:00pm Little R’k KARK Su 9:00am Little R’k KGHlSu 7:00pm
We 5:45pm Fr 5:45pm Little R’k KLRA Su 10:30am Paragould KBTM Su 10:00am
We 11:30am
Texarkana KCMC Su 6:45pm
CALIFORNIA
El Centro KXO Su 10:00am
Eureka	KIEM Su 10:30am
Fresno KM J Su 0:45pm Hollywood KNXSu 9:15pm Long B ’ch KGER Su 10:45am Los Angeles KTM Su 9:30am
Su 8:00pm Th 8:00pm
Oakland KLS Su 11:15am We 2:45pm Fr 2:45pm
Oakland KROW Su 10:15am Su 6:15pm Mo 8:15pm
We 8:15pm Sa’mcnto KFBK Su 9:30am S.F’cisco KTABSu 9:30am Stockton KGDM Su 9:30am
We 7:15am Fr 1:15pm
COLORADO
Col ’o Spr. K VOR Su 10:30am
We 5:30pm Sa 4:30pm
Denver KFEL Su 7:00pm
Grand J’n KFXJ Su 1:15pm
Greeley KFKA Su 6:45pm
Lamar	KIDW Su 7:15pm
We 2:40pm Fr 2:4(>pm
Yuma KGEK Mo 12:45pm We 12:45pm Fr 12:45pm
CONNECTICUT Bridgeport WICC Su 10:30am
DELAWARE
Wilm’ton WDELSu 6:15pm
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
Washington WOLSu 6:00pm
FLORIDA
Jacksonv. W.MBR Su 10:00am
Miami WIODSu 3:30pm
Miami WQAM Su 4:45pm Orlando WDBO Su 12:-15pm Pensacola WCOA Su 1:00pm
We 7:00pm
GEORGIA
Albany WGl’C Su 10:30am
Athens WTFI Su 9:45am
Atlanta WGST Su 5:45pm
Atlanta WJTLSn 2:15pm
Augusta WRDW Su 1:13ptn
Th 7:45pm
Columbus WRBLSu 9:30am
LaGrangeWKEU Su 3:0Opm
We 3:00pm Fr 10:00am
Macon WMAZSu 4:00pm
Rome WRGA Su 12:30pm
We 8:45pm Fr 8:45pm
Savannah WTOC Su l:00pin
HAWAII
Honolulu KGMB We 12:05pm Fr 7:15pm
IDAHO
Boise KIDO Su 10:45am
Idaho Falls KID Mo 10:00am
Nampa KFXD Su 11:00:tm
Mo’ 7:45pm
Twin Falls KTFI Su 10:45am Su 4:45pm
ILLINOIS
Bloom’ton W.1BC Su 9:45ain
Decatur WJBL Su 10:00ain
Fr 6:30am
Harrisb’g WEBQ Su 6:00pm
Quincy WTAD Su 12:30pm We 1:00pm
Rockford WROK Su 10:15am Su 9:30pm We 9:30pm
Sp ’gtield WCBS Su 12:30pm
Sa 11:15am
Tuscola WDZ Su 12:45pm
INDIANA HaramondWWAE Su 11:00am Ind’apolisWKBF Su 10:00am Th 1:00pm
Muncie WLBC Su 1:30pm Fr 3:30pm
KANSAS
Coffeyville KGGF Su 1:45pm '	Th 8:45pm
KENTUCKY Louisville WAVE Su 1:45pm
LOUISIANA
Shrevep’t KWKH Su 9:45am
Bangor
MAINE
WLBZ Su 10:45am
MARYLAND
Baltimore WBAL Su 11:30am
Cumber! ’dWT BO Mo 1:15pm
We 1:15pm Fr 1:15pm
Hagerst'n WJEJ Su 10:15am
MASSACHUSETTS Babson F. WBSO Su 12:30pm Boston	W1IDII Su 12:30pm
Boston	WNAC Su 10:0(>am
Sp’gfield WMAS Su 10:30am ■Worcester WORC Su 10:30am
MICHIGAN
Calumet WHDFTu 6:15pm Detroit WJR Su 10:00am Jackson WIBM Su 6:30pm KalamazooWKZO Su 9:45am We 1:15pm
MINNESOTA
F’gusFnllsKGDE Su I0:00nm Min’npolisWDGY Su 2:00pm Mom head KGFKSu 7:30pm
We 5:15pm Fr 5:15pm
MISSISSIPPI
Gulfport WGCM Su 9:45am We 8:45pm
Hattiesb ’g Wl’FB Sti 1:30pm We 7:15pm
Lnurcl WAMLSu 1:00pm
Meridian WCOC Su 10:00am We 6:45pm
MISSOURI
Columbia	KFRU Su	12:00nn
	We	7:15am
Kans.C ’y	KWKC Su	2:00pm
	Tu	7:00am
	MONTANA	
Kalispell	KGEZSu	9:00am
NEBRASKA		
Kearney	KG FW Su	10:00am
Lincoln	KFAB Su	9:30am
Lincoln	Kroi: Su	10:15am
Scottsbl’f	KGKYSu	10:15am
We 5	:45pm Fr	5:45pm
	NEVADA	
Reno	KOU Su	10:30am
NEW JERSEY
Newark WNEW Su 10:00am
NEW MEXICO
Albuq’que KOB We 5:15pm
Kosv.ell KG FL Su 5:15pm
We 4:30pm Fr 4:30pm
NEW YORK
Auburn WMBO Su 6:30pm Su 2:15pm
Bing ’mtonWNBF Su 7:15pra
(Cofttinned on page 335)
WATCHTOWER.
Published Semi-Monthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N. Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford President "W. E. Van Amburgh Secretary "And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.”-haiah 34:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation and his active agent in tho creation of all things; that tho Logos is now the Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created tho earth for man, created perfect man for the earth and placed him upon it; that man wilfully disobeyed God's law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born sinners and without the right to life.
THAT JESUS was made human, and tho man Jesus suffered death in order to produce tho ransom or redemptivo price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every namo and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is tho Chief Officer thereof and is tho rightful King of tho world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and are his witnesses whose duty and privilege it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in the Bible, and to bear the fruits of tho kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and tho Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to the establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of tho peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ which has now begun; that the Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and tho establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under thb kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall be restored and live on earth forever.
“JEHOVAH”
With deep gratitude to the great Revealer of his own name The Watchtower announces the publication of a new book. All faithful witnesses of God and Jonadabs will thrill to know the book bears the title “Jehovah”, and that its contents set forth, as does no previous publication, the glorious name, the marvelous works and dealings, past, present and future, and the sure covenant purposes, of the Most High God. The book’s beautifully embossed cover holds within it 384 pages of text matter, color illustrations, and complete index. The author’s edition also contains a facsimile letter in the author’s own handwriting, specially written for and addressed to the Lord’s anointed ones (and the Jonadab brethren). It is now ready and may be had at 50c a copy, this to help offset the heavy original costs of publication. Jehovah’s faithful witnesses and true Jonadabs will not fail to read this new book and thereby to arm themselves for future service in placing it before the whole world, by his grace. Those wishing a copy should place their order through the director or vvitli the sharpshooter. If not associated with a company, then order direct from the Society.
PHONOGRAPHS
In his own ehosen time, and when his enemies are desperately trying to limit his witnesses on earth in getting the truth to the people, Jehovah has provided another effective instrument for the kingdom proclamation, to wit, a portable phonograph equipped with electrically transcribed records of 44-minute speeches by Brother Rutherford on vital Bible topics. Reports
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purposes as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses’. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his Beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of tho Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns aro not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
Exited States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Fobcicn, $1.50; Great Britain, Australasia, and South Africa, 7:;. American remittances should bo made by Express or Postal Money Order, or by Bank Draft. Canadian, British, South African and Australasian remittances should bo made direct to the respective branch ollices. Remittances from countries other limn those mentioned may be mnda to the Brooklyn office, but by international Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British .......... 34 Craven Terrace, London, W. 2, England Canadian ....... 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Australasian . . 7 Beresford Road, Strathfield, N. 8. W., Australia South African .... Boston House, Cape Town; South Africa Please address the Society In every cose.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay tho subscription price may have The Watchtower free upon written application to tho publishers, made once each year, stating the reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but tho written application once each year is required by the postal regulations. Eotice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment cf a new or a renewal subscription will be sent only when requested. Change of address, when requested, may be expected to appear on address label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) will be sent with the journal one month before the subscription expires. Entered as Second Class Mail Matter at Brooklyn, N. Y., Bostofflce.
Act of March S, ISIS.
to date from pioneers and others already equipped with and using this phonograph attest the success and potency of this method of introducing and driving home the Lord’s message. The machine is manufactured by the Society at its Brooklyn factory, and is specially designed for its work, and is the best available for the purpose. Sttong, compact, with a powerful spring-wound motor, and carrying space for several discs, it weighs 21 pounds with six discs bearing twelve recordings. To cover the bare cost the phonograph, with 18 recordings, may be had for $19.25. AU orders therefor, remittance accompanying, should be sent to the Brooklyn office of the Society.
ATLANTA CONVENTION
The Atlanta service convention will be on November 23, 21 and 25; headquarters Ansley Hotel, roof garden. Meetings Saturday and Sunday will be held in the City Auditorium. These meetings will be addressed by various brethren, including the president of the Society.
It is hoped that many of Gw pioneers in the south may be able to attend. Sleeping quarters are being provided for a hundred, or more pioneers. Pioneers will make no arrangements for quarters until seeing convention committee. A credit of $25 will be allowed to each pioneer on book account to help pay- expenses to the convention. Let all the Lord’s people present this matter before the throne of grace for his blessing that there may be a splendid witness to the honor of his name. Address all communications to Clifton R. Thomas, Chairman Convention Committee, 1391 Belmont Ave., S.W., Atlanta, (. a.
Vol. LV
November 15, 1934
No. 22
FEAST OF CONSPIRATORS
“For they eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine of violence.”—Prov. 4:17.
PART 2
JEHOVAH had Daniel in Babylon to bear testimony to II is name. Daniel stood out separate and distinct from all men of Babylon. Jehovah has taken out from the world (which is antitypieal Babylon) men and women whom he has anointed and appointed to be his witnesses, and these must stand out separate and distinct from all men of the world. It is the name of Jehovah God that is involved, and the vindication of his name was the paramount issue in Daniel’s day. That is still the paramount issue, and which issue must now be definitely settled in the right way. Men are of little importance, but the name of Jehovah is all-important; hence all divine prophecy should be examined with this thought in mind: that the principal reason for these prophetic pictures and the fulfilment thereof is the vindication of Jehovah’s name, and what men have to do therewith and what is the result to men arc of secondary importance.
2	Daniel had been in Babylon for several years, and in that time had proved himself a faithful and true witness to the name of God. He was of good old age, and still the Lord God would use him to bear testimony. I’’or approximately 1,900 years God has been taking out from the world his church and using those thus selected to be his witnesses, and now, even in the old age of the church, in these last days the faithful arc having greater opportunities of bearing testimony to Jehovah’s name. The picture made in connection with the appearing of Daniel before the king of Babylon strongly indicates that the remnant would in these last days be given a greater privilege and responsibility to be witnesses to the name of the Most High and to bear before rulers of this world testimony to Jehovah’s name and to his kingdom. The mother queen had concluded her speech before his royal majesty, and the king, giving heed thereto, had Daniel brought before him. “Then was Daniel brought in before the king. And the king spake and said unto Daniel, Art thou that Daniel, which art of the childien of the captivity of Judah, whom the king my father brought out of Jewry ?” (Dan. 5:13) The bringing of Daniel before the king was a last resort of Belshazzar, and after his wise men had utterly failed.
333
The so-called “wise men” of the present day, including the “brain trust”, have utterly failed to suggest a method that will effectually bring peace and prosperity to the people. The prophecy indicates that the remnant of the church yet on earth must as a last resort serve notice and warning of such utter failure upon the earthly rulers of Satan’s organization called Babylon and that this notice must be served shortly preceding the overthrow of the wicked organization by Jehovah’s great Executive Olliccr. Jehovah has brought forth his witnesses for the purpose of giving such notice. The miserable failure of the clergy to tell the truth to the people makes it necessary for Jehovah God to employ the remnant to give notice and warning to the rulers of the world. It was in 1925 that God revealed to his people on earth the meaning of the two great signs or wonders appearing in heaven. (Rev. 12:1,3) Those great signs or venders disclose to God’s people the organization of the enemy Satan, and the greater organization of Jehovah God, the explanation of which appears in The Watchtower, 1925, page 67 on. On September 27, 1930, the books Light, explaining The Revelation, including the two great signs and wondersand the seven last plagues, were released to the public, and a wide distribution of these books followed, and which were placed in the hands of many of the ruling class. Thereafter the importance of giving testimony was emphasized, and God’s organization on earth fixed a quota for the year 1931 of the amount of literature that it was hoped would be placed; and during each year from that time forward a like course has been taken and a greater testimony than ever given to the name of the Lord. It then became apparent that such is “the testimony of Jesus Christ”, and the remnant understood more fully than before that the Lord has committed to his anointed ones on earth the obligation of delivering this testimony and that they must deliver it regardless of all opposition. The remnant are the witnesses for Jehovah.
3	No longer, therefore, could the faithful remnant be identified as merely “Bible Students”; because anyone claiming faith in God, and accepting the Bible
340
THE WATCHTOWER.
Er.ooKLYN, N. Y.
as his Word, might bo thus designated. When Daniel appeared before Belshazzar the king inquired of him : ‘Arc you Daniel of Jewry?’ That question required Daniel to identify himself as a Jew, that is, one of the people of Jehovah God who gives praise to Jehovah’s name and who w’as at that time in Satan’s world, Babylon, but who was not a part thereof. Corresponding to this, in the year 1931, Jehovah caused his faithful people to come up before the rulers of the world and to, boldly confess their identity, that is, that they arc those who give praise and service to Jehovah God and therefore arc true Judeans. This docs not at all mean that they have any relation whatsoever with the so-called commercial “Jews” or selfi-h Yiddish people who make gold their god; but it does mean that these of the remnant are entirely devoted to Jehovah and his kingdom. The faithful remnant representatively in a body accepted the gracious gift of Jehovah God, to wit, the new name given to them by Jehovah, and adopted that new name which he had revealed to them, that is to say, Jehovah’s xcitnesscs, and from that time forward they have been known as “Jehovah’s witnesses”. In the resolution adopted at that time, to wit, July 26, 1931, reference was made to the period of the work of the church foreshadowed by the prophet Elijah and the names by which the faithful followers of the Lord Jesus had been known during that period, and then the resolution said: “We arc servants of Jehovah God, commissioned to do a work in his name, and, in obedience to his commandment, to deliver the testimony of Jesus Christ, and to make known to the people that Jehovah is the true and almighty God; therefore we joyfully embrace and take the name which the mouth of the Lord God has named, and we desire to be known as and called by the name, to wit, Jehovah ’s witnesses.” (The Watchtower, 1931, page 279, paragraph 5) Since then the anointed have been known as and called “Jehovah’s witnesses”, meaning Judeans in fact, that is, those who are wholly devoted to the praise and service of Jehovah God.
* Belshazzar, after having Daniel identify himself, then said: “I hate even heard of thee, that the spirit of the gods is in thee, and that light, and understanding, and excellent wisdom, is found in thee.” (Dan. 5:14) It is certain that he had not heard of Daniel from his wise men, because they would consider it best to keep Daniel’s name in the dark. Likewise the -world rulers have had no favorable report from the modern clergymen and their “wise” associates about Jehovah’s witnesses, because such “wise men” prefer to have Jehovah’s witnesses entirely discredited. Whatever report is made about them is adverse. The clergy and their allies go even to the point of preventing the people from hearing the testimony delivered by Jehovah’s witnesses; and in this they are ablv supported by Big Business, who own many radio facilities, and who deliberately prevent Jehovah's witnesses from using the radio to proclaim God’s message of truth. It was the queen mother who brought the informa
tion to Belshazzar, and it is the honest and fair-minded men of the world today, foreshadowed by the que< n, that bring testimony to the higher rulers concerning the witnesses of Jehovah; and these honest men have had to do with opening the way for Jehovah's witnesses to be heard before the higher governmental officials, recently at Washington, D.C.
5	The prophecy of The Revelation, among other things, says: “And I beheld, and heard an angel Hying through The midst of heaven, saying with a loud voice, Woe, woe, woe, to the inhabiters of the earth, by reason of the oilier voices of the trumpet of the three angels, which are yet to sound!” (Rev. 8:13) Woes were pronounced by the. Lord in his message delivered and proclaimed at London in 1926 ; Toronto in 1927; Detroit in 1928; and the clergy had b-en unable to explain to their coconspirators the meaning of those woes. When Belshazzar had Daniel before .him, continuing to address Daniel he said: “And now the wise mon, the astrologers, have been brought in before me, that they should read this writing, and make known unto me the interpretation thereof: but they could not shew the interpretation of the thing.” (Dan. 5:15) The king acknowledged the utter inability of his wise men to make known the interpretation of the handwriting on the wall. Their failure v.as due to the fact that such wise men were The sons of the Devil and his servants, and they could not tell the truth, and hence they lied. (John 8:44) Likewise, when the “woes” were pronounced, as above stated, and which corresponded to the three woes shown by the handwriting on the wall in Belshazzar’s least room, the clergy or “wise men” of modern Babylon lied to the other rulers and insisted that what the “pestiferous Bible. Students named Jehovah’s witnesses” called ‘signs from Jehovah God’ were not from God at all, but that these men and women who were going about promulgating a message which they claim to be God's message concerning his great signs and wonders are in fact impostors. These clergynun have gone to the point of saying that Jehovah's witnesses are seditionists, pacifists, unpatriotic, against the government, socialists and communists, uncompromising foes of Christianity, hawkers, peddlers, and many other like names. Therefore they have insisted before the higher rulers that no credence should be given to the ‘prattle’ of these witnesses. But the clergy, or modern “wise num”, have not been able to allay the fears of the higher rulers, nor have these lying servants of .Satan been able to keep tiic real and true interpretation of present-day events room getting to the ears of the ruling class, ami especially 'to those of the ruling class who have a desire to see fair play. The message of the kingdom and The vengeance of our God against Satan's organization, in printed form, has gone into the hands of the .rulers of “Christendom” and has been widely broadcast by radio throughout the land. The rulers Cue bron served with notice and warning, as contained in God's
November 15, 1934
STJe WATCHTOWER.
341
message of the truth, and have been plainly told what they may expect to come upon the world organization.
6	If Belshazzar had been satisfied with the answers given to him by his wise men he would not have continued to be in great trouble as the Scriptures declare he was. He hoped to get some satisfactory answer from Daniel, and therefore said to him: “And I have heard of thee, that thou canst make interpretations, and dissolve doubts: now, if thou canst read the writing, and make known to me the interpretation thereof, thou shalt be clothed with scarlet, and have a chain of gold about thy neck, and shalt be the third ruler in the kingdom.” (Dan. 5:16) The opinion of man, unsupported by authoritative proof, only tends to raise doubts in the minds of thoughtful men. Belshazzar was in much doubt as to what he had heard from his wise men, and now he wanted to be informed of the truth. Today the clergymen boastfully express their opinion concerning the present-day events, but their opinions thus expressed are not supported by any real authority and carry no conviction to thoughtful men. The word of God used by Jehovah’s witnesses, the remnant, is not the message of any man, nor the expressed opinion of man, but is the authoritative truth of God’s Word, and does away with all doubt as to the final solution of the world situation. Those  who believe and rely upon God’s Word know what is coming to pass shortly; and when they speak thereof they speak with authority from the Lord.
7	Daniel was told that if he could give an honest and satisfactory explanation and interpretation of the handwriting on the wall he would receive great honor and distinction in the realm of the king. But Daniel was not before the king for selfish gain; and this is shown by his answer to the king, to wit: ‘ ‘ Then Daniel answered and said before the king, Let thy gifts be to thyself, and give thy rewards to another; yet I will read the writing unto the king, and make known to him the interpretation.” (Dan. 5:17) In presenting Jehovah’s message before the rulers of the earth at this present time, and announcing his judgments against Satan’s organization, Jehovah’s witnesses are not doing so for selfish gain. They are not asking, nor are they expecting, to receive any favor from worldly source. Let the rulers of this world favor their own; which they will do, of course. This is made manifest on every occasion when the questions concerning the truth, are presented before the rulers by Jehovah’s witnesses. Recently a petition was presented to the Congress of the United States relative to the use of the radio, which petition was signed by many persons of good will. Some persons have foolishly said that the presentation of such petition was ‘going to Egypt’, that is, to the world, for help. That conclusion was not only foolish, but very erroneous. The petition asked for no favor from anyone, but does demand that the rights of God’s people be respected and that they be permitted to go on with their work without let or hindrance from any part of the Devil’s representa
tives or organization. The occasion of this petition was similar to what God directed Moses and Aaron to do in Egypt when appearing before Pharaoh. Such is a witness against the world powers and to the name of Jehovah.
8	Those whom Daniel foreshadowed at this point, namely, Jehovah’s witnesses, began to give answer before “the king”, that is to say, the ruling powers of the world, particularly from July 26, 1931, and forward, and to do so in an effective manner by serving upon them the message contained in the Kingdom booklet, the distribution of which began on the fourteenth day of September, 1931, and was world-wide. The clergy were first served with that booklet, and then their allies, the political and financial element. Now modern Babylon’s “wise men” cannot truthfully charge Jehovah’s witnesses as being peddlers and hawkers engaged in a commercial enterprise, particularly with reference to the foregoing booklet, because that was given to them, and many of the clergy viciously tore the booklet to pieces and used abusive language against those who brought it to them. Jehovah’s witnesses are not peddlers and hawkers in delivering any part of Jehovah’s message, and the clergy know that when they charge them with such their charges are wholly false. Jehovah’s witnesses are doing their work in obedience to the command given to them. When before the king Daniel appreciated the fact that Jehovah had ‘raised him up for that very time’, and hence he took advantage of the occasion to make known the judgments of Jehovah God; and this he did unselfishly and without fear, favor, or hope or promise of reward.
9	In this day only Jehovah’s witnesses identify “the higher powers” properly. They know and publicly declare that the “higher powers” consist of Jehovah God and Christ Jesus. They point to the supremacy of Jehovah, and prove their contention by the historical facts as well as the inspired Word of God. Anyone who holds that a man or company of men or any organization on earth constitutes any part of the “higher powers” mentioned by the apostle in Romans 13:1 shows that he does not understand and does not appreciate God’s Word. The faithful anointed remnant well know that Jehovah is supreme and that his Chief Executive Officer at the temple is directing the work of God’s organization on earth, and that no man is entitled to credit or honor therefor. As did Daniel, so do they give all honor, credit and praise to the Most High.
10	In a few words Daniel covered much of the history of man from the time of Eden onward: “ 0 thou king, the most high God gave Nebuchadnezzar thy father a kingdom, and majesty, and glory, and honour.” (Dan. 5:18) Nebuchadnezzar here mentioned represented Lucifer, to whom was given the overlordship of the earth prior to his rebellion in Eden. It was to Lucifer that God committed the rulership of the world; and becoming wicked, he was thenceforth
342
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn', N. Y.
known as "that old serpent”, "the devil,” ‘the father of lies,’ and his offspring are designated the ‘seed of the Serpent’, and which seed of the Serpent was represented by Belshazzar and his Jords and wise men and others of his official organization. After the rebellion of Satan Jehovah gave nothing to Satan nor to his seed; hence verse eighteen, above quoted, applies specifically prior to the rebellion in Eden. On a previous occasion Daniel had said to Nebuchadnezzar: "It is thou, O king, that art grown and become strong [like a great tree in the midst of the earth] : for thy greatness is grown, and reacheth unto heaven, and thy dominion to the end of the earth.” (Dan. 4:22) Daniel had also stated to Nebuchadnezzar: "Thou, 0 king, art a king of kings: for the God of heaven hath given thee a kingdom, power, and strength, and glory. And wheresoever the children of men dwell, the beasts of the field, and the fowls of the heaven, hath he given into thine hand, and hath made thee ruler over them all. Thou art this head of gold.” (Dan. 2;37,38) Thus Daniel had spoken of Lucifer as he had appeared at the beginning and before the rebellion. Lucifer, now Satan, turned his organization into wickedness, and at the point of the prophecy concerning the feast of Belshazzar the king Belshazzar there represented the ‘seed of the Serpent’.
11	Lucifer had been entrusted with the power of death, which power, of eour.se, was to bo used in harmony with the will of God and against those willfully disobeying God. (Heb. 2:14) Lucifer did not use his power as authorized ; likewise his representative Nebuchadnezzar improperly used his authority: "And, for the majesty that ho gave him, all people, nations, and languages, trembled and feared before him: whom he would he slew, and whom he would he kept alive, and whom he would he set up, and whom he would he put down.” (Dan. 5:19) Satan was never authorized to use his power tyrannically; nor has any man been authorized to be a tyrant. Now there are many who tremble before the debased Lucifer, who is Satan, and which people are, because of fear, Devil worshipers. Jehovah's servants do not tremble before the Devil, but they fear and worship Jehovah God. God does not permit the Devil to do as he would against men who are faithful to Jehovah; and this is shown by the experiences of Job. (Job 1:12; 2:4-6; John 19:10,11) Satan has used his power autocratically and despotically in his attempt to be like the Most High and to turn people away from Jehovah. It is true that Nebuchadnezzar destroyed Jerusalem; but he did so only by permission of Jehovah and as an instrument employed by Jehovah to accomplish His purpose in executing His righteous judgment against a rebellious people. (Jer. 25:8,9) Pride with prosperity always leads to disaster. That was true in Nebuchadnezzar’s case. Hence said Daniel concerning him: "But when his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened in pride [and his spirit was hardened that he dealt proudly, Jf.V.], he was deposed from his
kingly thione, and they took his glory from him.” (Dan. 5: 20) Nebuchadnezzar continued in his selfish and proud schemes for such a long time that he concluded that he was master of his own destiny and that his actions were not subject to Jehovah’s permission or disapproval. That was exactly the spirit of Lucifer, and which led to his downfall. Another example of pride and prosperity was that of Uzziah, one of the kings of Israel, who also mot disaster. (2 Chrcn. 26:11-23) Nebuchadnezzar brought his beastly insanity upon himself by his wrongful course. God was in no wise responsible for that madness, any more than God is responsible for the beastly madness of the modern rulers of "Christendom”. (Dan. 4:29-37; Luke 21:24) Jehovah did not say, as his message delivered by Daniel shows, "I will create in him a beast’s heart,” but he did say, "Let a beast’s heart be given unto him [by another].” (Dan. 4:16) Doubtless God permitted a wicked spirit, a part of Satan’s organization, to take control of Nebuchadnezzar, just as he permitted wicked .spirits to get control of the herd of swine. (2 Chron. 18:18-22; Matt. 8:2s-32) God has permitted the same crowd of wicked spirits associated with Satan to imprison the "sons of God” who sinned in Noah's day. By reason of his own fall Nebuchadnezzar found himself in a shameful and insane condition, and when his heart was lifted up ami he was hardened in pride God took away his throne from him.
12	Nebuchadnezzar was like a wild beast, and Daniel called this to the attention of Bels'mzzar: "And he. was driven from the sons of men; and his heart was make like the beasts, and his dwelling was with the wild asses; they fed him with grass like oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven ; till he knew that the most high God ruled in the kingdom of men, and that he appointed: over it whomsoever he will.” (Dan. 5: 21) At the end of the seven years described Nebuchadnezzar came to know that' Jehovah, "the most high God,” is the ruler; but Belshazzar his son had failed to learn that great truth, and Daniel was reminding him of that fact. The "seven times” of the Gentiles ended in 1914, and, like Belshazzar, the visible rulers of the world failed to then learn the vital truth that Jehovah is God, although they had been told of it time and time again. Had they learned this great and all-important truth they would not have held a modern feast, such as Belshazzar held, and which present-day world carousal was foreshadowed by his feast. The modern rulers failed to give heed to the fact that Jehovah sets up whomsoever he wills, and in due time debases those who go contrary to bis will. God did not "set up” the selfish rulers of the earth, nor did he set up the proud and self-exalted pope, the clergy, and other like austere men. God sets up what the world considers the "basest” or lowest, that is to say, Christ, who abased himself, and whom Jehovah God has exalted even as lie had caused to be foretold by his prophets. (Ezek. 21: 26, 27 ; Dan.
November 15, 1934
Tfle WATCHTOWER
343
4: 17) In 1931 Jehovah God by his witnesses brought this great fact to the attention of the rulers of this world, but they failed to give heed thereto or to learn any part of such great and important truths.—The Walcltljwcr, 1931, pages 277, 278.
13 The proud failed to take warning, and refined to humble themselves before the mighty hand of God, just as Belshazzar failed to take warning ami humble himself before God. Therefore said Daniel: “And thou his son, 0 Belshazzar, hast not humbled thine heart, though thou knewest all this.” (Dan. 5:22) When the World War came the rulers were told that that was in fulfilment of prophecy, marking the end of Satan's power and rule, and the end of their own power and rule, and that God’s kingdom was now at hand; but they failed and refused to give heed thereto. Since 1918 the purpose of Jehovah to destroy the organization of this wicked world has been repeatedly told to the rulers as a notice and warning to them; hence they can never plead ignorance concerning Jehovah's King and his kingdom. With the completion of the ‘pouring out of the seventh vial’, which pouring out began in 1928, “Christendom” has received full notice that, she is weighed in the balance, is found wanting, and is going to be destroyed. It is the handwriting on the wall; ami the rulers, although being informed, refuse to repent and refuse to cease inti r-fering with Jehovah’s witnesses in carrying the message of truth to the people. They show their stubbornness and disregard of God’s Word by continuing to oppose the delivering of the testimony by .Jehovah’s witnesses. These facts have recently been presented to the Congress of the United States, at the hearing of which Big Business, the clergy, and the political representatives were present; and instead of giving heed to the message and acknowledging Jehovah God as supremo, such rulers, like Belshazzar, appealed to their own “wise men”, including the clergy, and ignore Jehovah’s witnesses and Uis message of truth, and by their course of action they continue to reproach the name of Jehovah the Most High. They have heard the truth and have had full opportunity to know what course to take, but, like Belshazzar, they spurn the truth.
11 The Lord Jesus at the temple as Jehovah’s Chief Executive Officer has caused the warning to be given to “Christendom” time and again. As evidence of such warning there is here cited the “Warning” resolution of July 1931. above referred to, also the Kinf/dom booklet, the Crisis booklet, and other like booklets since distributed. Instead of giving hei<1 to this me-sage of warning from the Lord the rulers of the world foreshadowed by Belshazzar have ridiculed, reproached and persecuted Jehovah’s witnesses, and held them up to scorn before others, and have thus lifted up themselves against Jehovah even as did Belshazzar. Said Daniel: “But hast lifted up thyself against the Lord of heaven; and they have brought the vessels of his house before thee, and thou, and thy
lords, thy wives, and thy concubines, have drunk wine in them ; and thou hast praised the gods of silver, and gold, of brass, iron, word, and stone, which see not, nor hear, nor know: and the God in whose hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy ways, hast thou not glorified.” (Dan. 5:23) The wicked conduct of the modern rulers of “Christendom” in persecuting Jehovah's- witnesses is in fact against “the Lord of heaven”, because these witnesses bring not their own message, but the message from the Lord God. These matters have been plainly stated before the rulers of the present day in the publications above mentioned, and also in Vindication, Books Oue, Two, and Three. The rulers, instead of giving heed to God’s message, have, continued to drink the wine of Babylon, make tinir.s-elves drunk, and use Jehovah’s witnesses in a disgraceful way to amuse themselves.
It was ‘the finger of Almighty God’, that is to say, his beloved Son Christ Jesus, that did the writing upon Belshazzar’s banquet hall: “Then was the part of the hand sent from him ; and this writing was written.” (Dan. 5:2-1) Sir.ee Jehovah has poured out his spirit upon all bis faithful witnesses he has sent forth these witnesses and used them to write his message of truth ‘upon the wall’ of reveling “Christendom”, but the rulers have ignored and despised the message and wickedly persecuted the messengers.
I,; Belshazzar’s feast of wine-drinking and debauchery (lid not eease after the handwriting appeared; on the contrary, the misuse of (he golden vessels of the temple continued. Likewise during the time the antitypical plagm-s were being poured out upon the world, trom 1926 to 1929, the carousal of “Christendom” has continued and those participating therein have increased their hatred and bitterness toward Jehovah’s witnesses. During recent years the faithful remnant, under the direction of Jehovah's Chief Officer, have continued to boldly, plainly and fearlessly inform '■Christendom” that this world organization is that of the Devil. That message delivered, and the reaction of “Christendom” thereto, is all well summed up in the words of Jehovah’s prophet Daniel spoken to Belshazzar on the occasion of his feast, to wit: “And this is the writing that was written, MENE, MENE, TEKEL, UP1IARS1N.” (Dan. 5:25) From an authority on oriental literature the following is quoted: “These mysterious words are Aramaic. They are rendered on the margin of li.V. ‘Numbered, numbered, weighed, and divisions’; Pharsin being the plural of the noun pcres, Mene being the regular passive participle of its verb in the Peal species, and Tekel being regarded as likewise a passive participle, with the realization which is traditionally given to it changed from tekil to tekel to conform to the sound of mene’. These letters were not vocalized as written on the wall, i nd might have bcm pronounced in a variety of ways. Even if the correct pronunciation had occurred to me of the wise men as among several possibilities, he Lad no means of establishing the correctness of his
344
tffie WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
reading or of interpreting the word4.*’—Davis Dictionary of the Bible, page 491. (Sec also McClintock & Strong's Cyclopaedia, Vol. VI, page 89.)
” The king and his company of revelers had seen the handwriting on the wall in this strange language, and now they must be told what it meant. Had they been entirely sober they might have been able to read the words, even though they did not get an understanding thereof. Daniel, who foreshadowed Jehovah’s witnesses, God now used to both read and interpret the strange words. Likewise “Christendom” had heard the words concerning God’s kingdom and the fall of Satan's organization at Armageddon, and had heard these words repeated time and again. Had “Christendom” been sober her wise men might have read them with some understanding; but, being drunk with the wine of Babylon, they neither properly read nor understood. But it is the will of God that “Christendom” must be told concerning the words and the meaning of the “handwriting on the wall”, particularly as from 1926 to 1929, whin this message was delivered to “Christendom” in fulfilment of these words. The interval between 1929 and 1930 afforded the rulers time to investigate and learn, and time to determine what attitude they would take toward God and 1 is people, and their work being done on earth. In the booklet Freedom for the People, distributed in 1927, Big Business, conscienceless politicians and hypocritical religion were exposed, and, among other things, these words were used: “The Word of God s nd the physical facts prove that ‘organized Christianity’ or ‘Christendom’ is a failure,” that is to say, i:i weighed in the balance and found wanting. The metropolitan press took notice of the message in fulfilment of the “handwriting on the wall” and denounced Jehovah’s witnesses who delivered the message as the ‘uncompromising foes of organized Christianity’. Seven years later, to wit, in 1934, before a Congressional committee at Washington, D.C., one of the representatives of “organized Christianity” placed in evidence before such Congressional committee the booklet Freedom far the People, containing the message of warning, and called attention to that message r.s the reason for refusing Jehovah’s witnesses the use of radio facilities to proclaim God’s Word of truth. Thus “Christendom's” representatives admit that they have seen the “handwriting on the wall” and that they saw it in 1927. “Christendom” and her representatives are therefore estopped from ever being heard to say that they did not sec the “handwriting on the wall”. They admit that they saw it; but now, how about the interpretation ?
18	Daniel, by the grace of God, was used to give the interpretation of the mystic words, as he said, “This is the interpretation of the thing” (vs. 26) ; which message the king and his revelers had seen, but they were too drunk and blind to appreciate the meaning thereof. Likewise the rulers of “Christendom”, drunken with the wine of Satan's organization, were and
are dull-eyed and cruel of heart and slow of understanding. They read the words, but they understand not. It was in 1918 that the great Judge, Christ Jesus, came to the temple and began judgment. Concerning the clergy of “Christendom” and their allies the words of Jehovah’s prophet now apply, which words Jesus quoted, to wit: “Therefore they could not believe, because that Esaias said again, He [Jehovah] hath blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart; that they should not see with their eyes, nor understand with their heart, and be converted, and I should heal them. These things said Esaias, when he saw his glory [Jehovah’s glory in the temple], and spake of him.” (John 12:39-41; Isa. 6:9,10) The fulfilment of the interpretation began upon “Christendom” and began to be told to “Christendom” on July 26, 1931, when the message contained in the booklet The Kingdom, the Hope, of the World, accompanied by the resolution of “Warning”, was spoken and widely broadcast, and later distributed throughout “Christendom”, and especially among the rulers of “Christendom”. Then was made known for the first time the “new name” that Jehovah gave to his people and by which name, that is, Jehovah’s witnesses, they arc now known and recognized by the rulers of “Christendom”.
WHOM DANIEL FORESHADOWED
19	Daniel gave the interpretation, which foreshadowed the interpretation of Jehovah’s message of the present day. Meno means “numbered”. The repeating of the word or writing upon the wail twice, as stated in the text, shows two numberings. Daniel knew that God had numbered Babylon, Ihc world power, and this he had learned from the prophecy of Jehovah uttered by Jeremiah; and Daniel so states. (Dan. 9:1, 2; Jer. 25:11-13) Jehovah numbered not only typical Babylon, but also Satan’s organization, the Greater Babylon, symbolized by his woman. The divine statement at Genesis 3:15 discloses that Jehovah then fixed a time certain during which he would not interfere with Satan and his efforts to turn men away from the true God but would abide his own due time to raise up a seed by which he would destioy Satan and his organization. The words written upon the wall and interpreted by Daniel show two separate and distinct numberings, the first “mono” of the numbering of Babylon fixed the end of the “times of the Gentiles” or beginning of “the time of the end” for Babylon, and this time is fixed as at A.D. 1914. The seven symbolic times, each of 360 years, beginning with the destruction of Jerusalem by typical Babylon in the year 606 B.C., would necessarily end 2,520 years thereafter, to wit, A.D. 1914, at which time also the prophecy uttered by Christ Jesus began to be fulfilled.—Lev. 26:18,21. 24; Dan. 12:4; Afatt. 24: 3-8.
20	The second “mene” would apply to the finishing, or ending, of Satan’s organization: “And finished it,” or, according to the Revised Version, “and brought it
November 15, 1934
aTie WATCHTOWER.
345
to an end.” The final end comes at Armageddon and just before which the witness work must be completed. (Matt. 24:14,21,22; see Rev. 18:10,17,19) The message first promulgated at the Columbus (Ohio) convention July 26, 1931, and which appears in the booklet The Kingdom, the Hope of the World, gave forth the notice and warning to the rulers of “Christendom” similar to the interpretation which Daniel gave before Belshazzar.
21	The word tckel that appeared written on the wall means “weighed”. It is from the verb meaning “to balance ”, and was used by Job: “Let me be weighed in'an even balance, that God may know mine integrity. If my step hath turned out of the way, and mine heart walked after mine eyes, and if any blot hath cleaved to mine hands.” (Job 31:6,7) Jehovah’s prophet Daniel informed Belshazzar that his kingdom was done for and the reason thereof was, as Daniel stated: “TEKELj.Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting.” (Vs. 27) The uninterrupted reign of great Babylon, Satan’s organization, came to an end in 1914. It was then weighed in the balance and found wholly wanting. The weighing consumes time, which weighing began when the official Weighmaster, C'hrist Jesus, appeared at the temple of Jehovah, and he continues weighing until the enforcement of the second “inene”, when it is completely finished, marking the final end, and which final end is after the finishing of ‘the preaching of this gospel of the kingdom’, at which time the final end comes in the great tribulation. “For her [Babylon’s] sins have reached unto heaven, and God hath remembered her iniquities.” (Rev. 18:5) By his prophet Jehovah says: “We would have healed Babylon [while being weighed], but she is’not healed: forsake her, and let us go every one into his own country; for her judgment rcacheth unto heaven, and is lifted up even to the skies.” (Jer. 51:9) She is weighed in the divine balances, which are impartial and absolutely true and accurate. “A just weight and balance arc the Lord’s; all the weights of the bag arc his work.” (Prov. 16:11) “Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree arc a lie: to be laid in the balance, they arc altogether lighter than vanity.” (Ps. 62:9) It is during the weighing of Babylon by the Lord Jesus Christ that the ruling elements of the earth, pictured by Belshazzar, his wives, concubines, lords and other officers, put on the vestments or garments by which they identify themselves as anti-God, antikingdom, and as Devil worshipers, hence deserving to be slaughtered at Armageddon as Jehu slaughtered the Devil’s typical crowd.—2 Ki. 10:18-26.
22	While the weighing progresses Jehovah’s witnesses in obedience to commandment go through “Christendom” and mark those whom God would save from the slaughter. (Ezek. 9: 3-10) Concerning “Christendom” Jehovah says, “Thou art found wanting.” The message of truth, delivered by Jehovah’s witnesses, is God's message, and he directs its prepara
tion and furnishes the means of delivery; and in doing so he uses radio stations, transcription recording machines, and a little army of faithful men and women who go from house to house delivering the message which other machines have printed. The message of the Lord declares concerning “Christendom” that she is ‘weighed in the balances and found wanting’; and this message is particularly contained in such as “Can the American Government Endure?” “America’s End,” in The Crisis and in like booklets which are distributed throughout the land called “Christendom”, and also in “heathen” lands, so called, where few Christians reside. Modern Babylon has been told that “the world is sick unto death and is going to die”. The rulers in “Christendom” are wanting in fear of God, and this is shown by the fact that they spurn his message of truth and continue to profane the “vessels” of God, that is, Jehovah’s witnesses. “Christendom” is wanting in love for. God and for his kingdom, and ’they show this bj’ continuing the persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses, thus disclosing that they are acting under the direction of Gog, Satan’s chief officer. (Ezek. 38:1,2) “Christendom,” which is part of Babylon, the Devil’s organization, has defamed the name of Jehovah and desecrated his temple; hence “his device is against Babylon, to destroy it; because it is the vengeance of the Lord, the vengeance of his temple”.—Jer. 51:11.
23	At Armageddon the rulership of the world will be snatched away from Satan and taken over by Christ Jesus. Foreshadowing this, Daniel’s interpretation continues in these words: “PERES; Thy kingdom is divided, and given to the Medes and Persians.” (Dan. 5:2S) In verse twenty-five the word “Pharsin” or “Upharsin” is used, and which is the plural form of the verb Peres or Peras, meaning “to split up”, “to deal,” “tt' distribute.” (Isa. 58:7; Lev. 11:3,4) In verse twenty-five the plural “Pharsin” calls attention to two dividings or dealings-out, that is to say, the dealing out of Babylon to Christ in 1914, when the Devil and his crowd were cast out of heaven, an I the second dealing-out, which takes place at the battle of Armageddon, when the organization of Satan is destroyed and the ruling of the world completely taken over by Christ Jesus. Daniel’s use of the word “Peres”, in the singular in verse twenty-eight above quoted, seems to apply specifically to the final dividing or splitting-up, at Armageddon.
24	Satan combines all his forces in his organization that are on the earth; hence the words “thy kingdom is divided” do not mean Satan’s organization falls by reason of internal dissension and division. This is not the ‘dividing’ mentioned in Revelation 16:17-19. The rule of the world will be forcibly snatched away from Satan at Armageddon by Christ Jesus the Conqueror; and concerning this the prophet Daniel records his vision which he had in the first year of the reign of Belshazzar, to wit: “I saw in the night visions, and, behold, one like the Son of man came
343
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they brought him near before him. And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages, should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed. And the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints of the Most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey him.”—Dan. 7:1.3, 14, 27.
21 The rulcrship taken from Babylon, as the record states, was “given to the Medes and Persians”. The dividing of the kingdom seems to support the conclusion that there are two divisions of the conquering forces, to wit, the unseen and the seen. These two divisions of conquering forces seem to be symbolized by the ram’s “two horns” mentioned by the prophet: “The ram which thou rawest having two horns are the kings of Media and Persia.” (Dan. 8: 20) The Scriptures always give precedence to the Medes. They are mentioned as a very ancient people, the sons of Ja-pheth. The Medes seem to symbolically represent the invisible organization of the Lord Dod, which includes cherubim, seraphim and angels. Persians are Scrip-turally mentioned as picturing Christ Jesus; hence in the prophecy of Daniel the Persian ruler seems to more particularly picture the anointed ones of Jehovah on earth, members of the Christ, to wit, the remnant.—Isa. 45:1-3.
28 It is the invisible army of Jehovah, led by Christ Jesus, that will destroy Satan’s organization. “The burden of Babylon, which Isaiah the son of Amoz did see. Behold, I will stir up the Medes against them, which shall not regarel silver; and as for gold, they shall not delight in it. Their bows also shall dash the young men to pieces; and they shall have no pity on the fruit of the womb; their eye shall not spare children. And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldees’ excellency, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah.” (Isa. 13:1,17-19) “Make bright the arrows; gather the shields: the Lord hath raised up the spirit of the kings of the Medvs: for his device is against Babylon, to destroj’ it; because it is the vengeance of the Lord, the vengeance of his temple. . . . They are vanity, the work of errors: in the time of their visitation they shall perish.” (Jcr. 51:11-18) In the execution of Jehovah’s judgment against Satan’s organization ‘all the saints’ have a part. (Ps. 149: 6-9) The part to be performed by the division of God’s army on earth is merely that of declaring the day of the vengeance of our God, calling attention to the “handwriting on the wall”, and announcing Jehovah’s purpose to destroy Satan’s rule and give the rulership of the world to Chrht Jesus. Such is the very part the remnant have been having and doing particularly since 1926. The ‘handwriting on the wall’ has been explained to the rulers, and no w
the remnant is engaged in telling the people of good will what is about to come to pass and in instructing them in the way of the Lord. Now Jehovah's witnesses are engaged in a world-wide distribution of the message “Dividing the People”, that those of good wrill may see the right way and have opportunity to take it in order that they may receive the favor of Jehovah in-the greatest of all crises, just ahead.
2T Belshazzar the king had given his word that the one who could show the meaning of the handwriting on the wall should be rewarded. (Dan. 5:7) Probably Belshazzar did not enjoy the divine message v.'Hirk Daniel delivered in response to his question. Probably he did not then believe what Daniel said, but, having given his word, he would keep it: “Then commanded BeLhazzar and they clothed Daniel with scarlet, and put a chain ol‘ gold about his neck, and made a proclamation concerning him, that he should be the third ruler in the kingdom.” (Dan. 5:29) While it is true that the king Belshazzar decreed that Daniil should be made “third ruler in the kingdom”, Daniel did not assume the duties of that office during the reign of Belshazzar, because Belshazzar was slain that very night. Daniel satisfactorily explained the handwriting on the wall, and his exaltation by Belshazzar surely brought great chagrin to Babylon’s wise-men. This seems to clearly correspond to Haman’s being compelled to lead a horse on which Mordecai rode through the public streets and to announce to the people that, Mordecai was one honored by the king. (Esther 6:4-12; see Preservation, page 132) Just what relationship this particular part of the prophecy nmy bcai- to Jehovah’s witnesses and to Iheir position in the near future would be a mere guess, and Imnce the guess would better not be made.
28 On that same day that Babylon fell Darius the Mede became the ruler of the nations of the world; and the Scriptures show Darius pictured the supreme ruler. Darius carried out the decree that Belshazzar had announced, and made Daniel the third ruler in-the kingdom, this being the order: first ruler, Darius; second, Cyrus; and third, Daniel. (Dan. 6:1-3) Corresponding to this, at the complete fall of Babylon, which is Satan’s organization, including “Christendom”, the order of the rulers of the world will be this, to wit: first, or supreme ruler, Jehovah; second, Jesus Christ; third, the members of the body of Christ, and hence the “faithful and wise servant” ch-r-s, whom Daniel foreshadowed.—1 Cor. 31:3.
20 While Belshazzar and his lords were feasting handwriting appeared on the wall, and shortly thereafter Belshazzar and bis revelers were slain. Tim ‘handwriting’ has now appeared on the wail of “Christendom”, and her doom is sealed. It is certain that Satan’s seed, that is, those who now rule the earth, will be destroyed. “In that night was Belshazzar ll.e king of the Chaldeans slain.” (Dan. 5:30) The Bible does not disclose who slew Belshazzar. What prefmie history has to say about it deserves no considered ion.
November 15, 1934
WATCHTOWER.
347
It was the agency of Jehovah that did the slaying; henec there is pictured the work of Jehovah’s Executioner enforcing the divine judgment, which is already written against Satan’s organization. At Armageddon those who have long ruled the world in wickedness, and have oppressed the human race and shamefully dishonored God’s holy name and his kingdom, will come to an end, and Christ Jesus will do the executing of all the wicked ones.
30	At this point in the world’s history embraced within the prophecy Babylon as a world power ceased, and the rule of the Medes and Persians there began: “And Darius the Median took the kingdom, being about threescore and two years old.” (Dan. 5:31) The name “Darius” means “coercer, or, conservator”. In fact, Darius did coerce Babylon completely and preserved or conserved Daniel the faithful servant and prophet of Jehovah God. It is said that Darius was a kinsman, that is, the uncle, of Cyrus, and probably Cyrus was the heir of Darius. This seems to suggest that Darius the Mede pictures the supreme power, Jehovah himself, the Most High. He began his reign as the world ruler at the fall of Babylon, which corresponds or pictures the fall of Satan’s organization, and Darius there pictures Jehovah, who is, of course, the First Ruler in 1he great universal kingdom. Cyrus, the. second ruler, pictures Jehovah’s “heir of all things”, that is, Christ Jesus, to whom Jehovah gives the kingdom and all the nations of the earth as a possession. (Ps. 2: 8) He is the one with whom Jehovah associates himself in the destruction .of Satan’s organization. The fact that the scripture tells that Darius was about sixty-two years old when he became the first ruler of the world power would further indicate that he there pictured Jehovah, “the Ancient of days.”—Dan. 7 : 9.
31	At the fall of Babylon Darius the Mede, rather than Cyrus the Persian, is made foremost; and this would seem to say that as the result of the battle of Armageddon Jehovah the great King, who is the Supreme One, is made known to all creation that lives, and that his name is fully vindicated, and he is seen to be above every creature, including his beloved Son, Christ Jesus, the world’s King. All secular historians have difficulty in identifying Darius the Mede, and do not mention him by name, but do give prominence to Cyrus the Persian. The Bible makes known Darius •. and this corresponds to the. further fact that the rulers in this world do not know Jehovah God, and that they make mention of his name only in derision, while at the same time they give prominence to the name of Jesus Christ, even though they do so for a selfish reason. After Armageddon all shall know Jehovah.
32	Jehovah, by permitting his people to have some understanding of the prophecy at this time, is further manifesting his loving-kindness toward his anointed and thus he brings great comfort to them even as he has in his Word given promise to do. (Rom. 15:4) The fact that Daniel survived the fall of Babylon and
lived even unto the third year of the reign of Cyrus the Peisian king (Dan. 10:1) would suggest that the Greater Darius (The Conservator, Jehovah) will keep alive at least a part of the remnant during the battle of Armageddon and grant to them some service on earth after the battle, which service will be to the honor and glory of Jehovah's name. “Great is Jehovah, and greatly to be praised, in the city of our God, in his holy mountain. Beautiful in elevation, the joy of the whole earth, is mount Zion, on the sides of the north, the city of the great King. God hath made himself known in her palaces for a refuge.” —Ps. 48:1-3, A.R.V.
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
U 1. Account for Daniel’s being in Babylon at the time of the event hero under consideration. Show that the record of bis integrity and experience is a prophecy.
If 2, 3. Explain the prophetic significance here of Daniel’s being brought before the king, and of the inquiry made by the king concerning Daniel’s identity.
4.	What information imd come to the king concerning Daniel, and how had it reached him? What is foreshown therein?
5,	0. Relate the facts which show that, in fulfilment of versts 15 and 15, the modern 'wise men and astrologers' have been given an opportunity to road the handwriting and to interpret it, but have been unable to do so. Account tor their failure, and describe the methods employed by them to conceal their lack of wisdom.
D 7, 8. How did the king’s offer of reward appeal to Daniel? What has taken place to show that at that point nl«« Daniel foreshadowed Jehovah's witnesses of the present time?
V 9, 10. When and how does verse 18 apply? Point out other statements by Daniel which support that conclusion.
U 11-15. In verses 18-21, of whom was Daniel speaking? Compare Lucifer and Nebuchadnezzar, according to this record, in points of position, source of authority, course of action, and result of such course. Why did Daniel call Belshazzar’s attention to those fan’s concerning Nebuchadnezzar, and to the further facts declared in verses 22 and 23 J Show that the rulers of "Christendom’’ have received notice and warning and that they have failed to use th-'ir privilege or to meet the responsibility brought to their attention.
V 1(5-18. How, in fulfilment of the prophetic picture, is it shown that the revelry continued even after the appearing of the writing on the wall? Was this justified, and why, in view’ of the faet that they were unable to read and understand the writing? What was the writing, and the interpretation thereof, as revealed by (led to Daniel and by him made known to the king? What are the facts which show that the ‘handwriting on the wall’ and "ts interpretation’ have been made known to the rulers of "Christendom’’, and the further facts which clearly disclose why they have failed to profit thereby?
K 19-25. With illustrative related scriptures, explain the meaning and application then, and the iirophetia meaning and application, (a) of "mhne”, and of its being repeated, (b) Of "TEKF.L". (c) Of "UPHARSIN", or (as in verse 28) ‘' PEitns ’ ’.
K 26. What is herein clearly seen as to whom Daniel foreshadowed and what was foreshown by his reading the writing on the wall and making known its interpretation as revealed to him by Jehovah?
$ 27, 28. Was Belshazzar’s word fulfilled concerning reward to the one who could read and interpret the handwriting on the wall? What is foreshown therein?
29.	What further even' took place that night? By whom was it accomplished? and what is pictured therein?
30.	What is the prophetic significance of the recorded statement of verse 31, and of the relationship and position of Cyrus and of Daniel in that kingdom ?
f 31. Compare the Scriptural record and secular history in point of prominence given to Darius the Mede and to Cyrus the Persian, and account for the contrast.
H 32. What does Daniel 10: 1 suggest in regard to the remnant during and after Armageddon?
TEMPTATION AND FALL OF ECCLESIASTIC1SM
THE term “ecclesiasticism” applies to all denominations, Catholic and Protestant, which have united with the financial and political elements of the earth to form the governing or controlling factors to ru’e the world. To these ecclesiastics the Devil presented the three great temptations. These temptations he had also presented to Eve in the garden of Eden. She yielded and fell. The same three temptations were presented to Jesus by the Devil, and Jesus resisted all of them and gained the victory. And now mark how they were presented to the ecclesiastical systems and how these have all fallen to the wiles of the Devil and have become a part of his organization, the evil world.
The Scriptures declare that God does not tempt anyone. The apostle James (1:13-15) writes: “Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God: for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempteth he any man: but every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed. Then when lust hath conceived, it bringeth forth sin: and sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth death.” It was the desire of these ecclesiastical leaders for honor and power that led them into temptation.
Jesus Christ is the great Shepherd of the flock of God. (Ileb. 13:20; 1 Pet. 2:25) In the organization of the church the Lord provided for undershepherds, designating them as overseers and teachers. Upon these is enjoined the duty and obligation of feeding the flock of God, to unselfishly look well to the interest of such (1 Pet. 5: 2-4), and not to lord it over the people of the Lord. Contrary to the Word of God, the elective elders or shepherds of the denominational churches in earlier centuries organized councils, synods, presbyteries, and like bodies politic, elected their own members to the high offices of popes, cardinals, bishops, doctors of divinity, reverends, and so forth, and thus formed and created what are properly termed the ecclesiastics of “Christendom”, the high personages in the denominational churches, Catholic and Protestant. God did not tempt these men so to do. Of their own desire were they led to these steps; and thereby they laid themselves open to the great Tempter, who promptly presented to them temptations similar to those which were presented to Eve and Adam and later to Jesus Christ; namely, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life.—1 John 2:15-17.
Consider, first, the lust of the flesh (or body): The power gained by the ecclesiastics in the church, by reason of their position, they have used for their own selfish purposes. They have fed themselves and let the flock of God go without attention. (Ezek. 34:8) Selfishly they have advanced their own private interests, permitted the people to go without spiritual food, and thereby have caused a famine in the land for the hearing of the Word of God. Yielding to the temptation to use their powers for selfish purposes, they fell.—Araos 8:11.
Second, Just of the eyes (dr mind) : Desiring to possess the seductive things of this world, and to be admired by men rather than be approved of God, the clergy have yielded to the lust of the eyes; they have clothed themselves in scarlet and long, flowing robes, decked themselves with jewels, and have arrogantly assumed a form of godliness while denying the power thereof. They fell ready victims to this temptation. —2 Tim. 3: 5.
Third, pride of life: Jesus instructed his representatives to preach the gospel of his kingdom and to awa.it patiently his second coming, when he would establish the kingdom. He admonished them to keep themselves separate from the world. The ecclesiastics, or clergy, have boldly assumed to represent the Lord on the earth. Satan held before them The temptation that, as the Lord's representatives, they could establish the kingdom of God on earth without waiting for the second coming of Christ; the condition being that they should join hands with the commercial and political powers of earth, which were already under the control of Satan. This appealed to their “pride of life”. To them it was a wonderful thing to bring the capitalists and the politicians into the church, They yielded to this seductive temptation; they set about immediatcl.v to obtain control and rulcrship of the world, without the aid of the Lord and contrary to his Word.
The clergy met the conditions and they have failed. They have worshiped the Devil, sanctified war, for pay have acted as military recruiting officers, and have resorted to other devilish methods to gain their selfish and ambitious ends. They have ignored God and the Lord Jesus, and have waxed rich anil powerful, while being associated with their allies and under the direction of the super-mind of the god of this world. They have fallen to the temptation, and have carried out their part of the Devil’s arrangi-ment to blind the people to God's purposes. They stand self-confessedly guilty before God and man.
The ecclesiastics, to wit, popes, cardinals, bishops, reverends, doctors of divinity, and theological professors, have claimed the exclusive right and authority to interpret the Scriptures, and presumptuously deny the right of anyone to preach the gospel except such as are ordained by them. They have set aside the pure doctrines of God’s Word and through their various organizations have constituted themselves the fountains of doctrines, which doctrines they have sent forth as a river, claiming such to be a life-giving stream for the benefit of the people, whereas in truth and in fact theirs has been a message of fraud and deceit and a stream of sickness and death. By these false and deceptive doctrines the people have been blinded to the purposes of God, and his great provision for salvation has been hid from their eyes.
Claiming for themselves the exclusive authority to interpret the Scriptures, for a long time the erc!<--ms-tics kept the people in ignorance of the tent of the
348
November 15, 1934
WATC HT0WER.
349
Bible by discouraging them in studying it; but now in this day of greater education, when the people might read and understand the Scriptures, these ecclesiastical leaders boldly and flippantly deny the inspiration of the Word of (tod. Foreknowing that they would take this course, God caused his prophet Jeremiah to write concerning them: ‘‘They have foisaken me, the fountain of living waters [source of life and truth], and hewed them out cisterns [man-made systems and doctrines], broken cisterns, that can hold no water [really contain no life-giving truth].”—Jer. 2:13.
For the purpose of turning the minds of the people away from the true God and blinding them the ecclesiastics have taught false doctrines, of which the following are a few, and which are set out here in contrast with the truth for the purpose of comparison, to wit:
The Bible teaches that man was created perfect, and that because of sin he was sentenced to death, thereby losing perfection of organism and the right to life.
Modern ecclesiastics teach that man is a creature of evolution; that he never fell, and never lost the right to life by reason of sin.
The Bible plainly states that man is mortal, and that because of Adam's sin all arc born sinners subject to death.
Ecclesiastics teach that all men have immortal souls, which cannot die, which doctrine is supported only by Satan’s great lie, namely, ‘There is no death.’—Gen. 3:4; John 8: 44.
The Bible plainly teaches that the wages of sin is death, and that death and destruction is the punishment of the willfully wicked.
Ecclesiastics teaeh that there is no real death, and that the punishment of the selfish and wicked is conscious torment, eternal in duration; and that to escape such terrible punishment the people must join their church denominations.
The Scriptures plainly teach that Jehovah is God, the great First Cause; and that Jesus Christ, his only begotten Son, is the I’cdeemer of mankind.
Ecclesiastics teach the unscriptural, God-dishonoring doctrine of the trinity.
The inspired Word of God declares that Jesus Christ is the ransomer of all; and that all members of the human race shall, in due time, have an opportunity to know about The ransom and receive its benefits.
Ecclesiastical teachings of evolution, human immortality, eternal torment and the trinity are denials of the ransom by implication; and now the chiefest among them deny that J<sus was any more than an ordinary man, deny that there is any value in his sac
rifice, deny the only Lord God and the blood of the Lord Jesus Christ by which mankind is redeemed.
The Scriptures teach that Christ Jesus is King, the only One who has the right and authority to rule the earth in God’s due time.
Ecclesiastics teach the divine right of earthly kings, who are made by big business, to rule the people; and the ecclesiastics have joined hands with big business and big politicians to enforce this rule and to control the peoples of the earth because, they say, it is the divine arrangement for them to rule.
Jesus constituted his apostles as the foundation of the Kingdom, and the Scriptures teach that the apostles have no successors.
Ecclesiastics have fraudulently claimed to be successors of the apostles, and thereby have arrogated to themselves great authority and have attempted to deceive, and have deceived the people.
The Bible teaches and emphasizes the second coming of Christ, the great Prince of Peace, that he will take unto himself his power to reign; it admonishes all the followers of the Lord to faithfully proclaim this message of his coming kingdom, and to advocate and follow peace with all men.
The ecclesiastics teaeh and advocate war; they have sanctified war and wrest the Scriptures to justify their conclusion; they have repeatedly had their portraits made with, and exhibited with, great warriors of the world; they have turned their church edifices into recruiting stations; they have received and accepted filthy lucre in consideration of rendering service for recruiting young men for the war, and have willfully preached them into the trenches. And now when the evidence is plain and conclusive that the old world has ended, that the Lord for the second time is present and that the kingdom of heaven is at hand, the ecclesiastics ignore the proof, ami scorn, ridicule and persecute those who dare tell the truth to the people. Instead of bidding welcome to the King of glory, and telling the people of his kingdom and the blessings it will bring they openly unite with the Devil in his schemes to control the peoples of the earth in a compact designated as the League of Nations; and piously and fraudulently they declare it to be the ‘‘political expression of the kingdom of God on earth”.
Thus ccclesiasticism throughout ‘‘Christendom” has undeniably fallen to the temptations which Satan has placed in its path, and now Jehovah God s time is at hand to clear ccclesiasticism off the face of the earth that the people of all lands may know that he is Jehovah, the only true and living God, the Almighty and Most High One, in whom is no lie or fraud or hypocrisy or injustice or anything selfish.
GOD
standeth in the congregation of the. mighty: he judg-eth among the gods. . . . Arise, 0 God, judge the earth: for thou shalt inherit all nations.—Psalm 82.
THE ISSUE AND THE WITNESSES
NEVER was it so important as now that the people know the truth. Mankind’s great enemy, Satan, is putting forth all his efforts to prevent the people from knowing the truth. Many of the rulers are deceived and blinded by Satan, and likewise the people are blind to the truth. What, then, shall bo done that the people may know the truth?
God, whose name is Jehovah, does not execute his purpose in secret. ITe gives due notice of his purposes. It was but a brief space of time after the expulsion of man from Eden that Satan formed a company of men ami caused them to hypocritically call themselves by the name of the Lord. The book of Genesis, chapter four, verse twenty-six (martfill), testifies to this fact. Men hurried down the road to wickedness. Satan also led many of the spirit creatures of God into wickedness, causing them to leave their first estate in God’s organization, take on human form as nephilim and fill the earth with violence. Because of this wickedness God determined to destroy that wicked generation. (Gen. 6:7) Before doing so, ho sent Noah to bear witness concerning his purpose. (2 Pct. 2:5; 1 Pet. 3:20) That which Noah did was prophetic and foretold what would come to pass at the end of the world. Of this there is not the slightest doubt, because Jesus so declared.—Matt. 24:37.
When God would deliver his people from the oppressive hand of the ruler of Egypt, he sent Moses and his brother Aaron to give testimony before that ruler and the people,-of and concerning his purpose. (Ex. 3:18; 4:16; 5:1-4; see also Exodus 6 to 12) That what was there done by Moses and Aaron, and what followed thereafter with the Israelites, was prophetic and foretold similar things which would come to pass at the end of the world, is also certain. (1 Cor. 10:11) The prophecies fulfilled disclose two mighty organizations, to wit, God’s organization and Satan’s organization, which are at enmity and between which the war in heaven has been fought, and between which there is yet a great war to be fought, involving all the peoples of earth. Il should be expected that Jehovah God would give due notice of that approaching conflict by having testimony given in his own good way, of and concerning his purposes.
The great question at issue for early determination by all creatures is, Who is the Almighty God? That issue must and will have a final determination, because God has so declared it. When the mighty hunter Nimrod, under the supervision of Satan, built the tower of Ba-bel, the purpose was to prove that Satan was equal to Jehovah God, if not greater. Jehovah destroyed that tower and confused the speech of that people that thev might learn that he is the Almighty God.
When Egypt’s king became arrogant and oppressed God’s chosen people, the issue then was, Who is the supreme God'? Jehovah demonstrated his supreme power at that time, that his name and his supremacy
might be kept before his people for good, and to demonstrate to Egypt that Jehovah is God.—2 Sam. 7:23.
When the king of Assyria appeared with arrogance before the ancient city of Jerusalem the issue raised by him then was, Who is the supreme God? Jehovah destroyed the Assyrian army that the people might sec who is supreme.—Isa. 36:18; 37:36-38.
Today the world powers of combined “Christendom” give allegiance to Satan the Devil, and cast reproach upon Jehovah, while hypocritically claiming to be followers of Christ; and now the great issue is, Who is the zVlmighly God, and whom shall we obey? Jehovah has expressed his determination that the issue shall be settled, and that shortly; but before doing so, he will cause testimony to be given before the nations and peoples of the world of and concerning his purpose, to the end that the rulers and the people may have an opportunity to know the truth; and furtlur, that all mouths will be for ever stopped from saying that they had no opportunity to know. That the giving of such testimony should immediately precede the final determination of the great issue is made sure by the words of Jesus Christ, the great Prophet of Jehovah God, when he said: “And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations: and then shall the end come. For th< n shall be great tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of the world to this time, no, nor ever shall be.”—Matt. 24:14, 21.
The fact that God would have this testimony given before the great time of trouble is proof that he would thereby furnish a warning to, as well as an opportunity for, those who hear to profit by the facts, break away from Satan’s organization, and seek safety under the power and protection of Jehovah. It is equally certain that Satan would do everything within his power to keep the rulers and the people from hearing the testimony, to the end that he might hold them in his organization.
Testimony is given by witnesses, detailing certain facts that bear upon the issue. Who will be witnesses on the earth to testify to the name of Jehovah God as the Almighty One? That question can be determined by ascertaining whom God has used on former occasions when he would bring his name before creation. Jehovah puts his spirit upon men whom he sends to deliver his message of truth. That means that they are authorized to speak in his name. He endows such with power from on high to act as witnesses for him. His spirit is his invisible power operating according to his sovereign will. (2 Pet. 1:21) It is quite evident that God caused a record to be made of what he did in the past, to enable men to better understand what he will do in the future.
When God organized the nation of Israel into his prophetic organization, he provided the priesthood to
350
November 15, 1031
fjfie WAT CliTOWEK
351
serve that people, and he caused the priests to be anointed with holy oil, thus indicating authority and approval from Jehovah. The holy oil was a representation of the holy spirit of God with which he anoints those who act in his behalf. Among other duties that must be performed by the priests of that time was that they were required to teach the people by informing them concerning God’s law and his purposes. (Alai. 2:7) The priests of that organization prophetically foretold a similar class that would serve his real organization ‘when Zion is builded up’.
Through his prophet God foretold the coming of his mighty Son Christ Jesus, the great Prophet of Jehovah. Concerning the work that lie was to do, the prophet Isaiah (61:1,2) wrote: “The spirit of the Lord God is upon me; because the Lord hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek: he hath sent me to bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound; to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God; to comfort all that mourn.” When Jesus began his earthly work he took up the book containing that prophecy, read it in the hearing of others, and applied it to himself.
He first read: “The .spirit of the Lord is upon me, because ho hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor; he hath sent ine to heal the broken-hearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that arc bruised, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord. And he began to say unto them, This day is this scripture fulfilled in jour cars.” (Luke 4:18,19,21) The fact that, in reading the prophecy at that time, Jesus omitted the words, “and the day of vengeance of our God,” must be significant.
He know that he would come again, and that at his second coming and the end of the world the “vengeance of our God” should be told to the people before that great and terrible day; and this conclusion is fullj- supported by what he subsequently said to his disciples. (Matt. 24:14,21) In the period of time elapsing from Pentecost (A.D. 33) until the coming of the Lord to his temple and the building up of Zion or God’s organization, his body members, that is to say, the members of the body of Christ, would be selected and gathered unto him. The last of these members on earth would constitute “the feet of him”, as the prophet Isaiah (52: 7, 8) terms them, and they must therefore perform the duties designated by the authority of their anointing.
For three and one-half years Jesus gave testimony before the people and The rulers, telling of God's purposes. When he stood before the Roman governor Pilate and responded to the question concerning his mission on the earth and as to whether he was a king or not, he said: “To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear wit
ness unto the truth. Every one that is of the truth hearcth my voice.” (John 18:37) Thus he proved his mission to be that of the great Witness or Prophet of God, and that all who are really of the truth must hear and obey his voice and must be witnesses-together with him.—Luke 24: 48.
One of the titles given unto Jesus by Jehovah God is “the faithful and true witness”. (Rev. 3:14) It is also stated that his body members must be like him. (Rom. 8:29) This likeness must of necessity consist in this, that bis body members would be wholly and unreservedly devoted to Jehovah God and delight in keeping his commandments. That would mean that they must be witnesses for Jehovah.
Jehovah’s purpose in having the gospel preached from the time of Pentecost, fifty days after Jesus’ resurrection, until the coming of Christ Jesus to Lis temple was to take out from among men “a people for his name”. The wily enemy Satan early began to carry on his campaign to offset God’s purpose. Well knowing that he must operate by fraud and deceit, he projected into the minds of the leaders in the earthly organization of the church the conclusion that the mission of 1he church is to convert the world and to robe it in glory and beauty in preparation for the second coming of Christ Jesus. Satan knew that men could not do such a thing, but that to follow that course would keep them busy and would hide Gou’s real purpose from their understanding.
When ancient Rome adopted a religion and named it the “Christian religion”, the leaders then began to carry on a great campaign to compel the people to become members of that church. That meant that Satan had gotten control of the organization and had made that organization the “religion” of his organization, therefore had made it a part of his organization which is called “Babylon”. Those who would not, yield to this influence were subjected to all manner of cruel treatment and torture.
The real purpose of the church was entirely lost to the sight of honest persons, and such was the result of Satan’s wicked influence. As the Jewish Pharisees were blind guides of the blind people when Jesus was on earth, even so the clergy, who are the counterparts of the Pharisees, became the blind guides of the people in the church, who likewise were blinded to the truth by Satan’s course of action.
When the conditions in the Roman church became intolerable, some of the more honest ones broke away to form what is known as the Protestant church. Tire Protestants also fell under the seductive influence of Satan, misconceived the purpose of the church, and believed it to be their duty to convert the world to Protestantism. As a result of. this, many bloody wars followed, especially in Europe, between the Catholic and Protestant church organizations. Both of these great organizations participated freely in the politics of the world and really became a part of the ruling
352
fffc WATCHTOWER.
Bkooklyx, N. Y.
factors. The truth was hid to them. This condition of misconception of the purpose of the church continued until the Lord began preparing the way before Jehovah and the restoration of the fundamental doe-trints of the truth of God’s Word.—Mal. 3:1; 4: 5, G; Mark 9:11,12.
True Christianity means the faithful following by men in the footsteps of Christ Jesus, the Anointed of God. (1 Pet. 2:21) That means entire devotion to Jehovah God, and not to any man or to any worldly organization directed by man. It means that the true Christians or followers of Christ Jesus must be witnesses to the majesty ami supremacy of Jehovah God and bear testimony to the truth of God’s Word. (John 18:37) In order to give testimony of the truth it is necessary for one to study ami to understand the Word of God, the Holy Scriptures, which is the truth. —John 17:17.
“Organized Christian religionists” have entirely overlooked the Scriptural meaning of the second coming of Christ Jesus and his kingdom. The Bible testimony is all one way, to wit, that the coming of Christ Jesus and his kingdom is to vindicate Jehovah’s name by proving that Jehovah is the supreme and true God, that he is flic God of wisdom, justice, love and power, and from whom all life and blessings How. The Bible testimony further is that the kingdom of God under Christ is a righteous government, which kingdom or government will vindicate Jehovah’s name and is the only hone of the peoples of the world. In this year of
1934, when the nations and peoples all over the earth are in great distress and perplexity, “organized Christian religionists” entirely ignore the Scriptural testimony as to the cause of this trouble, and how the world can be brought out of this depression, and in the place and stead of the Scriptures they follow the theories of men and join in all man-made schemes to relieve mankind. These religionists not only entirely ignore the cause of the trouble, but appear to be entirely blind to the divine remedy.
The clergj- and the politicians pose before the people as followers of Christ and by word of mouth say, “We implicitly believe in divine guidance,” and at the same time entirely ignore the Word of the divine God, who is-Jehovah the Most High. No one who is truly devoted to Jehovah God and his kingdom can have any part in the political affairs of this world. If these men, as they say, did implicitly believe and trust in the divine God, then they would follow his Word and would see that the great climax of trouble and wickedness is now upon the earth because of Satan, and that soon God will destroy this wicked organization, and in its place there shall follow a rule of complete righteousness; and they would teach the people these truths, and inform them that the kingdom of God alone will, bring relief and blessings. Any persons who would join forces with socialists or communists or any other political organization in this day would thereby furnish the conclusive proof that they arc not the servants of Jehovah God, and do not see the issue.
SERVICE APPOINTMENTS
	T. E.	BANKS	
Statesville, N. r. ...	...Pec, 4, 5	1-aimville, N- C, ..		Doc. IS, 19
Vale, N. C		.... ”	G, 7	Smford, N. 0			” 20,21
Asheville, N. C		.... ”	8. 9	Cheraw. 8. C. 				” 22, 23
(•Impel Hill, N. C. .	” 11.12	Cope. S. C			” 21,25
Ihiueld. N. C		” 13,11	Atlanta. Ga		A. 4 , .— .
Roekj Mount, N. C.	.... ” 15, 10	Rome, Ga			” 29, 30
Manville, N. J.......Dec.	1
ihzh Kridvo. N.J.......”	2
Clinton, N.J...........”	4
Now Brunswick, N. J. ”	5. G
Perth	N. J.....”	7
C/iffwood, X*. J.......”	8
Anbury Park. N. J......”	9,10
Lakewood, N. J.........”	12,13
W. J. THORN
Creamrldeo, N.J........Dee.	11
Trontou. N.J.............”	15, iG
R»><*hhnir, N.J.........”	’n
Philadelphia, J‘a........”	19 23
A i innlie City. N. J....”	25 2S
Sea Isle CH.v, N. J..... ”	29
Wnodhlne, N.J............”	30
Vineland, N.J..........Jan,	1,2
	G. II.	DRAPER	
Fni<l. Okla		....Dee.	2	Muskogee. Okla		...Dec. 19. 20
Painicw, <>l,ln			”	4	Peggs, Okla				”	21
Rodrock, (»kla	.			”	5	Bunrh, Okla. 			” ...» .....	A- “**
J onea I'ity, Okla. .		”	6, 7	Stigler, Okla		.... ”	23
Shidler, Okla		”	s	Porum, Okla		.... ”	2-J
Blackburn. Okla. ...		’’	9	Cloudy, Okla		.... "	20
Pawnee. Okla				" 11	Denison. Tex		”	,»w .. .. .	A. . ,	'
Tulsa, Okla			”	1214	Wichita Falls, Tex.	.... ” 29, 30
Claremore. Okla			” 15. id	Lubbock. Tex		.... ”	31
Nowata, Okla			”	18	Portales, N. .Uex		. .Jan.	1
S. H. TOUTJIAN
A. H. MACMILLAN
Hallowell, Me..........Dec. 2
Pittsfield, Me...........”	4
Milo. Me.................”	5
Old Town. Me.............”	6
Bangor, Me.............”	8. 9
Belfast. Me..............”	11
Fi eeport, Me............”	12
Portland, Me.............”	13,14
Newburyport, Mass.	..Dec.	15
Lawteiice. Ma>s		.... ”	1G. 17
Beverly. Mass		....	19, 20
Ljnii, Mass		.... ’	21.22
Boston, Mass			23-20
Quincy, Mass		.... ”	27. 2’*
Brockton, Mini		.... ”	29. 30
Allh'boro, Mass		..Jan.	1.2
Montgomery, Ala.....Dec.
Cnion Springs, Ala...”
Slocomb, Ala..........”
Eufaula, Ala..........”
Opdika, Ala..........”
Roanoke, Ala..........’*
Afhland, Ala..........”
Shelby, Ala..........”
Jemison, Ala..........”
Tu^caloobtn, Ala....."
Biookuood, Ala.......”
2, 3	Birniin^liani. Ala. ...	.Dec. 10 19
5	Jie.-a-nier, Ala		... "	21
G	Parrish, Ala		...
7	Corona. Ala		... ”	23
8	Hai Helle, Ala		... ”	25
9	Decatur, Ala		... ’*	2G
11	Elkmont, Ala		... ”	27
12	Harvest, Ala		...”	2h
13	Boaz, Ala		... ”	29
14	Alabama Citv, Ala. ..	”	30
15	Anniston, Ala		..Jan,	1
J. C. RAINBOW
Danville. Ill..........Dec. 2
Champaign, Ill..........”	4,5
Sheflield, Hl..........."	6
Rochelle, III...........”	7
Moline. Ill.............”	S. 9
Cedar Rapids, Iowa....*’	11,12
Kirksville. Mo..........”	13
Frankford. Mo..........”	14
Moberly, Mo.............”	15
Bucklin, Mo.............”	10
J. C. WATT
Blmkwater. Mo.......‘..Doc.	18
Jen ei son City, Mo.” 19. 20
Sedalia, Mo.............”	21
Knobnostcr. Mo.........”	22
Warrensburg, Mo........”	23
Clinton. Mo............”	25
Pleasant Hill, Mo......”	23
Levasv. Mo.............”	27
St. Joseph. Mo.........”	2 30
Kansas City, Mo......Jan.	1*1
Toledo, Ohio 		.. Dec.	1,2
Willi'-ton. Ohio 			.... ”•	4
Port Clinton. Ohio ..		5
Sandusky, Ohio 		.... ”	G
Fremont. Ohio 			”	7, 8
Tit’in, Ohio 			9, 10
Cvjrnot, Ohio			.12
Findlay, Ohio 		ft	13
Bucjrus, Ohio 			14
Marion, Ohio ..........Dec. 15,	10
Edison, Ohio ............”	-	18
Galiuii, Ohio ...........”	19
(.’reslline, Ohio .......”	20
Man-field, Ohio .........”	21.22
Ashland. Ohio ...........”	23,21
Mt. Veinoil. Ohio	2<>
Columbus. Ohio ..........”	27	3,9
Lugan, Ohio ...........Jan.	1
tte WATCHTOWER.
BeBLISHED SEMI-MONTHLY By WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N. Y., U. S. A. OFFICERS
J. F. BvinntFORD President IV. E. Van Ambcech Secretary "And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children."-Isaiah 54:13.
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, the Maker of heaven, and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that the Logos was the beginning of his creation and his active agent in tho creation of all things; that tho Logos is now tho Lord Jesus Christ in glory, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Chief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for the eurth and placed him upon it; that man wilfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong aet all men are bom sinners and without tho right to life.
THAT JESUS was mado human, and tho man Jesus suffered death in order to produce tho ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and above every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is tho Chief Officer thereof and is tho rightful King of the world; that tho anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and aro his witnesses whose duty and Jrrivilogo it is to testify to the supremacy of Jehovah, declare lis purposes toward mankind ns expressed in the Bible, a”d to Lear tho fruits of tho kingdom before all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD 1ms ended, and tho Lord Jesus Christ has been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to tho establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of tho peoples of earth can come only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ which has now begun; that tho Lord’s next great act is the destruction of Satan’s organization and the establishment of righteousness in the earth, and that under tho kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall bo restored and live on earth forever.
YEAR BOOK FOR 1933
The prophet Ezekiel regularly measured the waters flowing out from the temple. The Society does likewise, and here announces the issue of the i’cer Hook for 1935. This contains the president’s annual report, describing the purposes of the Society and briefly but comprehensively reviewing the activities, the experiences and the work accomplished dining the service year just past by Jehovah’s witnesses and Jonadub brethren in the various countries where the Lord has placed them. Also the 1935 year text, with appropriate comment, is given, and daily texts and comments for your refreshment and instruction each day of the year. Only a limited edition is being printed; lienee the Year llooli is oft'ered at 50c a copy. Remittance to cover should accompany order, forwarded to the Brooklyn office or branch office. Groups of Jehovah's witners-es and Jonadnbs should combine orders and send through local service director or sharpshooter.
1935 CALENDAR
You will be especially pleased with the Society’s calendar for 1935. Full of action and graphically representing tire astounding victory Jehovah will gain for his name’s sake, the calendar picture is most expressive of the year’s text and sets forth, too, the part that Jehovah’s witnesses must perform ail through 1935 and clear through to the glorious finish. The calendar also bears a letter from the president and naming tho
ITS MISSION
THIS journal is published for the purpose of enabling the people to know Jehovah God and his purpose'; as expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible instruction specifically designed to aid Jehovah’s witnesses. It arranges systematic Bible study for its readers and supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable material for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in tho Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worldly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah God under Christ his Beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in tho light of tin Scriptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns aro not open to personalities.
Yearly Suesckiftion Prick
■United States, ?1.00; Canada and JIisCEM.ANromt Fonnio:;, 51.50; Great Bmtiix, Avstomiasia, and Sooth Africa, 7s. American remittances should bo imulo by r.-cpre'i or I’o-.tal Money Order, or by Bank Draft. Canadian, Brlti'-h, South African and Australasian remittances should bo made direct to the rcspcctue branch offices. lt.-niittances from countries other than those mentioned may be nm.do to the Brooklyn office, but by International Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
British .......... 31 Craven Terraco, London, W. 2, England Canadian ....... 40 Irwin Avenue, Toronto, Onlailo, Canada Australasian . . 7 pere>forj Road, Strntbfield, N. S. V>'., Vu.-1r.iJia South African .... Boston House, Capo Town, South Africa Please address the .Society in every ease.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.)
All sincere students of the Bible v.ho by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity nro unable to pay tho subscript ion prb 3 may have The H'atchtoicer free upon written application to the publishers, made once eacli year, stating tho reason for so requesting it. We are glad to thus aid the needy, but 11m written application once each year is risiuircd by tho postal re-’ulatior.s. Xotice to Subscribers; Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will bo sent only v.l’.en requested. Clian-rc of affilrc when requested, may bo expected to nopear on addro.s Inb'l within one month. A renewal blank (c.nrryint' notice of oxniralion) will be sent with the journal one month before tho subscription expi.-ei. Entered as Second Class Mail Matter at Brooklyn, N. V., Bo-Grier.
Act of March 3, jf$7.9.
special service periods for the year. These particular s tv ice periods, both regional and world-wide, me also indi'-atid on the calendar date pad. Order from the Society, tlm Brookba office or branch office, enclosing remittance with order, at L’.'e each, or five for $1.(K) if sent to one address. Olden may be grouped and forwarded through tho company director or sirupshooter.	— -	—
“JEHOVAH”
With deep gratitude to the great Revealer of his own mime The Watchtower announces the publication of a new book. All faithful witnesses of God and Jonadabs will thrill to know the book bears the title “ Jehovah ”, and that its contents foit’t, ns does no previous publication, tho glorious name, the marvelous works and dealings, past, present and future, and tile sme covenant, purposes, of the Most High God. The book’s Leauii-fiillv embossed cover holds within it 381 pages of text m.it’«i, color illustrations, and complete index. The author’s cdiium also contains n facsimile letter in the author’s own handwiiti.ig, sp'ecially written for and addressed to the Lord’s anointed om c (and the Jonadab brethren). It is now ready and n.:;y be had at 50c a copy, this to help offset the heavy origin'! i-o-t- of publication. Jehovah’s faithful witnesses and tnio Jonmi'ibs will not fail to read this new book end thercl>v to arm themselves for future service in plaeing it before the wliole wori l. by Lis grace. Those wishing a copy should place tlu.r ui’b r through the di'.'cctpr or with the sharpshooter. If not associated v.itii a company, then order diieet from the Society.
Vol. LV
December 1, 1934
No. 23
"LIONS’ MOUTHS”
“Uy God hath sent his angel, and hath shut the lions’ mouths, that they have not hurt me: forasmuch as before him innocency was found in me; and also before thee, 0 king, have I done no hurt.”—Dan. 6: 22.
PART 1
JEHOVAH uses the lion as a symbol of justice and judgment. Christ Jesus is the judicial officer of Jehovah to whom is committed all judgment in heaven and in earth, together with the authority and power to execute judgment. (John 5:22-27) Jesus Christ is therefore appropriately named "The Lion of the tribe of Juda”. Of all who praise and serve Jehovah, Christ Jesus is the Head and chief. His judgments are in strict harmony with justice. To the workers of iniquity Christ Jesus, the Executioner of Jehovah’s judgment, is a power of evil, but to those who love and serve Jehovah the Chief Officer is a shield and strength and protection. (Phil. 4:13;
1	Tim. 1:12) It is by the grace of God through Christ Jesus that the victory for the faithful is gained.—1 Cor. 15: 57.
* In the construction and operation of his organization Satan has attempted to mimic Jehovah, and by this means he has succeeded in bringing much reproach upon the name of the Most High. Satan uses the lion to represent his law, his abortive justice, and his judgments. In Satan’s organization men are condemned to death and are often literally thrown to the lions for execution, and the multitude, beholding the infliction of the penalty of the law, wag their heads and remark: ‘ ‘ That man got justice. ’ ’ But in this they are wrong. For centuries men have organized governments, made laws, and attempted to administer them in the way of justice, but in almost every instance they have failed and their failures have been due to the power and influence of the wicked one, Satan. In the world the failure of the law and justice to go hand in hand has caused the people to have little respect for the law and also has caused them to greatly reproach the name of Jehovah God.
3	"The law of Jehovah is perfect, . . . the [judgments] of Jehovah are true, and righteous altogether.” (Ps. 19: 7, 9, A.Z2.V.) "0 Lord God of hosts, who is a strong Lord like unto thee? or to thy faithfulness round about thee? Justice and judgment are the habitation of thy throne: mercy and truth shall go before thy face.” (Ps. 89: 8,14) It is profitable to keep in
355
mind the proper meaning of law, justice and judgment. The law of God is his perfect rule of action. Justice is that which is right, righteous, pure and equitable. It is the strict conformity to the principles of righteousness and rectitude. Judgment means the finding or conclusion of the court based upon the facts, that is to say, the judicial determination or decree rendered by one having authority so to do. All of Jehovah’s judgments are just, true and righteous, and are in exact harmony with his perfect law. Likewise all the judgments of Christ Jesus are just, true and righteous and in harmony with the divine law.
‘With Jehovah his law and equity are the same. That is not true in the organizations of men under the control of Satan. Because of the harshness and inflexibility of the law of the governments the nations long ago found it necessary, in order to more nearly render justice between men, to establish courts of equity. Law courts often render judgments that are not only very unjust but shockingly cruel and oppressive. Courts of equity attempt to render justice regardless of the fixed rules of law; hence the rules of equity are more bending or flexible, and an honest judge in chancery may render a just judgment. In the organization of the world the inflexible legal rule is that ignorance of the law excuses no man, and the enforcement of this rule often results in very great injustice. In Jehovah’s organization ignorance of the law is an excuse or defense. (Acts 3:17; 17: 30; Heb. 5: 2; 1 Tim. 1:13) Because of his rule of righteousness Jehovah always brings notice to the wrongdoer before he pronounces judgment against him and executes that judgment. Jehovah’s law judges no man without first giving him a hearing and opportunity to make his defense or excuse for his action.—John 7:51.
6	Men who organize and rule the nations of the world frequently make and enforce laws exactly contrary to justice. With them law and justice do not mean the same thing, even though the ruling element attempts to induce the common people to be-
356
Tile WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
lievc that law and justice are one and the same. Often v.hen laws that are proper in themselves are improperly construed and enforced the result is great injustice against the person. When the religious organizations, such as the Catholic hierarchy, find it desirable to rid themselves of annoyance created by Jehovah’s witnesses’ telling the truth, that politicalreligious organization brings forth a scheme to accomplish its purpose in an apparently lawful manner. The Catholic hierarchy widely advertises itself as strictly adhering to and obeying the law, while at the same time violating the spirit of the law in almost every instance. If a person is found doing something that is displeasing to the Catholic hierarchy and its agents, at once an effort is made to find some “lawful means’’ by which the supposed offender may be apprehended and severely punished. This is very often true, even though the one charged with wrongdoing is at the time proceeding exactly in accordance with God’s law. The law of men makes it unlawful for a person to go from house to house and sell goods, wares and merchandise. The law of God commands his witnesses to go from house to house and preach the gospel of his kingdom, and it is the duty of God’s servants to obey this law. When they do so in obedience to God’s commandments the ecclesiastics, particularly the Catholic hierarchy and their agents, misapply and misconstrue the law of the land and insist that Jehovah’s witnesses should be severely punished, on the theory that they are violating the laws of commerce, although thej- well know that Jehovah’s witnesses are not engaged in a commercial work. The real purpose of the hierarchy and their agents is to rid the community of Jehovah’s witnesses; and the real and primary author of their unjust scheme and procedure is Satan the Devil. This is proof that the Catholic hierarchy and its agents form a part of the Devil’s organization.
6	A striking example of the injustice of certain laws and the enforcement thereof is found in the sixth chapter of the prophecy by Daniel. Since we are advised that whatsoever things were written aforetime in the Scriptures were written for our learning that we may have comfort and continue in patience and be strong in hope, we must be assured that this record concerning the prophet Daniel was written and kept for the benefit of us who in tlo-se last days are endeavoring to serve Jehovah according to his commandments. (Rom. 15:4) As we see and appreciate Jehovah’s dealings with his faithful servant Daniel we can have strong consolation in the experiences of Jehovah’s witnesses in these days, and may confidently hope that God will supply all the needed protection for his faithful witnesses. The rulers of “Christendom”, and particularly the religious element thereof, have a strong desire to be rid of Jehovah’s witnesses because such witnesses tell the truth and the truth exposes the sins and delinquencies of the re
ligionists. The experience of Daniel aids us in understanding wliy Jehovah’s witnesses continue to suffer at the hands of men who proceed against them under laws that are conceived in malice and enforced in wickedness.
T The record of the sixth chapter of Daniel’s prophecy following immediately upon the fall of Babylon and the coming into power of Darius the Mede, the king, Darius, here appears to picture Jehovah God in whom supreme regal power is vested and who assumes rulership over the world from and after 1914. Satan was then east out of heaven, and from and after 1918 Darius, whose name means “coercer, conservator”, pictured Jehovah exercising his power in things pertaining to the earth. The sixth chapter of Daniel opens with the statement: “It pleased Darius to set over the kingdom an hundred and twenty princes, which should be over the whole kingdom.” —Dan. 6:1.
EPITOME
8	To aid one in the examination- of this prophecy it seems well to here set out an epitome of the prophecy, to wit: Darius the king pictured supreme regal power; Daniel pictured Christ Je»us, the Judge of all things in heaven and earth; Daniel also pictured Jehovah’s elect servant, of which Christ Jesus is the Head and chief and which includes the faithful remnant who are joined together with Christ Jesus in the covenant for the kingdom. Thore also piomineutly appears in the prophecy a representation of the League of Nations, and of “the man of sin”; also the elements of Satan’s organization, both invisible mid visible, under the immediate leadership of Gog in his attempt Io destroy the remnant who are Jehovah's witnesses; and the lions, picturing justice of Almighty God; and the power of Jehovah Ged shutting the mouths of those wild beasts, foreshadowing the protection of those who are wholly devoted to him.
11	In 1914 Jehovah began the exercise of his power over things in the earth by then placing his King upon his throne and sending him forth to rule and to cast Satan out of heaven and down to the earth. (L’ss. 2:6; 110:1,2; Rev. 12:1-5) By 1918 Satan and his wicked angels had been east out of heaven and down to the earth. The prophecy of Daniel states that “it pleased Darius to set over the kingdom . . . presidents”, or satraps; and even so it pleased Jehovah God to set his ruler.Jnp over the earth, particularly from and after 1918. The three presidents, or satraps, set up by Darius the Mede included Daniel as one of them, and Daniel was the only one amongst them that served Jehovah God. Since the year 191s the onlj' class of persons who claim to serve Jehovah God, and who in truth and in fact do so, is the temple company under Christ. When the World War ended, “Christendom's” leaders called attention to the fact that the time for the Kingdom had come, assumed to
December 1, J934
watchtower
357
represent God on earth, and proceeded to set up an organization calk-d the League of Nations and designated it as the expression of God’s kingdom on earth. The highest court in America also rendered a judicial decision announcing that “the United States of America is a Christian nation’’. Approximately at the same time the “man of sin” class, “Ilie son of perdition,” set itself up as the representative of Jehovah God.—2 Thess. 2:4.
10	Seeing that the kingdom was set up, and the judgments of Jehovah Ged began in 1918, why should he permit wicked ones to assume to represent the kingdom on earth and still continue in their wieked practices? This was foreshadowed by the act of Darius setting the, satraps over Mcdo-Persia. The kingdom of God is pictured by a great house. It is written in the Scriptures: “Nevertheless the foundation of God standeth sure, having this seal, The Lord knoweth them that are his. And, Let every one that nameth the name of Christ depart from iniquity. But in a great house there are not only vessels of gold and of silver, but also of wood and of earth; and some to honour, and some to dishonour.” (2 Tim. 2:19,20) Thus it is seen that amongst those who name and serve Jehovah God there are vessels of honor and vessels of dishonor. The vessels of honor arc those truly and faithfully devoted to Jehovah and his kingdom interests. The vessels of dishonor are those assuming to represent God and who misuse their opportunities because of their selfishness and wickedness. Many have been perplexed and anxious to understand why Jehovah would permit the wieked clement to continue to exercise power over the earth after he has set his King upon his holy hill and caused him to begin his judgments. Manifestly the reason is, as appears from the Scriptures and facts, that Jehovah might cause a witness to be given of and concerning his name and that lie might manifest his supreme power and demonstrate to all creation his supremacy and his riches of glory on those who are true and faithful to him. “What if God, willing to shew his wrath, and to make his power known, endured with much longsuffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction: and that he might make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, which be had afore prepared unto glory.” (Rom. 9:22,23) This is also shown by God’s dealing with Pharaoh, which foreshadows his permission or his sufferance of the operations of Satan to continue in the earth after the coming of the King, Christ Jesus: “For the scripture saith unto Pharaoh, Even for this same purpose have I raised thee up, that I might shew my power in thee, and that my name might be declared throughout all Ilie earth.”—Rom. 9:17.
11	The beginning of judgment by the great Judge Christ Jesus, in 1918, marks the time for the beginning of the testing of all creatures who claim to be servants of Jehovah God and his kingdom. Whether
the end of that testing be “honour” or “dishonour” and “destruction” is determined by the course of action taken with reference to God’s kingdom intereds. Those of “organized Christianity”, which is called “Christendom”, and particularly the ecclesiastic,: 1 element thereof, take unto themselves the honor of the kingdom covenant with God. The rulers set up the League of Nations as a. substitute for God's kingdom, and hence cause it to stand “in the holy place”, “where it ought not” to stand; “the man of sin,” while claiming to represent God, joins in the conspiracy against Jehovah’s faithful remnant; while the remnant, to whom the testimony of Jesus Christ is committed concerning the kingdom, continues to faithfully advertise the King and the kingdom. Respectively these classes show by the course of action taken whether they are vessels of dishonor or vessels of honor. The faithful ones who constitute the remnant Jehovah God has “set” in his own appointed way to perform his will. (Rom. 8: 29, 30) The others above named assume to represent God, and hence, by their assumption they place themselves in an implied covenant to truly represent the kingdom of God but, on the contrary, they are opposed to the kingdom of God and hence are vessels of dishonor. Due to its vast colonial possessions and mandates by the League of Nations “Christendom” has its ruling power operating practically throughout the entire earth. This was foreshadowed by the 120 satraps of the empire of Medo-l’ersia scattered throughout the various provinces. Jehovah’s witnesses, the remnant on earth, continue to push the work of giving testimony throntrh-out the earth of and concerning the kingdom, and this greatly annoys “Christendom’s” ruling power, and particularly the religious clement thereof.
12	The ruling group now on earth and who have assumed to represent God’s kingdom on earth were foreshadowed in the prophecy of Daniel, as it is written: “And over these three presidents, of whom Daniel was first [was one]; that the princes might give accounts unto them, and the king should have no damage.” (Dan. 6:2) The three presidents here specifically mentioned foreshadowed the super-ruling group, (1) the League of Nations, that is caused to stand in the holy place (Matt. 24:15); (2) the “evil servant” or “man of sin” company, which first buries in the ground its “one talent”, and then exalts itself against God’s kingdom, and which has become a part of the mystery of lawlessness (Matt. 25:18.24,25; 2 Thess. 2:3-12); and (3) Jehovah’s witnesses, “the faithful and wise servant,” to the members of which are committed all the goods or kingdom interests of the King, and which faithful remnant deliver "the testimony of Jesus Christ according to the commandments of Jehovah God. (Matt. 24:45-47; Rev. 12; 17) Daniel “was one” and the only real one of the presidents or satraps, and even so now Jehovah's remnant, who are his witnesses, are the first and only real ones
358
JJfie WATCHTOWER-
Brooklyn, n. Y.
who may speak with authority from the King and to whom the King has duly delegated authority to speak in his name.
13	Daniel stood head and shoulders above the other satraps; meaning that he was preferred above the others because he was an honest and faithful man: ‘‘Then this Daniel was preferred [distinguished, Tt.Vh] above the presidents and princes, because an excellent spirit was in him; and the king thought to set him over the whole realm.” (Dan. 6:3) It is even so in these days, that Jehovah’s witnesses have a distinguishing mark above all others who claim to speak in the name of Jehovah God, and even the common people can see that. Jehovah showed his preference for such in 1922 by pouring out of his spirit upon all truly devoted to him and the giving to such the glory or honor of bearing his name, which honor ho gives to none save the elect servant class. (Joel 2:28,29; Isa. 41:1-8) The faithful servant is greatly blessed, and in harmony therewith Jesus said: “Blessed is that servant, whom his lord, when he cometh, shall find so doing. Verily I say unto you, that he shall make him ruler over all his goods.” (Matt. 24:46,47) Thus it is seen that Daniel in this respect foreshadowed the “faithful and wise servant” class, otherwise called the remnant of Jehovah’s organization yet on earth.
M Jehovah’s expressed thoughts disclose his purpose. The prophecy states: “The king thought to set him [Daniel | over the whole realm”; and even so Jehovah purposed to set Christ Jesus and his faithful associates over the entire world. In due time the “League of Nations” group and the “man of sin” group will be put completely out of business, and the remnant with Christ Jesus will reign. It is a fixed rule of Jehovah that men must be put to the test to determine their integrity. The faithful, because of their faithfulness, suffer, but, as it is written, ‘if we suffer with him, we shall reign with him.’ (2 Tim. 2:12) It is further written: “And hast made us unto our God kings and priests: and we shall reign on the earth.” (Rev. 5:10) The peculiar and special test upon the remnant from 1918 onward until the enemy is completely cleared out at Armageddon is had in order to prove that such are ‘vessels of honor’ maintaining their integrity towards Jehovah.
15	A conspiracy against Daniel was formed by the other presidents or satraps, which conspiracy was conceived in malice and born in iniquity. “Then the presidents and princes sought to find occasion against Daniel concerning the kingdom; but they could find none occasion nor fault; forasmuch as he was faithful, neither was there any error or fault found in him.” (Dan. 6; 4) The two other presidents aside from Daniel foreshadowed the “League of Nations”, which is the instrument employed by “Christendom” (Rev. 13:15), and the “man of sin”, which particularly embraces the malicious clergy and those who
were once enlightened concerning the truth, and all of whom have become the opponents of God and his kingdom. All of these are now operating under the special guidance of Gog, their spiritual adviser, and who is the chief active agent of the Devil. The modern. conspiracy led by Gog is formed in express malice and is prosecuted with murderous intent; and concerning this it is written: “They have taken crafty counsel against thy people, and consulted against thy hidden ones. They have said, Come, and let us cut them off from being a nation; that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance. For they have consulted together with one consent: they are confederate against thee.”—Ps. 83:3-5.
“Daniel was a captive Jew, an alien, and devoted to the praise of Jehovah God, and he told the truth, and his righteous course stung the others who were associated with him, and “shocked their susceptibilities”. The truth always “shocks the susceptibilities” of those indulging in crooked practices, because the truth exposes their wrongdoing. With malice, envy and coveteousness the other satraps took note of the royal favor Daniel received. By speaking the truth and pursuing a course of strict honesty and integrity Daniel would interfere with the schemes of the conspirators in enriching themselves at the expense of the public exchequer. They needed to get rid of him to pursue unhindered their wicked course. Likewise today •Jehovah’s witnesses, under commandment from Clirisf Jesus, speak the truth, and the truth stings the clergy and “the man of sin” and their allies, disturbs their nerves and “shocks their susceptibilities”. Jehovah’s witnesses, in order to be faithful to him, must, tell the truth, and it is the truth that holds up to shame, ridicule and contempt the hypocritical element in “Christendom” that assumes to represent God and his kingdom. As his name implies, Daniel stood for justice and for judgment; and even so Jehovah’s witnesses speak the truth and advocate justice and true judgment. These things not only disturb “Christendom’s” leaders and “the man of sin”, but cause such opposers of God’s kingdom to harden their hearts and to seek the destruction of Jehovah’s witnesses.
17 The satraps sought to find occasion against Daniel as touching the kingdom, that is to say, they sought to find some apparently lawful means to bring about Daniel’s destruction. Exactly similar things come to pass in these wicked days. “Christendom,” and particularly the religious clement thereof, now seeks some apparently lawful means to destroy Jehovah’s witnesses because these witnesses’ telling the truth interferes with the wrongdoers. The clergy, and particularly the Roman Catholic hierarchy and the “man of sin”, are the chief ones on earth that commit overt acts in the performance of their wicked conspiracy. They have gone to the political element, whom they wrongfully designate as “the higher powers . . . ordained of God”, and laid charges against Jehovah's
December 1, 19S1
gTze WATCHTOWER.
359
witnesses, charging them with being lawbreakers, communists, revolutionists, and anarchists. Those malicious conspirators know that their charges are wickedly false, and this proves that their conspiracy is conceived in malice and prosecuted with extreme cruelty. Even after the worldly courts have repeatedly held that Jehovah’s witnesses are not lawbreakers, the religious clement and their immediate allies continue to cause the arrest and imprisonment of Jehovah’s witnesses. As no real fault was found in Daniel, even so none can be found in Jehovah’s witnesses in their work which would justify their arrest and imprisonment. They cannot be faithful to Jehovah God and at the same time engage in lawbreaking, such as revolution and anarchy, or otherwise willfully do injury to men. To the faithful followers of Christ Jesus the commandments are given to “love thy neighbour”, and “love worketh no ill to his neighbour”. — Horn. 13:10.
BETRAYERS
”An honest and faithful man is diligent in doing what is right without regard to the law which requires right to be done. Laws are unnecessary for righteous men. (1 Tim. 1:9) Any law that contravenes or opposes Jehovah God’s specific law is an unrighteous one, and no righteous man could obey that which is contrary to God’s law. The wicked are diligent to find some apparently lawful excuse or justification for their wrongful deeds, and for this purpose quite often unrighteous laws are enacted by the lawmaking body. Doubtless there were some among the 120 satraps who were of Hebrew stock but who were unfaithful to God, preferring to have the approval of mca and pursue their own wicked and selfish course. Such men, being acquainted with the devotion of a true Jew to Jehovah, would know about Daniel’s strict observance of God’s commandments, and they would be the very ones who would suggest to the others in the conspiracy a means by which they could “get” Daniel. “Then said these men, We shall not find any occasion against this Daniel, except we find it against him concerning the law of his God.” (Dan. 6:5) The betrayers of Daniel here pictured the Judas or “man of sin” class, who pretend to serve God but who in fact are God’s enemies. “These men” mentioned in the foregoing prophecy knew that Daniel observed the commandments of Jehovah: “Thou shalt have no other gods before me.” (Ex. 20:1-3) Knowing this, the betrayers in the conspiracy advised a course that should be taken by which they would entrap Daniel, and hence the enactment of a law of the realm directly contrary to God’s law. Today Jehovah’s witnesses are strictly endeavoring to obey God’s law, and his rule by which they are now specially guided is this: “Ye are my witnesses, . . . that I am God”; “go through the midst of the city, through the midst of Jerusalem [from house to house in ‘Christendom’], and set a mark upon the fore
heads of the men that sigh, and that cry, for all the abominations that be done in the midst thereof”; and obeying these commandments they publicly preach and "0 from house to house. (Isa. 43:12; Ezek. 9:4; Acts 20: 20) The faithful witnesses of Jehovah now heed the admonition of God’s Word: “Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers,” that is, to Jehovah and to his King, to whom he has committed the authority, and not to the base, world-powers that dishonor God's name. (Rom. 13:1) Having undertaken to do the will of God, and having no desire to violate any just or righteous law, these faithful servants of the Lord say: “We ought to obey God rather than men.” (Acts 5:29) Where the law of this world contravenes God’s law the faithful must obey God’s law at any cost, and no one of the conspirators understands that fact so fully as the “evil servant” class. It would be some of that very crowd that would suggest to their coconspirators Ike enactment of a law whereby Jehovah’s witnesses might be entrapped. It was the Judas “man of sin” class that first denounced the work of Jehovah’s witnesses as a “book-selling scheme”, and doubtless they made the suggestion to the other conspirators that Jehovah’s witnesses be proceeded against as breakers of the law concerning hawkers and peddlers.
1!1 The suggestion made by these, men that “we shall not find any occasion against this Daniel, except, we find it against him concerning the law of his God”, would necessarily call for a consultation to be held by the conspirators to determine just'the course that they should take. Without a doubt this meeting was held without the knowledge of Daniel. “Then these presidents and princes assembled together to The king, and said thus unto him, King Darius, live for ever.” (Dan. 6: 6) The course of the wicked is the same at all times; hence we may reasonably conclude that the satraps assembled and with great manifestation of loyalty and loud words of being themselves law-abiding, and with much solemn and hypocritical speech, worked up a feeling against Daniel and patted themselves on the back as being the defenders of tIm kingdom. Then they would appoint probably the greatest hypocrite amongst them, who also possessed eloquence, to be the spokesman of the crowd, and these would march into the presence of the king and there proceed to induce the king to make a decree that would suit their purposes. It is even so today.
2" The “Ministerial Alliance” meets at regular intervals to discuss ways and means to further their own selfish ends. These, together with their “stool birds”, assemble and pretend to look up to the supreme power, offer up hypocritical prayers for the protection of their crooked allies, declare, their own allegiance to the government, and thereby hope to have the endorsement and support of the common people. They work themselves up to convince themselves that they are pursuing a great and righteous
360
THE WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
course, and hope to induce the people to back them up. In harmony therewith God’s prophet says: ‘Why do these non-Judeans thus tumultously assemble, and the people imagine a vain thing?’ (Ps. 2:1) These modern-day satraps deem it necessary that they must first impress the common people with their own devotion to the law and that they are guardians and protectors of the nation, and many of the common people are induced to believe just such vain things. The action of the conspirators both in Daniel’s day r.nd in modern times is in fact a challenge to Jehovah God for him to permit them to put their schemes into operation so as to put his witnesses to a decided test. Such a thought necessarily would originate with Satan and would be carried forward by his chief officer. These modern-day conspirators are so thoroughly impressed with their own importance that they think that Jehovah will use them to rid the land of the men and women who go about preaching to the people, and which preaching interrupts and shocks the susceptibilities of the modern conspirators. They even think to show Jehovah that his confidence in these people, who call themselves Jehovah’s witnesses, is sadly misplaced. These conspirators of modem times come to Jehovah with their mouths wide open, speaking honeyeti words, but their hearts are insincere and far removed from the Lord. (2 Tim. 3:5; Ir,a. 29:13) They rely upon their “garments” as a means of deceiving the people and their being continued in the favor of God. (Ps. 59:7,8) Satan set tl.e pace for such hypocritical action when he appeared before Jehovah God with respect to Job.
21	The satraps approaching Darius said: “King Darius, live for ever”; but they were insincere and their hearts were not with the king. They were bent upon accomplishing their own wicked purposes. Likewise the modern-day satraps or conspirators approach Jehovah God and in substance say: “Jehovah, you are mighty, but you stay in heaven and let us run the things down here on earth. We arc looking after your interests.” Be assured the Lord knows that such men are liars and hypocrites. They use their mouths, and ‘their speech betrays them’. “With their mouth they shew much love, but their heart goeth after their covetousness.” (Ezek. 33:31) This should be sufficient evidence to convince all sober-minded and thoughtful persons that such religionists are not the representatives of God, but are God’s enemies and the enemies of his kingdom. The modern-day conspirators, particularly the Homan Catholic hierarchy, well know that the truth is their greatest danger and that if the common people know the truth, these ecclesiastics will lose their power and control over the people and their opportunity to fleece the people will be done; hence they want to “get” the ones whom Daniel here foreshadowed, namely, Jehovah’s witnesses, who testify to the truth.
22	The first thing that those satraps did was to tell
the king a lie; and the modern-day satraps do the same thing when they stand before the Lord God. They told the king that all the official element of the government had consulted together to establish a royal statute for the protection of the government. They knew that was a lie, because the chief president of the government, Daniel himself, knew nothing about it. The Devil put that thought into their mind; and the Roman Catholic hierarch}7 has followed the same tactics ever since it was organized.
23	Imagine now this company of solemn-faced hypocritical “roosters”, with long beards, well oiled, and with long flowing robes, marching solemnly into the presence of the king. Then the fat, pot-bellied spokesman standing forth in the front line and speaking that the entire crowd might hear him, saying to the king: “All the presidents of the kingdom, the governors, and the princes, the counsellors, and the captains, have consulted together to establish a royal statute, and to make a firm decree, that whosoever shall ask a petition of any god or man for thirty days, save of thee, 0 king, he shall be cast into the den of lions.”—Dan. 6: 7.
24	In order to bring all those distinguished satraps from every part of the wide-flung lledo-L’ersian empire it required much travel and communication and much expense, and all of this just to “get” one man, Daniel, whose honest administration of his office had interfered with the robbing of the public treasury and obtaining money from the people by false pretenses on the part of the 119 other satraps. They well knew they were lying when they said to the king, “All the presidents of the kingdom” had consulted together. Their purpose in leaving out Daniel’s name was to deceive the king. Likewise today the Roman Catholic hierarchy, which constitutes the earthly7 brains of the modern conspiracy, and who are aided and supported by the Protestant clergy and by the “evil servant” class, go to great efforts of time, energy and expense merely to “get” a little company of men and women, Jehovah’s witnesses, who are interfering with their selfish operations. At first they treated Jehovah’s witnesses with silent contempt, and then the truth stung them so terrifically and so terribly “shocked their susceptibilities” that they7 were moved to act. Simultaneously they attempt to have a law passed in New Jersey, New York, the provinces of Canada, in England and in other places, upon the pretext that such a law is necessary to protect the people from the wicked movement known as Nazism, which now controls Germany. At the same time they well know that their real purpose is to destroy Jehovah's witnesses. In Germany7 the Roman Catholic hierarchy and the Nazis work hand in hand. The Nazis are engaged in an effort to kill Jehovah’s witnesses. The Roman Catholic hierarchy is engaged in the same unrighteous business. The overzealous New Jersey representative of the hierarchy7 tried to slip
December 1, 1934
WATCHTOWER,
361
one over on the people in New Jersey, to get a law enacted with teeth in it to prevent the speaking in any manner whatsoever of anything that might expose the crookedness of the hierarchy. He talked too much with his mouth, however, and his noisy words caused some to hear and to act and to expose the nefarious movement. It must be the due time of the Lord for this matter to come to the open, because long ago he foretold the conspiracy in his Word, when he said: “The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together, against the Lord, and against his anointed, saying, Let us break their bunds asunder, and cast away their cords from us.” —Ps. 2: 2, 3.
25	Whenever some unusual and drastic measure is introduced in the legislative halls the claim is made that “an emergency has arisen”, hence action must be taken. The same policy was followed in Daniel’s day. The conspiring satraps declared to the king that they had all agreed that a law should be made, and which must be enforced for thirty days, because an emergency had arisen, within which time certain things must be done. They concluded that thirty days would be long enough for them to “get” Daniel or any other faithful worshiper of Jehovah. The time of an entire moon was to be set aside to spy out and gather together the necessary facts, that is, evidence, whether true or perjured, and then within that time and during some day of formal worship and practice of their Baal religion they would have Daniel duly and “legally” executed. Those conspiring satraps reasoned that, if Daniel prayed openly to Jehovah within that period of time and they could prove it, such would be a shock, not only to their own “susceptibilities”, but to the susceptibilities of the king, and that such a flagrant violation of the law would demand the immediate and public execution of Daniel. Satan seems always to have held that “religious groups” should be safeguarded from slander and libel and hence no one should be permitted to speak the truth or act any truth that would tend to call attention to the frauds and hypocritical practices of such Baal-religious groups. This really involves the great issue: Jehovah God or the Devil, who is supreme? It was tried out with Daniel, and it is tried out now, and the result is certain to be the same way, because Jehovah is at the helm.
26	Of course, any Jew, including Daniel, could within the secrets of his own heart and in his secluded bedchamber make petition to Jehovah and be heard by Jehovah just as well as in doing so by public prayer, and, he so doing in secret, the rulers in the governments could not know about it. The same is also true of the present day. Such hidden worship by Jehovah’s witnesses might be carried on by praying to Jehovah God and talking secretly to others about his kingdom without even the hierarchy’s knowing it. But such hidden worship would be posi
tive evidence of the fear of men, and a taeit admission that Jehovah is not supreme and cannot protect and deliver his own. That is exactly what Satan desires to accomplish. The Lord foreknew this and warns that ‘the fear of man leadeth into a snare’. (Prov. 29:25) But “the fear of the Lord tendeth to life”. (Prov. 19:23) To be a true worshiper of Almighty God one must obey his commandments, one of which is, “Ye are my witnesses”; that is to say, you must make known to others that your trust is in Jehovah and that he is the only source of life and blessings and the One to whom all proper petition can be presented with certainty of having the same answered.
27	To limit all prayers or petitions to the king of Persia would be making the king a god and allowing him to control the conscience of men. Such would show supremacy of a power other than Almighty God. The conspiring satraps proposed a law that would make the state the supreme power, to which all the people must yield and thus blindly obey a human dictator. It is exactly so today. Every part of the earth is in a state of turmoil. The powers that rule arc being defied by the lawless. The clergy and all religion-mongers come forth with pious faces and hypocritical words and say to the political powers, in substance, this: ‘The communistic and revolutionis-tic spirit is due to a lack of proper respect for the religious groups in the land; therefore give us a law with teeth in it, which law will not permit any person or organization to in any manner speak or publish or say or do anything that might in any manner whatsoever subject our religious groups to ridicule, scorn, or conlempt. ’ Further the religious conspirators say, ‘This is a Christian nation, and it is the Christian duty of all to be subservient to the state in order that there may be peace and prosperity in the land.’ Those words seem to be well chosen, but the speakers know they are hypocritical. They know that their claim is false and that their real purpose is to rid the land of those who faithfully serve and worship Jehovah God and speak the truth about his King and kingdom, which is the only hope of the world, as the Scriptures declare. This is further proof that the clergy and their allies, or coconspirators, are instruments of Satan. These conspirators, therefore, demand that provision be made by law that whatsoever the people may hear by radio, phonograph, transcription machines, word of mouth, printed page or other means of communication, must first be approved by a committee appointed by the state; hence no one would be permitted to say anything until it is first censored by the duly appointed groups. They proceed to make up a committee of Catholies, Protestants and Jews, who practice their own religion, each of a different kind, and none of which serve Jehovah God, and this committee attempts to tell the people what they shall or shall not hear. The evidence offered be
362
WATCHTOWER.
BnooKiA’X, N, Y,
fore the Congress of the United States in 1934, and before the state legislative body in New Jersey in the same year, abundantly proves that the clergy, and particular!}' the Roman Catholic hierarchy, priests, pre’hchers and other agents, have formed and are carrying out a conspiracy to prevent the people from worshiping Almighty God as he has commanded them. The enactment of such drastic laws which are destructive of freedom of speech and of press, so far as religion is concerned, proves beyond all doubt that the real purpose is to prevent the people from hearing the truth of and concerning Jehovah God and his kingdom. The Devil himself is back of such a movement. To be sure, that conspiracy is led by G'og, but these earthly hypocritical representatives of Gog have concluded that their quickest and most effective method of accomplishing their wieked purpose is to destroy Jehovah’s witnesses and thus to stop their work in every part of “Christendom” and to thus succeed in ‘cutting them off from being a nation’. Those who really love Jehovah and have taken their stand on his side will not be disturbed by the activities of the enemy. They know that the conspirators cannot succeed in their wickedness; for the reason, it is written: “He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh; the Lord shall have them in derision. Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure. ’ ’—Ps. 2: 4. 5.
The conspirators asked that the law should provide that anyone who should pray to any other than Darius should be east to the lions and by them consumed. The lions here mentioned wore the king's lions and stood for the execution of justice. The conspirators reasoned that, if they could have Daniel thrown to the lions, all the people would say: “Surely that man Daniel got what was coming to him. He must have been a bad man.” At the same time these conspirators would expect the people to sing their own praises and hold them up as defenders of the law. The modern-day conspirators have reasoned the same way and have concluded that they must find some apparently lawful means of destroying Jehovah’s witnesses and, if the laws on the statute books are insufficient to accomplish their purposes, then some new law must be passed. In line with this the conspirators said to King Darius: “Now, 0 king, establish the decree, and sign the writing, that it be not changed, according to the law of the JIedes and Persians, which altereth not.” (Dan. 6:8) In keeping therewith the pope sends word along to his various active agents in the nations of “Christendom” to get a law passed that Jehovah’s witnesses might be destroyed.
2* The enemy of Jehovah’s witnesses desire God’s approval to go ahead in their destructive work, and hence they seek a “lawful means” to accomplish the same. They have long held and openly advocated that the political element of the world rule by divine right
and hence that if they can have a law put upon the statute books under which they might “frame” Jehovah’s witnesses they can thereby bring about their destruction and accomplish the same in apparently a lawful manner and with God’s approval. Because the action of the conspirator’s was, in Daniel’s time, and is now, a challenge to Almighty God, the King eternal, he responds to them as he did on another occasion to the Devil: “Thou movedst me against him, to destroy him without cause.” (Job 2:3) “Shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee, which frnmeth mischief by a law?”—Ps. 94:20.
30 The king, Darius, yielded to the request of the satraps. “Wherefore king Darius signed the writing and the decree.” (Dan. 6:9) This illustrates how Jehovah permits ‘the wieked to spring up as the gras and all the workers of iniquity tollourish’ (Ps, 92; 7), and to use so-called “legal” means or methods Io bring about the destruction of faithful witnesses of the Lord. God permits the earthly ruling factors to pursue their own way and to enact laws according to their own selfish ideas and to enforce the same, that such laws may operate as a test to his own people; but that docs not mean at all that God approves such cruel and unrmhteous laws. The great question involved is the vindication of Jehovah’s name, and hence that means that his anointed ones must receive the test and continue to maintain their integrity toward God until the end.
FAITHFUL WITNESSES
31 The big powwow before King Darius was hold publicly in'the absence of Daniel, but when Daniel learned that the decree was signed he did not falter in his faithfulness and devotion to Jehovah God. “Now when Daniel knew that the writing was signed, he went into his house; and his windo ws being open in his chamber toward Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his knees three times a day, and prayed, and gave thanks before his God, as he did aforetime.” (Dan. 6:10) The record does not say that Daniel attempted to prevent the making of the decree; but if he did know about it before it was signed he may have protested against it. Jehovah’s witnesses presented a petition to the Congress of the United States and a protest to the legislative body of New Jersey against certain laws, but they have not tried to prevent the enactment of any law against them. Their vigorous protest has been made in order that the record might be made up against the conspirators and that thus the mouths of the conspirators might be for ever slopped from saying that they did not know they were fighting against Almighty God by persecuting his witnesses. The attitude of Jehovah’s witnesses concerning all such matters is, Let the Devil and his crowd do what they will, but while they are doing it we will take occasion to tell them and the people what they are doing.
December 1, 1934
WATCHTOWER.
363
82 Daniel went into his house, and before his window that opened in the direction of Jerusalem he got down on his knees three times every day and prayed to Jehovah God. This proved that he feared not man, but that he feared Jehovah. Thus he pictured the remnant now on earth with their hearts and faces turned toward Jehovah’s organization, his kingdom, and showing that their chief purpose is to have a part in the vindication of Jehovah’s holy name. The remnant will remain true to Jehovah and his kingdom, regardless of consequences that might come upon them at the hands of the enemy. Like the faithful ones of olden times, the faithful remnant now say concerning Jehovah and his organization: “Jf I forget thee, 0 Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning. If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy.” (Ps. 137: 5, 6) “Evening, and morning, and at noon, will I pray, and cry aloud; and he shall hear my voice.” (Ps. 55:17) Regardless of the opposition of the conspirators and the persecution of Jehovah’s witnesses the faithful remnant will continue to worship Almighty God as he has commanded them, in the same way that Jesus and his faithful apostles did aforetime, to wit, by ‘publicly going from house to house and preaching the gospel’.—Acts 20:20.
S3 Had Daniel gone to the king and asked for a permit or a license to pray to Jehovah, that would have been conforming to the decree of the king, because he must first get the consent of the king before he could pray, and that would be showing that he did not sincerely hold that Jehovah is supreme and above the king on earth, which course of action would have been an insult to Jehovah. The state or earthly government is not a mediator between God and men. Jehovah is above all, and his law is supreme and his people will obey it.
34 The divine rule is not subject to change. Jehovah has commanded his anointed to go and bear testimony to the people by telling them the truth that Jehovah is* God and that Satan’s organization is the enemy of God and shall soon be destroyed. This truth of God’s Word necessarily subjects the practitioners of modern religion to shame, ridicule and contempt in the eyes of honest men and women, and calls forth the denunciation of the religionists and their efforts to destroy the witnesses; but this must not deter the remnant nor cause them to slack their hand in the performance of what God has commanded them to do.
33 The conspirators posted men at vantage points •where the evidence they needed might be procured. Likewise today the conspirators against Jehovah’s witnesses post members of their strong-arm squad and those of the Judas class where they can obtain evidence against Jehovah's witnesses. A company of these forming a part of the Judas class camp near the Bethel home in order that they may spy out what
goes on and misrepresent the facts, hoping thereby to entrap those who are serving Jehovah God. If the evidence at hand is not strong enough those “staked out” witnesses make it stronger to suit their own desires. This was foreshadowed by what the" crooked satraps did concerning Danigl: “Then these men assembled, and found Daniel praying [making petition] and making supplication before his God.” (Dan. 6:11) The real purpose of the conspirators was, not to stop Daniel’s worship of Jehovah, but to find some apparently lawful excuse to destroy Daniel. Likewise the modern-day conspirators move against Jehovah’s witnesses, not merely because they arc worshiping Almighty God, but for the reason they hope to find some apparently lawful excuse to destroy those witnesses who testify to God’s truth, which truth exposes the Devil worshipers to ridicule and contempt. As it was with Daniel, so it is with Jehovah’s witnesses. Daniel, by disregarding the unrighteous law of that realm, would bring upon him death, but unfaithfulness to Jehovah God would bring upon him destruction. Even so today, Jehovah’s witnesses, by disregarding some law of the land, may be subjected to death, but their disregarding of or disobedience to Jehovah’s law means the complete destruction of their very existence, as Jesus declared: “And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul: but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.” (Matt. 10:28) Those faithful unto Jehovah obey his law, and trust him implicitly as to the result. The faithful fear neither man nor Devil, but they do make Jehovah God their fear; as it is written: “Sanctify the Lord of hosts himself; and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread. And he shall be for a sanctuary.” (Isa. 8:13,14) To obey Jehovah’s law the faithful anointed cannot hide themselves by declining to openly testify to his name, nor can they have an excuse to sit quietly in their homes and hum hymns and read books. The true and faithful are Jehovah’s witnesses, and they must not cease to bear the fruits of the kingdom Ixi-fore men and to pray for the increase of Jehovah’s kingdom interests and for the destruction of Satan’s rule. In the faithful performance of their divinely given commission the remnant know that they are putting themselves in a position of jeopardy at the hands of men; but they are blind to everything save that of rendering full obedience unto Jehovah God. —Isa. 42:19.
36 The divine record supports the conclusion that Daniel was not present before the king when the conspirators appeared to make accusation against him. He was tried in his absence. It is even so at the present time. Often the case is made up, and the decision determined upon, before the defendants, Jehovah's witnesses, are even arrested. Seeing Daniel down on his knees praying, the satraps chuckled to themselves and went straightway before the king. “Then they
364
He WATC HT0WER.
Ekcoxlyn, N. Y.
came near, and spake before the king concerning the king’s decree; lltast thou not signed a decree, that every man that shall ask a petition of any god or man within thirty days, save of thee, 0 king, shall be cast into the den of lions? The king answered and said, The thing is true, according to the law of the Medes and Persians, which altereth not.” (Dan. 6:12) The conspirators wished to get the absolute confirmation from the king’s lips that the decree had been signed making death the penalty for any man’s asking a petition of any god or man other than the king within thirty days. They put a hypotlietical case before the king, being careful to hold back the name of Daniel until they received the desired answer. The answer of the king was in the affirmative, that they had properly staled the decree as signed, and that such law was unchangeable. The conclusion of the conspirators then was that they had an open and shut case against Daniel the Jew and that now they would soon make lion food of him. In modern times, when it seems needful to accomplish something that is unusual the ruling powers declare that a "state emergency” exists and that for the safety and peace of the people of the nations drastic laws must be made and executed. Based upon that hypocritical excuse the Hitler government did without reason or just eau.se issue a decree prohibiting Jehovah’s witnesses from preaching the gospel of the kingdom and from serving Jehovah God within that realm. In other parts of ‘•Christendom” Satan’s crowd, under the leadership of Gog, is doing the same thing. Such was foreshadowed by the thirty-day period fixed by the law of the king as an ‘‘emergency period”. The enemies of God seize upon like man-made period of “emergency” to find some lawful excuse by which Jehovah’s witnesses may be destroyed. Thus the satraps put 1 he matter before the king in order to bring about the death of Daniel. It is even so today, that the leaders of “Christendom” hide behind what they call a “state emergency” and emergency laws as a cover for their wicked action in bringing about the persecution and destruction of Jehovah's witnesses and the preventing of the declaration of the message of God’s kingdom. Daniel at this stage of the prophetic picture appeared to be in grave danger of immediate destruction. The king had unwittingly committed himself by his declaration of the law, and from this he could not now withdraw. Likewise in the present time Jehovah’s witnesses and their work in every part of “Christendom” apparently stand in grave danger of immediate destruction. What will the faithful do now? and why, some will ask and do
ask, does Jehovah permit his anointed to be placed in such a position of immediate danger?
(To be continued)
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
U 1. Point out the significance and fitness of Jesus Christ’s being named "The Lion of the tribe of Juda”.
U 2. In this connection show licit Satan has attempted to mimic Jehovah, and with what result.
V 3. What is meant by "the law of God”? Justice? Judgment?
4.	Compare law and equity, and the administration thereof, in Jehovah’s organization with that in the organizations of men, and account for the difference.
T 5. Point out the chief violators of justice, with illustration of their method of procedure. Of what is this a proof?
H 6, 7. What purposes are here seen to be served by .h-hovah's providing record of the sixth chapter of Daniel’s prophecy?
H 8. What ate the chief points to be kept in mind in the study of this prophecy?
1f 9. Describe the situation in which the opening expression of tills prophecy finds its application.
U 10. Account for the wickedness on earth at the present time, in view of the fact that the kingdom is set up, and the judgments of Jehovah began in 1918.
11 11. By pointing out the manner in which they reveal their identity, distinguish between the ‘vc.-sels of honor’ and the 'vessels of dishonor'.
•f 12. Identify the "three presidents”, mentioned in verso 2. 1> 13. Explain and apply the statement that "Daniel was preferred above the presidents and plinces’’, and the reason therefor, sis recorded in verse 3.
H 14. Apply the prophetic statement, "The king thought to set [Daniell over the whole realm.”
1i 15-17. How in the record of verse 4 are the modern conspirators identified and their motives confirmed 1 Account for the conspiracy against Daniel; and apply the prophetic picture.
11 IS. Why are laws unnecessary for righteous men? How do the grounds assigned for ‘finding occasion against Daniel’ serve, to reveal the chief conspirators then and nt tho present time? What are some of the laws of God which Jehovah’s witnesses are earnestly endeavoring to obey?
V 19-21. Apply the prophetic picture presented in verse (i, and their thus greeting the king.
1f 22-25, Show, from the record of verse 7, that the tactics adopted and practiced against Dnniel clearly foreshadowed the methods employed by the modern-day satraps, and especially by the Itoman Catholic hierarchy.
t 26, 27. Explain whether it would have been just as well for Daniel to pray only in secret. Apply the.-same principle to those now whom Daniel there prophetically represented.
V 28-39. Just why did the conspirators provide for that particular penalty for violation of tho "emergency law’’ which they were proposing? Apply the prophetic picture, together with verse 9.
U 31-33. What was foreshown in the record concerning Daniel upon his learning that the decree was signed I Quote other scriptures supporting Daniel’s course of action on that occasion.
U 34, 35. Why does the testimony borne to the people by Jehovah’s witnesses call forth denunciation of the religionists? Describe the methods these employ to procure “evidence” against Jehovah’s witnesses. Show that tills was foreshadowed by what the crooked satraps did concerning Daniel.
r 3(>. Why did the conspirators withhold expression of their purpose or objective until after they had the king’s verbal confirmation that he had signed the decree! Delate facts in which verse 12 finds fulfilment.
ASCRIBE UNTO JEHOVAH, 0 ye sons of the mighty, asciibc unto Jehovah the glory due unto his name; worship Jehovah in holy array. . . . Jehovah silteth as 1\-ng for ever. Jehovah will give strength unto his people; Jehovah will ble^s his people with peace.—David.
CHIEF ONE OF TOE NEW CREATION
JEHOVAH GOD ended his creative work with respect to the earth on the seventh “day” or creative period. The record of the book of Genesis (2:2,3) says: “And he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made.” Without doubt this statement relates to the creative work of Jehovah so far as the same pertains to things earthly. God is never idle. Long after the creation of man Jesus Christ said: “My Father worketh hitherto, and I work.”—John 5:17.
Man was the climax of the work of God as God’s creation related to things earthly; which work was perfect. (Dcut. 32:4) Thereafter Jesus came to the earth; and it may be asked, Was not he the creative work of Jehovah as that work related to the things of the earth? No; he was not. He was the second perfect man on the earth, but he was not created as Adam was created. His life, or existence, together with the right thereto, was transferred from heaven to earth. He was begotten in the womb of Mary by the power of Jehovah, even as the prophet Isaiah had foretold that a virgin should conceive and bring forth a son. (Isa. 7:14) He was not. there created, but he was the only begotten Son of God. (John 3:16) The Scriptures frequently speak of him as God’s only begotten Son.
Many make the mistake of thinking that God is responsible for the birth of every child. God delegated to the first man Adam the power and authority to transmit life; and when Adam was sentenced to death because of sin the right to life was taken from him and he could not transmit the right to existence or life, but he did transmit life to a limited degree. Jesus was born in a manner similar to that of other children: but his birth was perfect, because his existence and the right thereto emanated directly from Jehovah. In 1 Corinthians 15: 47 it is written: “The first man is of the earth, earthy: the second man is the Lord from heaven.”
Since all the human raec sprang from Adam and were begotten or born after his sin, all were born sinners. Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and all other men of God were under this same disability. The exception to this rule was Jesus; and he was perfect, for the reason that he was not begotten by man, as above stated. It therefore is clear that when he had created Adam, Jehovah rested from his creative work relative to the earth.
At the time that Abraham offered his son Isaac as a sacrifice in the mountain called Moriah God said to him: “Tn thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.” (Gen. 22:18) Any blessing of mankind that would be of lasting value must include an opportunity for man to gain everlasting life. The son of Abraham being imperfect, it is manifest that, the promised blessing could not come through him. The fact that Isaac died and that the blessing did not come
in his day is of itself proof that, Isaac was not the real One indicated by the promise. Long afterward it was written (Gal. 3:3,16): “And the scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith, preached before the gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all nations be blessed. Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made. He saith not, And to seeds, as of many; but as of one, And to thy seed, which is Christ.”
For centuries the ‘seed of promise’ through which the blessing must come to the peoples of earth was shrouded in mystery. God ordained it so. That mystery began to be made known at Pentecost, the fiftieth day after Jesus was raised from the dead, end was then made known only to those who were consecrated and faithfully devoted to the Lord God. (Col. 1:26; Eph. 3:4,9) That ‘seed of promise’, which is the mystery of Christ, is the new creation, and constitutes the agency employed and to be employed by Jehovah in carrying out his purpose to vindicate his holy name and to bless all the families of the earth as promised. The blessing of the families or peoples of the earth moans that God will give them opport unity to live, and such opportunity must come in his appointed way, to wit, by and through the promised .seed, which is Christ Jesus.
The new creation is The Christ. The Christ is a composite body made up of many members. The Head of The Christ is Jesus Christ, God's beloved Son. Those who are taken from amongst men, and justified, begotten and anointed by the spirit of Jehovah, and who then continue faithful unto death, will constitute the members of The Christ complete. (Eph. 1: 22, 23) In Colossians 1:18,19 it is stated: “And he | Jesus] is the head of the body, the church: who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead; that in all things he might have the pre-eminence. For it pleased the Father’ that in him should all fulness dwell.”
The new creation while on earth is a real thing, not an imaginary or “reckoned” thing. It does not consist of all who claim to be Christian, but consists of only those who by adoption into Jehovah's royal family become part of the ‘seed of promise’ as members of the body of Christ.' It is written (2 Cor. 5: 17): “If any man bo in Christ, he is a new creature: old things are passed away; behold, all things arc become new. ’ ’
The human body is taken as an illustration of The Christ, the Head and the members of the bod}’ being referred to as one. The apostle Paul writes: “For as the body is one, and hath many members, and all the members of that one body, being many, are one body; so also is Christ. For the body is not one member, but many.” (1 Cor. 12:12,14) “The Christ” and “the new creation” therefore mean one and the same thing.
“Christ” means the Anointed One of God. The
366
WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
pouring of the anointing oil on the head of Aaron the first Jewish high priest symbolically said: ‘This one is anointed and is set aside to serve the Lord God in the priest’s office to which he is appointed.’ This foreshadowed the anointing of Christ Jesus. God did the anointing; therefore Christ Jesus is The Christ of God, appointed, anointed and installed in the office of High Priest for the service of Jehovah. (1 Cor. 12:13; Eph. 1:17) As the scripture (Ileb. 1:8,9; Ps. 45:6,7) states: “But unto the Son [Jesus] he saith, Thy throne, 0 God [mighty one, or ruler], is for ever and ever: a sceptre of righteousness is the sceptre of thy kingdom. Thou hast loved righteousness, and hated iniquity; therefore God [Jehovah], even thy God, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.’’
Christ Jesus is the ‘seed of promise’, or “seed of Abraham”, the official channel through which the blessings of all the nations of the earth must come. (Gal. 3:27-29; 4:28; Ileb. 6:17; 2 Pet. 3:13) The seed must first come, and through the seed the blessing would come. That declared purpose of Jehovah, which is called the Abrahamie covenant, is the only covenant jiertaining to the blessing of the people, and that covenant is not made with any creature. It is the unconditional promise of Jehovah, made doubly sure and binding by his word and oath. Jehovah also saw the necessity for a covenant, “the new covenant,” to take out a people for his name. (Acts 15:14) Jehovah gave his word of promise that he would bless mankind after the taking out of this people for his name and the setting up of his kingdom, and that blessing must eome through his chosen seed, Christ Jesus. That being his expressed purpose, Jehovah will perform his purpose.
The clergy of the denominational systems have taught the people that the only place of salvation is in heaven, that no one can be saved unless he joins himself unto some denominational church system, and that then when he dies he will go to heaven. They have made the people believe that God has been putting forth a strenuous effort to get men into heaven. Satan the deceiver has been responsible for this scheme advocated by the preachers. Uis purpose has been to turn the minds of the people away from God and to blind them concerning God’s provision for their salvation and blessing. Up to this time Satan has well succeeded in blinding mankind; but now the change is at hand, because it is God’s due time to let the people know the truth.
It seems clear that the time is at hand when the people may understand that the mystery hid from ages and generations is The Christ, through which their blessings must come. Christ is God's way for man to obtain life. Life is a gift from God through Christ Jesus. (John 14:6; Rom. 5:18; 6:23) The people must have some knowledge before they can accept God’s gracious gift. In due time God will
bring all men to an accurate knowledge of the truth, and that time seems now at hand. (Isa. 11:9) Men may take courage now and study God’s purpose with a hope of finding the way that leads to everlasting life and blessings. This is true, not because men are any wiser today, but because it is the due time of Jehovah.
The perfect man Jesus consecrated himself unto God. Consecration meant his agreement to do the will of God. He said: “I come ... to do thy will, O my God.” (Ps. 40:7,8; Heb. 10:7) This he did when he presented himself at the Jordan river and was baptized by John the Immerser. His baptism was a picture, symbolically testifying of his death as a man in order to be the Redeemer of men. (Rom. 6:3,4) From the time of his birth as a babe until the moment of his baptism he was a human creature, nothing more and nothing less. He was perfect.
At the time of his baptism Jesus was begotten by Jehovah and acknowledged as his beloved Son. After his temptation in the wilderness he was anointed with the spirit of God. (Matt. 3:13-4:11) There he became Jesus Christ, the anointed One of God. As it is written: “God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the holy spirit and with power.” (Acts 10: 38) There the new creation began; and there Christ Jesus was made the Head over the members of the new creation, which is his body. (Col. 1:18) His anointing carried with it a commission from Jehovah God to do a specific work. (Isa. 61:1,2) After Jesus was thus anointed he understood what his relationship was to Jehovah and the work that he had to do. —Luke 4:16-21.
At the time of anointing of Jesus he was appointed and installed in the office of Priest unto Jehovah God. He was and is a Priest “after the order of Meh-hiz-edek”. (Ileb. 5: 3-6; Ps. 110: 4) As a man he sprang from the tribe of Judah, and there was no provision made by Jehovah God for a priesthood to be taken from that tribe. It was as a new creature that Jesus was a Priest of the similitude of Melehizedek the king of ancient Salem and the priest of the Most High God. (Heb. 7:1-22) As such Priest Jesus was, and is for ever, the honored Servant and Executive Officer of Jehovah God. As a great High Priest he offered himself as a human sacrifice to provide (and he did provide) the ransom price.
Christ Jesus died upon the tree on Calvary and thereby gave himself a ransom for all mankind. (1 Tim. 2:5,6; Heb. 2:9) He was put to death in the flesh and was raised from the dead in the spirit. (1 Pet. 3:18) He was the first one that was raised from the dead to perfection of life. (1 Cor. 15:1-20) He was given immortality at that time, even as Jehovah God had promised; and while he died as a man, he was raised as divine from the dead, and is now alive for evermore.—John 5:26; Rev. 1:18.
Because Christ Jesus was God’s anointed Priest
December 1, 1934
Slie WATCHTOWER.
367
to minister in the office to which he was appointed, he said: “I can of mine own self do nothing: . . . because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father which hath sent me.” (John 5:30) From the time that he was anointed all work and judgment concerning the execution of the divine purpose with reference to the vindication of his Father’s
name and the salvation of men was committed to him. (John 5:22) When he said, “I can of mine own self do nothing,” that did not mean that he was coerced into obedience by Jehovah; but it did mean that his devotion to his Father was so absolute and complete that he would and could do nothing except in harmony with his Father’s will.
PRAISE THE LORD FOR WONDERFUL TRUTHS
Dear Mr. Rutherfokp:
Wo know you are busy, but we must write you to express our heart-felt joy in studying the wonderful truths in the Bible winch are so marvelously revealed in the literature which you write.
One of your pioneers visited our island some ten months ago and delivered the wonder food to us. Since then we have met together every Sunday and studied some of your books.
For many years we have longed to understand the Bible, which seemed to us a book of confusion. With so many conflicting creeds in the world we gave it up as hopeless. But praise be to the Lord for delivering the wonderful food which
we get every fortnight through The TTatehlowtr. We would like you to convey to all Jehovah’s witnesses our continual prayers that the Lord may bless, protect, and guide them in their honorable mission.
May the Lord bless you, Mr. Rutherford, to supply us with more food.
Yours sincerely,
E. Dixon
E. Menn
A. Kklwav
Ida Lanning
—Falkland Island*.
(Continued from vane 36b)
NEW YORK
Auburn WMBO Su G :30pm Sa 2:15pm
Bing’niton WNBF Su 7:15pm Brooklyn WBBR Su 10:15am
Su 6:30pm Mo 10:30am Tu10:3(*am Tu 6:30pm WclOiMOam Wo 6:30pm Th 10:30am Th 6:30pm Fr 10:30am Fr 6:30pm
Buffalo WGR Su 10:00am Elmira. WESO Su 10:15am Freeport WGBBSu 9:00:im
Tu 7:00pm Th 7:00pm
Jamestown WOCL Su 9:30am
New York WBNX Su 2:30pm
New York WOV Su 4:30pm
SarauneL. WNBZ Su 10:15am
Tu 4:15pm Th 4:15pm
Syracuse WSYRFr 5:15pm
Wh. Pl ’ns WFAS Su . 6:00pm Mo 1:00pm Sa 9:00am
NORTH CAROLINA
Asheville WWNCTh 5:30pm Charlotte WSOC Su 9:45am Greensboro WB1G Su 9:45am Raleigh WFTFSu 9:45am
NORTH DAKOTA
G’d Forks KFJMSu 2:30pm
OHIO
Akron WADC Su 1:45pm We 11:15am
Akron WJWSu 5:30pm
We 2:00pm
Cleveland WHK Siri 0:30pm Tu 11:30am Th 2:30pm Fr 7:30pm
Cleveland W J AY Su 9:45am
Columbus WAIU Su 10:00ain Th 7:15pm
Columbus WBNSSu 8:45nm Mo 2:15pm We 2:15pm Fr 2:15pm
Dayton WSMKSu 1:30pm
Mt. Grab W1IBD Su 4:30pm We 4:30pm Fr 4:30pm
Toledo WSI’D Su 9:30am Sa 8:30am
Youngst’nWKBN Su 10:00am We 4:30pm
Zanesville WALK Su 10:00am We 4:15pm
OKLAHOMA
Elk City KASA Su 1:15pm Oki 'aCity KOMA Su 12:45pm Ponca City WBBZ Su 10:00am We 9:00pm
Shawnee KGFF Mo 8:45pm We 8:45pm Fr 8:45pm
Tulsa KVOO Su 10:15um
OREGON
Klamath F. KF JI Mo 8:15pm Marshlield KOOS Mo 1:30pm Medford KMEDTu 1:30pm Portland KWJJSu 4:15pm
PENNSYLVANIA
Erie WLBW Su 10:45am
Glenside WIBG Su 1:15pm Johnstown WJAC Su 4:30pm Phil’a WCAU Su 12:00 nn Philadelphia WIPSu 6:45pm Pittsb’gh KQV Su 10:30am
Wo 1:45pm Fr 1:45pm
Reading WEED Su 3:45pm
We 3:45pm
Wash’ton WNBO Su 9:45am W ’msport WR AK Su 5:30pm York WORK Su 3:00pin
PHILIPPINE ISLANDS
Manila KZEG Su 7:00pm
Th 7:00pm
SOUTH CAROLINA
Greenville Wl’BU Su 10:00am
Spart’b’g WSl’A Su 6:30pm
SOUTH DAKOTA
Pierre KGFX Su 1:00pm
Tu 4:00pm Th 4:00pm
Watertown KWTN Su 9:15am
We 8:15pm Fr 8:45pm
TENNESSEE
Cha ’noogaWDOD Su 1:15pm
Th 8:00um
Jackson WT.JSSu 1:30pm
We 5:30prn Fr 5:30pm
Knoxville WROLSu 7:00pm
Memphis WMC Su 4:45pm
Memphis WREC Su 9:45am
TEXAS
Amarillo KGRS Su 9:00am Austin KNOW Su 10:00am CorpusChr. KGFISu 9:00am
We 6:15pm Fr -6:45pm Dallas	KRLD Su 10:3(lum
Dublin KFPLTh 8:00pm
Fr 8:45am
F.lPaso KTSMSu 1:15pm Ft. Wortli KT AT Mo 5:15pm
We 5:15pm Fr 5:15 pm Galveston KLUFSu 8:0Upm We 8:00pm Houston KXYZ Su 10:00am S. Angelo KGKLSu 1:45pm
Th 8:45:un
S. Antonio KTSA Su 10:45am Tyler KGKBSu 9:15am
We 9:35am Fr 9:15am WichitaF. KGKO Su 12:30pm Th 5:15pm
UTAH
Ogden KLOSu 3:15pm
We 5:00 pm
Salt L. City KSL Su 10:45am
VERMONT
Rutland WSYBSu 10:00:im
'i’ll 5:30pm
St.Albans WQDM Su 1 :Ottpm
VIRGINIA
Ch ’lotte.sv.WEHC Su 10:45:.m
Danville WUTM Su !<• :15pm Lym-hb’g WLVA Su 12:45pm Norfolk WTARSu 12:30pm Richmond WR VA Su 12:15pi.i Roanoke WDBJ Su 12:30pm We 5:00pm
WASHINGTON
Aberdeen KXRO.Su 1:15pm
Bell’ham KVOSSu 10:06am
Th 5:15pm
Seattle K.IRSu 10:3i>am
Seattle KVLMo 4:15pm
Tu 4:15pm Wo 4:15i>m
Spokane KFIOSu 9:15-im
Spokane KGASu 5:l.'em
Tacoma KVI Su 2:15pm
Malla Walla KU.T Su 7:45am
Su l:5il'>m
■Wenatchee Kl’QSu 1:00;.m
Yakima KIT Su 16:00am
Tli 7:00.:m
WEST VIRGINIA
Bluefield WI1IS Su 9:00am
Fr 8:0'>:im
Cha’ston WOBU Su 4.00pm Fairmont WMMN Su 12:15:>-i llunt’ton WSAZ Th 4:0:>pm Wheeling WWVA Su 10:00am
WISCONSIN
La Crosse WKBU Su 12:00 nn Madison WIBA Su 10:05am Mani’woe WOMT Mo 7:00pm
Th litliipm
WYOMING
Casper KDFN Su 10:30am
Th 8:45pm
tffc WATCHTOWER.
RADIO SERVICE
The good news of the kingdom of Jehovah is broadcast each week or oftener by these and other stations at time shown.
[Current local time Is shown In each instance.]
AUSTRALASIA
NEW SOUTH WALES
Albury 2-AY Tu 8:45pm
Goulburn 2-GNSu 7:30pm
Grafton 2-GF Tu 7:30pm
Gunnedah 2-MOSu 7:00pm
Lismore 2-XNWe 7:15pm
New Castle 2-HD Su 10:30am
Su 9:30pm Su 11:40pm Wo 6:30pm
Sydney 2-UE Su V :00am
W’gaW’ga 2-WGSu 5:30am We 7:45pm
QUEENSLAND
Brisbane 4-BC Su 10:15am
Mackay 4 MK Su 10:15am
Marybor ’gh 4-MB We 9:45pm
Ruckh’pton 4-RO We 10:00pm
Townsville 4-TO We 8:00pm
TASMANIA
I/aunceston 7-LAFr 4:45pm
Ulvcrstone 7-UVWe 5:30pm
VICTORIA
Ballarat Bendigo Hamilton 1 loi sham Melbourne Melbourne Sale Swan Hill
3BA Sa 12:45pm 3-BOSu 8:45pm 3-HASu 6:45pm 3-HSSu 7:15pm 3-AKSu 2:15pm 3-AW Su 10:15am 3-TRSu 6:30pm 3SH Su 7 ;15pm
WEST AUSTRALIA
Kalgoorlio 6-KG Su 7:00pm
Perth 6-ML Su 7:00pm
BELGIUM
Hainaut WALLONIA-BONNE
(201.7m) ESPERANCE
We 8:45pm
CANADA
ALBERTA
Calgary CFCN Su 5:45pm
NOVA SCOTIA
Sydney CJCBSu 9:00pm
ONTARIO
Hamilton C HOC Su 10:30n m
Su 1:30pm Su 8:00pm
CHINA
Shanghai XMHASu 7:30pm
CUBA
Caiharien CHILD
Spanish Su 7:00pm
Havana CMHI Su 11:15am (1st and 3d Sundays)
Spanish Su 11:00am
Spanish Th 11:00am
(1st and 3d Thursdays)
Havana CMK Su 11:30am
Spanish Su 9:00pm
ESTHONIA
Reval RADIO Su 4:30pm (296.1m) TALLINN
FRANCE
Paris RADIO L L PARIS
We 8:15pm
Paris RADIO NATAN-
VITUS Sul2:00nn
Tu 7:45pm Th 7:45pm
Sa 7:45pm
Toulouse RADIO
TOULOUSE We 7:50pm
Sa 7:50pm
MEXICO
Mexico XECW
Spanish Th 10:00pm
UNITED STATES
ALABAMA
Birm’ham WAPI Su 12:45pm Birm ’ham WBRC Su 10:00am Dothan WAGE Su 1:30pm M’tgomeryWSFA Su 3:45pm MuscleS. WNRASu 6:00pm
We 8:00pm Fr 8:00pm
ALASKA		
AnchorageKFQD We Ketchikan KGBU Mo		9:30pm 7:15pm 7:15pm
Th	7:15pm Sa ARIZONA	
Bisbee We Jerome We Prescott We Tucson We Yuma	KSUN Su 4:00pm Fr KCRJ Mo 5:15pm Sa Spanish Th KPJM Su 5:45pm Fr KGAR Su 7:00pm Fr KUMA Su Spanish Su	4:00pm 4:00pm 5:15pm 5:15pm 4:30pm 5:45pm 5:45pm 5:45pm 7:00pm 6:15pm 6:00pm
	ARKANSAS	
Fay’ville KUOA Su 12:45pm Well:30ani Fr 4:30pm HotSp’gs KTHS Su 1:00pm Little R’k KARKSu 9:00am Little R’k KG 111 Su 7:00pm We 5:30pm Fr 5:30pm		
Little R’k KLRA Su 10:30am Paragould KBTM Su 10:00am We 11:30am
Texarkana KCMC Su 6:45pm
CALIFORNIA
El Centro KXO Su 10:00am Eureka KIEM Su 10:30am Fresno KM J Su 3:45pm Hollywood KNX £u 7:45pm Long B ’ch KGER Su 10:45am
Los Angeles KTM Su 9:30am
Su 8:00prn Th 8:00pm
Oakland KLS Su 11:15am We 2:45pm Fr 2:45pm
Oakland KROW Su 10:15am Su 6:15pm Mo 8:15pm We 8:15pm
Sa’mento KFBK Su 9:30am S. F’ciseo KTAB Su 9:30am Stockton KGDMSu 9:30am
We 7:15am Fr 1:15pm
COLORADO
Col ’o Spr. KVOK Su 10:30am We 5:30pm Sa 4:30pm
Denver KFELSu 7:15pm Grand J’n KFXJ Su 1:15pm
Greeley KFKA Su 6: 45pm
Lamar KIDW Su 7:15pm We 2:40pm Fr 2:40pm
Yuma KGEKMo 12:45pm We 12:45pm Fr 12:45pm
CONNECTICUT
Bridgeport WICC Su 10:30am
DELAWARE
Wilm’ton WDELSu 6; 15pm
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA "Washington WOL Su 6:00pm
FLORIDA
Jacksonv. WMBK Su 10;00am
Miami	WIOD Su 5:30pm
Miami	WQAM Su 5:15pm
Orlando WDBO Su 12:45pm Pensacola WCOA Su l:0opm We 6:45pm
GEORGIA
Albany WGI’C’ Su 10:30am
Athens WTFISu 9:45am
Atlanta WGSTNu 5:45pm
Atlanta WJTLSu 2:15pm
Augusta WRDW Su 3:00pm
Th 8:00pm
Columbus WRBLSu 9:30am
LaGrangeWKEU Su 3:00pm
We 3:C0pm Fr 10:00am
Macon WMAZ Su 4:00pm
Rome WKGA Su 12:30pm
We 8:45pm Fr 8:45pm
Savannah WTOC Su 1:00pm
HAWAII
Honolulu KGMB Wo 11:45am
Fr 7:15pm
IDAHO
Boise KIDO Su 10:45am
Idaho Falls KID Su 10:00am
Nampa KFXD Su 11:00am Mo 7:45pm
Twin Falls KTFI Su 10:45am Su 4:15pm
ILLINOIS
Bloom’ton WJBC Su 9:45am
Decatur WJBL Su 10:00am Fr 6:30am
Harrisb’g WEBQSu 6:00pm Quincy	WTAD Su 12:30pm
We 1:00pm
Rockford WROK Su 10:15am Su 9:30pm We 9:30pm
Sp"Held WCBS Su 12:30pm
Sa 11:15am
Tuscola WDZ Su 12:45pm
INDIANA
Ind "apolisWKBF Su 10:00am Th 1:00pm Muncie WLBC Su 4:15pm Fr 4:30pm
KANSAS
Coffeyville KGGF Su 1:45pm Th 8:45pm
KENTUCKY
Louisville WAVE Su 2:45pm
LOUISIANA
Shrevep’t KWKJI Su 9:45am
MAINE
Bangor WLBZ Su 10:45am
MARYLAND
Baltimore WBAL Su 11:30am
Cumborl’dWTBO Mo 1:15pm
Wo 1:15pm Fr 1:15pm
Ilagcrst’n W.IE.T Su 10:15am
MASSACHUSETTS
Babson P. WBSO Su 12:30pm
Boston WHDH Su 12:30pm
Boston WNAC Su 10:00am
Sp'gfield WMAS SulO:30am
Worcester WORC Su 10:30um
MICHIGAN
Calumet WHDFTu 6:15pm
Detroit W.IH Su 10:00am
Jackson WIBMSu 6:39pm
KalamazooWKZO Su 9:45am
We 1:15pm
MINNESOTA
F’gusFallsKGDE Su 10:00am Min’apolisWDG Y Su 2:00pm Moorhead KGEK Su 7:30pm
We 5:15pm Fr 5:15pm
MISSISSIPPI
Gulfport WGCM Su 9:45am
We 8: L5pm
Hattiesb’gWPFB Su 1:30pm
Wo 7:15pm
Laurel WAML Su 1:00pm
Meridian WCOC Su 10:00am We 6:45pm
MISSOURI
Columbia KFRU Su 12:00 nn We 7:15am
Kans.C’v KWKC Su 2:00pm ’	Tu 7:00am
MONTANA
Kalispell KGEZ Su 9:00am
NEBRASKA
Kearney KGFW Su 10:00am Lincoln KF AB Su 9:30am Lincoln KFOR Su 10:15am Scottsbl ’f KGKY Su 10:15am
We 5:45pm Er 5:45pm
NEVADA
Reno KOH Su 10:30am
NEW JERSEY
Newark WNEW Su 10:00am
NEW MEXICO
Albuq’que KOBWe 5:45pm
Roswell KGFL Su 5:15pm
We 4:30pm Fr 4:39pm
(Continued on 3Srj
CTle WAT C H TOWER.
Published Semi-Monthly By
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 117 Adams Street - Brooklyn, N. Y., U. S. A.
OFFICERS
J. F. Rutherford President W. E. Van Amburcii Secretary
‘'And all thy children shall be taught of Jehovah; and great shall be the peace of thy children.”-Isaiah
THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH
THAT JEHOVAH is the only true God, is from everlasting to everlasting, tho Maker of heaven, and earth and the Giver of life to his creatures; that tho Logos was the beginning of his creation and his active agent in the creation of all things; that tho Logos is now tho Lord Jesus Christ in glorv, clothed with all power in heaven and earth, and the Clief Executive Officer of Jehovah.
THAT GOD created the earth for man, created perfect man for tlie earth and placed him upon it; that man -wilfully disobeyed God’s law and was sentenced to death; that by reason of Adam’s wrong act all men are born, sinners and without the right to life.
THAT.JESUS vvns made human, and tho man Jesus suffered death in order to produce tho ransom or redemptive price for all mankind; that God raised up Jesus divine and exalted him to heaven above every creature and nbovo every name and clothed him with all power and authority.
THAT JEHOVAH'S ORGANIZATION is called Zion, and that Christ Jesus is tho Chief O/iieer thereof and is tho rightful King of tho world; that the anointed and faithful followers of Christ Jesus are children of Zion, members of Jehovah’s organization, and aio his witnesses v.lio.o duty and privilege it is to testify to tho supremacy of Jehovah, declare his purposes toward mankind as expressed in tho Bible, and to bear tho fruits of tho kingdom lieforo all who will hear.
THAT THE WORLD has ended, and tho Lord Jesus Christ lias been placed by Jehovah upon his throne of authority, has ousted Satan from heaven and is proceeding to tho establishment of God’s kingdom on earth.
THAT THE RELIEF and blessings of tho peoples of earth can corn© only by and through Jehovah’s kingdom under Christ which has now begun; that tho Lord’s next great act is tho destruction of Satan’s organization and tho establishment of righteousness in tho earth, and that under tho kingdom all those who will obey its righteous laws shall bo restored and live on earth forever.
ITS MISSION
IIIS journal is pubii.-lied for the purpose of enabling the pi-,ple to know Jehovah God and his purposes :■> expressed in the Bible. It publishes Bible iiistructio i
specifically designed to aid Jehovah's witnesses. . It arrange; systematic Bible study for its rccders and supplies other literature to aid in such studies. It publishes suitable mate-ial for radio broadcasting and for other means of public instruction in the Scriptures.
It adheres strictly to the Bible as authority for its utterances. It is entirely free and separate from all parties, sects or other worl lly organizations. It is wholly and without reservation for the kingdom of Jehovah Ged under Christ his Beloved King. It is not dogmatic, but invites careful and critical examination of its contents in the light of tl a 8<-.iiptures. It does not indulge in controversy, and its columns are not open to personalities.
Yearly Subscription Price
United States, $1.00; Canada and Miscellaneous Foreign, $1.50; Cheat Bntr.ilN, Australasia, and Soo'iir Aimc.v, 7'. American remittances should be made by Express or Postal Money Older, or by Bank Draft. Canadian, Brilidi, South Afri-au and Australasian remittances should b.v made direct to the re-pectbo branch oEiccs. Jiomlttnnrr-i from countries other than I hove ri"n-itoimd may be made to the Brooklyn office, but by international Postal Money Order only.
Foreign Offices
Dritisli................3-1	Craven Terrace, London, W. England
Canadian ............4(> Irv.'ri Av-wto, Toronto, Ontario, C,i :■.:«! i
Australasian . . 7 Beresford Hoad, Strathfleld, N. S. W., Australia South. African .... Boston lloir-e, Capo Town, b'outh Africa Please address the Society in every case.
(Translations of this journal appear in several languages.}
All sincere students of the Bible who by reason of infirmity, poverty or adversity are unable to pay tho subs'Tip'ion pn.■: m.iy have The H'afrhtorer free upon written application to tl-u publishers, made once each year, slating the reason for so re-qim-thw it. Wo are gluil to thus aid the needy, bill; the written application once each year is required by tho postal rvRubiUons-. Sotice to Subscribers: Acknowledgment of a new or a renewal subscription will bo sent only when requested. Change of adilrr-s, when requested, may be expected to rippe.-ir on nildrras label within one month. A renewal blank (carrying notice of expiration) viil ho sent with the journal one mouth before tho subscription expires. Entered as Second Class Hail Matter at Itroohlpn, -V. T., Fostofftee.
Act of March S, 1S13.
YEAR BOOK FOR 1933
The prophet Ezekiel regulaily measured the waters flowing out from the temple. The Society does likewise, and here announces tho issue of the Year Hook for 1935. This contains the presiilent’s annual report, describing the purposes of the Society and briefly but comprehensively reviewing the activities, the experiences and lire work accomplished during the service year just past by Jehovah’s witnesses and Jonadab brethren in the various countries where the Lord lias placed them. Also the 1935 year text, with appropriate comment, is given, and daily texts and comments for your refreshment and instruction each day of the year. Only a limited edition is being printed; hence the Year Book is offered at 50e u copy. Remittance to cover should accompany order, forwarded to the Brooklyn office or branch office. Groups of Jehovah's witnesses and Jonadabs should combine oiders and send through local service director or sharpshooter.
1935 CALENDAR
You will be especially pleased with the Society’s calendar for 1935. Bull of action and graphically representing the astounding victory Jehovah will gain for his name’s sake, the calendar picture is most expressive of tho year’s text and sets forth, too, the part that Jehovah’s witnesses must perform all through 1935 and clear through to the glorious finish. The calendar also bears a letter from the president and miming the
special service peiiods foi the year. These particular servile periods, both regional and world-wide, are also indicate 1 on the calendar date pad. Older from the Society, tic; Bro iklv n office or branch office, enclosing remittance with eider, at _’5c eacdi, or live for $1.<H) if sent to one address. Orders may bj grouped and forvvardtld through the company director or sharpshooter.	-*•	' -
“JEHOVAH”
With deep gratitude to the great Revealer of his own name The Watchtower announces the publication of a new book. All faithful witnesses of God and Jonadabs will thrill to know ti-o book bears the title “Jehovah”, and that its contents set foitl., as does uo previous publication, the glorious name, the marvelous works and dealings, pert, pre-ent and future, and the -u:e covenant purposes, of the Most High God. The book's Bi-oulI-fully embossed cover holds within it dsd pages of text iimhir, color illustrations, and complete index. The author's ediiior. also contains a facsimile letter in the author’s own liand-.vriting, specially written for and addressed to the Lord's iinolnb d ■ s (and the Jonadab brethren). It is now ready and may be ii-ui at o')c a copy, this to help offset the heavy original cos's of publication. Jehovah's faithful witnesses and true Jomvhbs will not fail to read this new book er 1 thereby to i.tni t.i " i-selves for future service in placing it before the whole v-md, by his grace. Those wishing a copy should place their order through the director or with the sharpshooter. It' not associated with a company, ti.cn order direct from the Society.
Vol. LV
December 15, 1934
No. 24
“LIONS’ MOUTHS”
“My God hath sent his angel, and hath shut the lions’ mouths, that they have not hurt me: forasmuch as before him innocency teas found in me; and. also before thee, 0 king, have I done no hurt.”—Dan. 6: 22.
PART 2
JEHOVAH’S rules of action do not change, even as lie does not change. (Mal. 3:6) This truth was reflected by the unchangeable law of the Medes and Persians. The fact that the Scriptures mention the unchangeablencss of the laws of the Medes and Persians is further evidence that everything recorded in the Bible is recorded for a definite purpose, and particularly for the interest of those who now constitute the remnant. The great question for determination is the supremacy of God, and this question is now to be settled, and in this is involved the integrity of God’s creatures. The man Jesus was perfect, yet he must prove his integrity, and this he could do only by suffering from the assaults made upon him by the enemy Satan. “Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered.” (Heb. 5:8) “Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution.” (2 Tim. 3:12) “Confirming the souls of the disciples, and exhorting them to continue in the faith, and that we must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of God.” (Acts 14:22) The faithful men of old, including Daniel the prophet, of necessity must be and were subject to the same rule of testing to determine their integrity, and this entailed upon them much suffering. The things concerning them were written aforetime for the comfort of the remnant now on earth. When we appreciate what Daniel and other faithful men of his time had to endure, we can understand why Jehovah permits his faithful witnesses in these perilous times to suffer at the hand of the enemy and his agents. By no other means could their integrity be fully tested and proved.
2 The shamefaced, bewhiskered, hypocritical satraps stood before the king, holding, as they confidently believed, the death warrant of Daniel in their hand. The spokesman for that wicked combine then addressed the king in behalf of his coconspirators: “Then answered they, and said before the king, That Daniel, which is of the children of the captivity of Judah, regardeth not thee, 0 king, nor the decree that thou hast signed, but maketh his petition three times a day.”—Dan. 6:13.
8 What was the real reason or cause that moved those conspirators to desire the death of Daniel? Surely not merely because he was a Jew. Had Daniel been agreeing with and working harmoniously with the crooked satraps they would not care whether he was a Jew or of some other nationality. Daniel was the only honest man among all the satraps, and it was his honesty and faithfulness that interfered with their graft operations carried on as officials of the government. Jehovah’s law required Daniel to be honest and fair in all his dealings, and Daniel was obedient to God’s law and he was not being guided by the laws or customs amongst men. Daniel must and did do Hie very right thing; otherwise he would not have had Jehovah’s approval.
* The hypocritical satraps who wickedly sought the life of Daniel evidently made mention to the king and emphasized the fact that it was a Jew who had been found violating his decree, and this they did for the purpose of arousing the indignation of the king against the Jews, even though the law of the Jews was different from that of the Medes. The king had issued his decree, which decree must be fully obeyed by all at their peril, and it would really have made no difference whether the violator was a Jew or a Gentile. The mention of the fact that Daniel was a Jew discloses the malice on the part of the satraps. Haman employed the same tactics when he said: “There is a certain people [Jews] scattered abroad and dispersed among the people in all the provinces of thy kingdom; and their laws are diverse from all people, neither keep they the king’s laws: therefore it is not for the king's profit to suffer them.” (Esther 3:8) This has always been the policy of the Devil, to create prejudice in the minds of the ruling powers against those sought to be destroyed. The proof now brought by these conspirators that Daniel was disobeying the royal decree should, as they reasoned, be enough to stir the indignation of the king and bring about the immediate execution of the offender. The conspirators, claiming complete loyalty to the king, would present an argument before the king to this effect: That this man Daniel holds a high position
371	'
372
SFfie WATCHTOWER.
Bkocklyn, n. V.
in the government, am] his conduct not only is a gross insult to the king but is such a bad example before the people that the people will he led to disregard the law, and therefore he greatly endangers the peace and safety of the nation. The decree recently issued by the German government against Jehovah’s witnesses is to the same effect, that Jehovah’s witnesses serve and worship their God Jehovah and by so doing they thereby endanger the peace and safety of the state, and that hence Jehovah’s witnesses must be suppressed. Oh the same theory, backed by the same false and fraudulent argument, earthly agents of Satan in other places are attempting to enact laws to prevent the proclamation of the truth. This effort is put forth in many of the states of the United States of America, and in other countries, which laws if enacted would lead to the destruction of the work of Jehovah’s witnesses concerning God's kingdom and would cause the imprisonment and probably the death of many of such witnesses; and this the conspirators desire in order to prevent the people from knowing of their own crookedness. The present or modern-day conspirators seek a “lawful means’’ to destroy Jehovah’s witnesses and their work, and it must be expected that before Armageddon the nations of “Christendom” will by law forbid the activities of Jehovah’s witnesses, and if the faithful persist in the witness work and service of Jehovah God many of them will be adjudged as deliberate lawbreakers.
5 The experience of Daniel forwarns of just such a condition as now obtains throughout the earth. A like wicked rule is already enforced in Germany, and the enemy, moving particularly through the Catholic hierarchy, is endeavoring to put such so-called “laws” in operation in the United States and other parts of the earth. In Germany Jehovah’s witnesses are subject to all manner of indignities merely because they have in their possession printed literature enabling them to understand the Word of God. In this the faithfulness and integrity of the witnesses of Jehovah in that land is put to a severe test. God’s permitting it to be done is manifestly for the purpose of testing their integrity. As Hainan said to the king, and as likewise the conspirators concerning Daniel, 'This people should not be permitted to longer exist in this land.’
0 Evidently Darius the king saw the trap into which he had been unwittingly led, but, being the supreme ruler, he must now stand by his own decree and the fixed laws of the nation. Men holding public office today see the hypocrisy of the clergy and their allies and observe their wrongful course taken against Jehovah’s witnesses, but such officials have not the courage to rise above the petty technicalities of the law and declare what is right, because they are. in fear of losing what they have. Being in fear of man, they are led into the snare. They are easily induced
to say that public policy and the law are of first importance, and they arc easily induced to side-step iho real issue and to thereby permit the innocent to suhir and God’s name to be defamed. We must keep in mind that in the ease of Darius the king lie was performing a part in a great prophetic picture, even though he knew nothing about that prophetic picture. We must keep in mind that the king here pictured regal power, which power the conspirators hoped to induce to act in their behalf and against a righteous one. “Then the king, when he heard these words, was sore displeased with himself, and set his heart on Daniel to deliver him; and he laboured till the going down of the sun to deliver him.”—Dan. 6:14.
1	1t cannot be concluded that Darius was displeased with Daniel, but he was displeased with Ilie course of events which had put Daniel in this tight position and which had been brought about by the sinful and crooked acts of the officials of the government. This illustrates the displeasure of Jehovah with those who make and enforce laws upon the pretext of protecting the people, but the real purpose of which is to cause Jehovah’s witnesses to be brought into difficulties and to suffer injustice. The purpose of the conspirators is to cause the punishment of men and women because of their faithfulness in obeying God’s law. To be sure, Jehovah could immediately causa the persecution of his witnesses to cease; but, having heretofore decreed that Satan should have opportunity to carry out his boastful challenge, Jehovah will not change that decree, but permits Satan to > through with his malicious work until God's due time for the complete vindication of his own great name. The opportunity is thus furnished for Jehovah’s witnesses to prove their integrity and hence to have a part in the vindication of God’s name. That is a marvelous privilege granted to creatures. Jehovah's witnesses can take great consolation now in the fact that they are permitted to sufi'er from the assaults of the enemy and thus have an opportunity to prove their integrity towards Jehovah.
s Darius the king probably felt some responsibility before Daniel’s God in permitting this faith fid man to come into the position of such great disadvantage to himself; hence, it is written, he “set his heart on Daniel to deliver him, and lie laboured” to accomplish that purpose. This illustrates how Jehovah provides the means for his faithful witnesses to present their cases before worldly courts to the end that his witnesses may give their testimony, and that, if released from custody of the unrighteous and from the penalties of misapplied law, they might be free to continue as witnesses in giving the testimony of the kingdom until their work is completed. Surely it is not the will of Jehovah that his witnesses make no effort to defend themselves before the courts. Such is an occasion, when one is arrested and put to trial, to give
December 15, 1931
*3TIe WATCHTOWER
373
testimony to the name of Jehovah God and thus to boldly declare his name. Jehovah’s witnesses, by stating their position before the courts and the legislative bodies, are thereby giving testimony to the name of Jehovan and informing the people of Jehovah’s provisions made for them and all who will serve righteousness. The official element that is used by the conspirators to bring about the suffering and punishment of Jehovah’s witnesses must be told the reason for the giving of the testimony of and concerning the kingdom, and this makes known to them that by opposing Jehovah’s witnesses they are fighting against God. (Acts 5:38,39) Thus Jehovah uses his witnesses by putting in their mouths the scriptures and legal argument and giving them opportunity and ability to present this before the magistrates and courts, and to do so in a forcible manner such as worldly lawyers do not see and will not do. Worldly lawyers look at the technicalities involved. Jehovah’s witnesses have but one purpose, and that is to magnify the name of Jehovah, and lienee they see and present the real issue. Such is the reason for the “Order of Trial’’ and for the petitions and protests filed before the legislative bodies of the country.
’Evidently Darius the king heard the conspirators to the conclusion of their argument and then recessed his court that he might consider ways and means to rescue Daniel. During that recess the conspirators would be wondering why the king delayed in handing down his decree, and their spokesman would be ready to again stress before the king the unchange-ablencss of the law of the Medes and Persians and to insist that Daniel must be immediately fed to the lions. Then the king again assembled his court and sat upon his throne of judgment, and solemnly and with great dignity the hypocritical satraps again filed in and stood before the king. “Then these men assembled unto the king, and said unto the king, Know, 0 king, that the law of the Medes and Persians is, That no decree nor statute which the king established! may be changed.” (Dan. 6:15) In modern times magistrates and judges of courts listen to similar arguments and then recess the court for a time upon the pretext of taking the matter under consideration or .advisement. Then later such magistrates and judges say: “We see no wrong in these people called Jehovah’s witnesses, but we must enforce the lawr as it is written. We are powerless to help them.”
10	The hypocritical satraps would see to it that the people were told that Daniel, the highest president of the land, was about to be sentenced to death. This they would do during the recess of the court. The morbid and bloodthirsty would hurry to the king’s palace and would crowd each other to come near and hear the sentence pronounced and to behold the “faithful satraps”; and the wicked-minded would say to each other: “What wonderful satraps we have to bring this lawbreaker to justice.” The high court
of King Darius now duly assembled, the hypocritical satraps would see to it that they were standing in the front ranks in order that they might sec the complete humiliation of an honest Jew who had hindered them in their crooked work. A silence like that unto death prevails in the court room. Daniel is brought in and subjected to the gaze of the morbid crowd. Probably that was the first time he had appeared before the court after the conspiracy was formed, and now he was to be sentenced to a horrible death. Imagine yourself being an onlooker and hearing the stentorian court crier announcing the king's command: “Then the king commanded, and they brought Daniel, and east him into the den of lions. Now the king spake and said unto Daniil, Thy God, whom thou servest continually, he will deliver thee.”—Dan. 6:1G.
11	Did the king, Darius, there picture regal power delivering up the innocent to suffer unjust punishment? The crucial test must eotne, else how could the witnesses of Jehovah prove their integrity? We can therefore easily see that Darius the king did occupy the position of representing regal power deliverin r up the innocent to their executioners. Jihovah permits his witnesses to be delivered up and subjected to unjust punishments, that the test may be. applied in vindication of his name and as a testimony against his enemies. “But take heed to yourselves; for they shall deliver you up to councils; and in the synagogues ye shall be beaten; ami ye shall be brought before rulers and kings for my sake, for a testimony against them.”—Mark 13; 9.
12	It is just as Jesus stated to his conspiring enemies: “Thou eouldest have no power at ail against me, except it. were given thee from above.” (John 19; 11). In that same connection Jesus further said, in order to disclose the most reprehensible: “Therefore he that delivered me unto thee hath the greater sin.” Today the class that “hath the greater sin” is the Judas or “man of sin” class, which class betrays Jehovah’s faithful ones into the hands of the cruel enemy. Those who have once been enlightened in the truth concerning the kingdom and who turn again to the “beggarly elements” of the Devil's world are in a position to more easily locate Jehovah’s witnesses and their manner of work and to misrepresent these to officials and cause Jehovah’s witnesses to be arrested and punished.
13	Being put into the den of lions was a place of fearfulness and of great danger, and hence a place of certain death to Daniel unless Jehovah furnished him protection. Let those who are faithfully performing their covenant in seiwing Jehovah God be just as fearless as was Daniel. Manifestly Daniel did not show any fear. His persecutors were vicious, even as the persecutors and conspirators against .Jehovah's witnesses today are vicious and are just as vicious as wild beasts, and would just as quickly tear God's faithful ones to shreds if permitted to do so. "While
374
OTue WATCHTOWER.
Brooklyn; N. Y.
this is being written it is reported that an officer, taking into custody one of Jehovah’s witnesses who had mercij’ been announcing a broadcast concerning God's Word had said to Jehovah’s witness, and in a manner vicious and wicked: "I would like to kill every damn’ one of you.” We must here have in mind that the lions in the den where Daniel was put were the king’s lions, and therefore those lions pictured Jehovah’s forces of justice, and which forces do destroy those who are guilty of breaking the divine law. Jehovah’s innocent witnesses are in danger when the conspirators or executioners assume to be ‘bearers of God’s sword not in vain’, and this they do when taking the law into their own hands. They fail to reckon that Jehovah is looking after his own. Those fully devoted to the Lord, and hence trusting in him, are shown as saying under such conditions: ”0 Lord my God, in thee do I put my trust: save me from all them that persecute me, and deliver me; lest he tear my soul like a lion, rending it in pieces, while there is none to deliver.” (1’s. 7:1, 2) ‘‘My soul is among lions; and I lie even among them that are set on fire, even the sons of men, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword.”—Ps. 57:4.
SAFETY
14	Jehovah knows full well who serves him in spirit and in truth, and his own he will preserve. King Darius saw the helplessness of his position because of the unchangeable law, yet his confidence in Daniel and in Daniel’s God was great. Hence he said to Daniel: ‘‘Thy God, whom thou servest continually, he will deliver thee.” That was a real tribute to Daniel’s integrity toward Almighty God. It was an acknowledgment by a heathen king, yet it represented God’s tribute to those who are faithful to him. In these perilous days Jehovah permits his faithful witnesses to be led away to prison and to suffer indignities at the hand of Satan’s agents, and yet at the same time he gives them full assurance that he will preserve and deliver those who remain faithful and true to him. ‘‘The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil: he shall preserve thy soul. The Lord shall preserve thy going out, and thy coming in, from this time forth, and even for evermore.” (Ps. 121:7,8) Doubtless inanj' of Jehovah’s witnesses in recent months have remembered these precious words of the Scripture when they have been led by the strongarm squad and placed behind prison bars. This is further evidence that the things heretofore written were written for their comfort and hope. ‘‘The Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temptations, and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished.” (2 Pet. 2: 9) ‘‘Many are the afflictions of the righteous: but the Lord delivereth him out of them all. He kcepeth all his bones: not one of them is broken. ’ ’—Pg. 34:19, 20.
15	The record does not disclose any reply that Daniel
made to the words of the king when being sentenced; he said nothing to his persecutors. It is quite probable that he stood mute before the court; but if he spoke it must have been words similar to those spoken by his brethren on a previous occasion, who said: ‘‘If it be so, our God, whom we serve, is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace; and he will deliver us out of thine hand, 0 king.” (Dan. 3:17) This would show Daniel’s complete confidence in Jehovah. The Judeans held in captivity in Babylon and who remained faithful trusted in Jehovah God; and now likewise in these modern days the faithful ones, in the world, are compelled to walk amidst Satan’s organization and to likewise trust Jehovah God, and are assured that he will keep them in safety and that he will in due time deliver them. Jehovah always rewards the faithful; and where they make Him their fear and refuge, to such he is a sanctuary and complete protection.
10 The conspirators would take no chance on Daniel’s escaping from the lions’ mouths; therefore they saw to it that the den was securely fastened and sealed after Daniel had been east in to the lions. ‘‘And a stone was brought, and laid upon the mouth of the den; and the king sealed it with his own signet, and with the signet of his lords; that the purpose might hot be changed concerning Daniel.” (Dan. 0:17) They would demand that 1hc king would seal it with his signet, and then these pious-faced hypocritical lords would stick their signets on the wax as though that would make it stronger. We are reminded how the same hypocritical crowd did concerning the body of Christ Jesus. But why did the king seal the den ? The word and the name of the king was involved, and the conspirators would demand that there be no possible hope of Daniel’s escape, and hence they would insist on the king’s seal to be there in order that he might not change his decree. Likewise Jehovah’s name is now involved, the test is upon his remnant, and he permits the test to be carried through in order that the enemy may have no excuse to say that Jehovah has changed his decree or law. To be sure, the enemy could do nothing against the remnant save by the permission of Jehovah, who lets the enemies have all the rope that they desire and go the full length of it. He could stop the persecution of his witnesses at any time, but he will do it only in his own due time.
1T The satraps put their seal upon the stone, and in doing this they thereby testified against themselves as to their own responsibility for Daniel’s ill-treatment and for his death, if that should follow. The satraps did not trust the king to faithfully keep his word; and even so today the agents of Satan have no confidence in the word of Jehovah God. but insist on carrying out their own supposed authority. If they trusted Jehovah God they would leave to him the punishment of wrongdoers.
December 15, 1934
WATCHTOWER
375
13	When a person desires to search deeply into a matter he refrains from food and avoids what is called pleasure. He will not permit anything to distract his careful consideration from the subject matter. The brain is clearer when the stomach is not so well filled. Darius knew that Daniel was in a perilous place, and although his words show that he had confidence in Daniel’s God that lie would deliver him, he likewise knew that he as the king must do what he could consistently do to deliver Daniel. He might have thought that, he would be able to do something to bring about Daniel’s deliverance, and that, hence he must keep a clear mind and be on the alert and ready to act; hence, it is written, “Then the king went to his palace, and passed the night fasting; neither were instruments of music brought before him; and his sleep went from him.” (Dan. 6:18) This does not mean that God has to fast or refrain from pleasure, but here evidently it means that when a man has a serious task to perform, he should see to it that he conserves his faculties and uses them to the very best advantage. Darius was thus showing a genuine interest in Daniel’s welfare. This pictures how Jehovah has a deep interest in all of those whom he has anointed to be his witnesses and that, when they are passing through some strenuous ordeal that entails upon them suffering and puts them in great danger, Jehovah is watching over them with an eye. that never sleeps. Jehovah himself loves his own and, as it is written, “In all their affliction he was afflicted.’’ “For he that touch-eth you {his anointed] toucheth the apple of his eye.” (Isa. 63:9; Zech. 2:8) In harmony with this the anointed pray: “Keep me as the apple of the eye; hide me under the shadow of thy wings.”—Ps. 17: 8.
10	Jehovah’s witnesses are now in a tight place anti must watch, and the Lord watches with them. There is unity of all in God's organization. Jehovah and Christ Jesus are one with those of the remnant, and hence all at the temple are one with Them, that is to say, all arc deeply interested in the outcome of the test now upon the anointed. During this time of great danger the entire company of the remnant as the representatives of the King of Eternity keep themselves in an attitude of prayer and sober thoughtfulness lest they miss some opportunity of doing honor to the name of the Host High. The hour of great testing is upon Jehovah’s witnesses, and hence the admonition of the apostle, written under inspiration of the holy spirit, should now be heeded: “Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance and supplication for all saints.” (Eph. 6:18) They thus pray that they may at the opportune time open their mouths boldly and make known the purposes of Jehovah.
20	Daniel was in the lions’ den all night, and that would afford ample time for the unchangeable law of the realm to be fully satisfied and justice to be fully executed by Daniel’s being devoured by the
lions. The king reasoned that, if Daniel continued to live at. the dawn of morning, he would live only by God’s intervention and hence it was time for him to be delivered or brought up out of the lions’ den; hence, it is written, “Then the king arose very early in the morning, and went in haste unto the den of lions.” (Dan. 6:19) The king had not slept during the night, and as soon as day dawned he went to the relief of his trusted servant. Jehovah watches over his faithful ones and keeps his own, and he “shall neither slumber nor sleep”. (Ps. 121:4, 5) His capital organization is dear to Jehovah’s heart: “God is in the midst of her [his organization]; she shall not be moved: God shall help her, and that right early.” (Ps. 46:5) These precious words are written in the Scriptures to give assurance and comfort to those who are passing through times of peril, that they might fully trust Jehovah, come what may.
21	Darius was deeply moved by reason of the unjust treatment to which his trusted servant Daniel hud been subjected, and he was righteously indignant that he had been unwittingly drawn into the position where he must put Daniel in a place of great danger. This is shown by his words as he approached the den: “And when he came to the den, he cried with a lamentable voice unto Daniel; and the king spake and said to Daniel, 0 Daniel, servant of the living God, is thy God, whom thou servest continually, able to deliver thee from the lions?”—Dan. 6:20.
22	In order to carry out his purpose to the complete vindication of his name Jehovah permits his faithful servants to suffer even unto a sacrificial death, all of which is precious in his sight; as it, is written: “Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints.” (Ps. 116:15) This does not mean that Jehovah is unable to prevent the suffering of the faithful, but he must be faithful and true to his own word and then in due time exercise his power in behalf of those whose hearts arc perfect toward him.
23	As the king approached the den of the lions where Daniel was supposed to have been devoured, he cried out. Likewise while the faithfid remnant are now in the midst of the wild beasts that control this world Jehovah proclaims to them, “Ye are mj' witnesses . . . that I am God.” These are a part of his “faithful and wise servant” class; hence Jehovah says to them: ‘In my servant my soul has delight.’ (Isa. 42:1-7; 43:10-12) Doubtless the hypocritical satraps were either personally present or had some of their representatives near the den who would be crying out to Daniel, “Is your God able to save you now?” It is even so in the present time that the representatives of Satan in mockery and derision ask of Jehovah’s witnesses, “Is your Jehovah able to deliver you from our law? We will show you who is the law in this land.” Darius, in asking the question as he approached the den, shows that now Jehovah asks a similar question of his witnesses in order to afford
37G
Me WATC HT0WER.
Brooklyn, N'. Y,
the faithful witnesses an opportunity to acknowledge their protection and deliverance, and that this is entirely due to Jehovah’s loving-kindness and his power exercised in their behalf. No one of the remnant could have a reason to boast of what he accomplishes in his own behalf. All honor is due and must be and will be given to the King eternal.
GOD'S ANGELS
’‘Jehovah’s angels are at all times on the alert to carry out the orders of the Most High. (Matt. 18:10) Daniel had some knowledge of this because, as he knew, on a former occasion Jehovah had sent his angel and delivered his three friends from the fiery furnace. Now he had witnessed the stopping of the lions’ mouths for his own protection, and this he knew to be a protection from God exercised by and through his angels. Though still in the den of the lions, Daniel answered King Darius with words of good cheer: “Then said Daniel unto the king, 0 king, live for ever.” (Dan. G:21) Thus Daniel acknowledged the king as his friend.
23	Daniel’s heart was pure and he spoke gracious words to the king. “He that loveth with a pure heart, and hath grace on his lips, will have the king as his friend.” (Prov. 22:11, Leaser) Even so in these wicked days Jehovah’s witnesses in the clutches of the strong-arm squad, and hence in great danger of bodily harm, confidently respond through Christ, proclaiming that Jehovah lives for ever, and that he is the Friend, the shield and protector of those who faithfully serve him.
28	Daniel was quick to assure Darius that the God whom he served had delivered him by the hand of his angel. “My God hath sent his angel, and hath shut the lions’ mouths, that they have not hurt me: forasmuch as before him innocency was found in me; and also before thee. 0 king, have I done no hurt.” (Dan. 6:22) The faithful remnant know that Christ Jesus, the mighty Angel of Jehovah God, is present and is accompanied by his host of holy angels, and is charged with the preservation of those who are faithful unto the Most High. (Matt. 25:31) The remnant now appreciate the precious promises long ago written for their benefit in these perilous hours, to wit: “The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivereth them.” (Ps. 34: 7) “For he shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways.”—Ps. 91:11.
2T	The lions in that den belonged to the king, and hence they represented Jehovah’s justice. (Rev. 4:7; 6:1) Those lions could not destroy Jehovah’s faithful servant, nor will God’s justice today destroy those who are faithful and true to him. The malicious enemy may kill the body of some of those who are faithful to Jehovah, but the everlasting existence of these anointed ones is in the hand of the Most High, and nothing can pluck them out. Satan has at all times
tried to destroy men who show their faithfulness to Jehovah. Paul had a similar experience, and after all men had forsaken him he said: “Notwithstanding the Lord stood with me, and strengthened me; that by me the preaching might be fully known,-and that all the [nations] might hear: and I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion. And the Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve me unto his heavenly kingdom: to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.” (2 Tim. 4:17,18) In these wicked days of conspiracy against the anointed of God the beastly element that now rules the earth would quickly destroy the remnant except for the protection that God furnishes them through his angels. With complete confidence and trust in the Most High the faithful constantly present their petitions to the throne of divine grace and continue in diligence to proclaim God's name and his kingdom; as it is written: “They gaped upon me with their mouths, as a ravening and a roaring lion. Save me from the lion’s mouth: for thou hast heard me from the horns of the unicorns. I will declare thy name unto my brethren: in the midst of the congregation will I praise thee.” (Ps. 22:13,21,22) “Lord, how long wilt thou look on I rescue my soul from their destructions, my darling [A.Zi.V., margin: dear life] from the lions. I will give thee thanks in the great, congregation: I will praise thee among much people.” (Ps. 35:17, 18) Jehovah gives assurance to those who have wholly devoted themselves Io him and who continue faithful, and says to them: “Thou shalt tread upon the lion and adder: the young lion and the dragon shalt thou trample under feet.”—Ps. 91:13.
23	Daniel was fully aware of the fact that he was innocent, and had done no wrong to anyone. It is even so today with the faithful remnant, who are likewise innocent and harmless before God and man. The modern-day conspirators falsely charge Jehovah’s witnesses with wrongdoing and work themselves into a frenzy in trying to convince themselves that Jehovah’s witnesses arc doing wrong, but they are entirely unable to establish by truthful and competent evidence that Jehovah’s witnesses are wrongdoers. The faithful witnesses of God refuse to have any part with wrongdoers, and that causes Satan’s agents to be greatly enraged at them. The true and faithful to God say in the language of the psalmist: “I have hated the congregation of evil doers; and will not sit with the wicked. I will wash mine hands in innocency: so will I compass thine altar, 0 Lord: that 1 may publish with the voice of thanksgiving, and tell of all thy wondrous works. Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thine honour dwelleth.” (Ps. 26:5-8) They are pure in heart and continue to proclaim Jehovah’s gracious words, and therefore they have the King eternal for tlwir friend. —Prov. 22:11, Leaser.
29	The preservation of Daniel by the angel of Je-
December 15, 1934
Tfo WATCHTOWER.
377
liovah God was proof that Daniel had been faithful. Likewise the preservation of the reinnant of God’s organization by the hand of his trusted officers is a confirmation that these witnesses have been faithfully maintaining their integrity before God. “0 love the Lord, all ye his saints; for the Lord preserveth the faithful, and plentifully rewardeth the proud doer.” —Ps. 31: 23.
30	The conspirators against Jehovah and his anointed at the present day are entirely without truthful evidence that the remnant are movers of sedition or in any other manner willful violators of the law. Continuing to be the objects of the wrath of these conspirators, the faithful remnant receive the persecution without murmuring, well knowing that God is permitting them to have these fiery trials to carry out his own good purposes. ‘‘For it is God which worketh in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure. Do all things without murmurings and disputings; that ye may be blameless and harmless, the sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, among whom ye shine as lights in the world.”—Phil. 2:13-15.
31	Compared to life everlasting with the Lord the faithful remnant count not their present existence at all dear to them, having always in mind their privilege of proving true and faithful to Jehovah. Like Paul and others of the same spirit, they now say: ‘‘Neither count I my life dear unto myself, so that I might finish my course with joy, and the ministry, which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the gospel of the grace of God.” (Acts 20:24) The testimony of Jesus Christ has been committed to the remnant, and they know that they must fight to the finish. And in this conflict they have confidence that Jehovah will send his angel before them to protect and deliver them to the praise and honor of his holy name.—Hev. 12:17.
32	Jehovah’s witnesses are now engaged in a righteous and holy war against a host of unseen wicked ones. (I’lph. 6:12) These unseen ones are using earthly creatures as their visible instruments for persecution. In themselves the remnant have no strength, and hence no ability to withstand the assaults of the powerful enemy, but in Christ Jesus they are invulnerable to the attacks of the enemy and in Christ they shall gain the victory. The divine commandment ha.-been given to the anointed that ‘this gospel of the kingdom must be preached unto the nations as a witness before the final end’, and this the faithful will, do regardless of the vicious attacks made upon them by the enemy. Daily they observe the enemy forming wicked devices and striving to bring forth some ap parently lawful means of inflicting punishment upon God’s anointed, and they know that at any time they are liable to be thrown to the “lions” of so-called “worldly justice”, but, trusting in the Lord, they go on in delivering the testimony, which they are com
manded to do. The remnant will now stand steadfast in Christ Jesus, having and exercising full confidence that Jehovah in his own good time and good way will ‘stop the mouths of lions’ in behalf of those who continue to maintain their integrity toward him. In all their trials and fights and tribulations the faithful remnant rejoice and sing, because they know that the final result will be to their good and to the honor of the Most High.
PLEASED
33	Darius the king was glad that Daniel had been preserved. “Then was the king exceeding glad for him, and commanded that they should take Daniel up out of the den. So Daniel was taken up out of the den, and no manner of hurt was found upon him, because he believed in his God.” (Dan. 6:23) Likewise Jehovah takes pleasure in the preservation of those who maintain their integrity towards him. Jehovah caused to be written in his record his expression of pleasure because of the faithfulness of Daniel and other like faithful witnesses, and in that record these words appear: “Who through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions.” (lleb. 1J : 33) This testimony was written long after the death of Daniel, and this of itself is further proof that the words were written for the comfort of the remnant who are today on earth. Jehovah at another place caused specific mention to be made of Daniel and his faithful companions, manifestly because of their faithfulness and devotion to the Most High. (ICzek. 14:14,20; Heb. 11:33,34) Can Jehovah put men on earth who under the most severe test will remain true and faithful to him? This is the great issue. Certain it is that God is pleased with those who do prove their integrity toward him; hence it is written: “The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty; he.will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy; he will rest in his love, he will joy over thee with singing.” (Zeph, 3: 17) It is those who arc faithful to Jehovah that he preserves and over whom he rejoices: “Many are the afflictions of the righteous: but the Lord deliveretli him out of them all. He keepeth all his bones; not one of them is broken. The Lord redeemeth the soul of his servants; and none of them that trust in him shall be desolate.”—Ps. 34:19,20, 22.
34	King Darius commanded that Daniel should be brought up out of the den of lions. This could not foreshadow that before Armageddon the remnant would be taken out of danger. Not until Satan and all of his organization are destroyed will all danger be removed. Daniel was just as safe inside as he was outside of the lions’ den, because he had the protection of Jehovah’s angel. His being taken up from the den seems more particularly to picture that there would be'a series of acts of deliverance by Jehovah of the members of his anointed remnant, to tlu- end
378
WATCHTOWER.
Beooklyn, N. y.
that they might continue to serve as his witnesses. “God is unto us a God of deliverances; and unto Jehovah the Lord belongeth escape from death.’’ (Ps. 68: 20, A./t’.V.) Such acts of deliverance would be an indication of Jehovah’s approval of his servant class, and would also serve as a comfort for them and to that extent would be a vindication of his holy name. The conspirators reason that the punishment of Jehovah’s witnesses by the terms of their laws, which are improperly called “rules of justice”, would prove that Jehovah’s witnesses are wrong, and hence that their lions (earthly rules of justice) would tear to pieces these “pestiferous” witnesses of Jehovah. The enemy, however, overlooks the fact that the lions in the prophetic picture belonged to the king and that they represented true justice that proceeds from the throne of God, and that real justice is meted out only by the Lord. No one could ever have occasion to regret his faithful devotion to God.
RETRIBUTION
35	The rule of retribution is a just law. “If a false witness rise up against any man, to testify against him that which is wrong'; then both the men, between whom the controversy is, shall stand before the Lord, before the priests and the judges which shall be in those days; and the judges shall make diligent inquisition; and, behold, if the witness be a false witness, and hath testified falsely against his brother; then shall ye do unto him as he had thought to have done unto his brother: so shalt thou put the evil away from among you. And those which remain shall hear, and fear, and shall henceforth commit no more any such evil among you.” (Deut. 19:16-20) The modern conspirators doubtless expect to get away with their wicked acts, but they will not deceive Jehovah. The fact that God caused this law of retribution to be promulgated at the time of the making of the covenant of faithfulness on the plains of Moab, and the further fact that Darius the king proceeded in exact harmony with that divine rule, is additional proof that Darius in this prophetic picture represented Jehovah God. “And the king commanded, and they brought those men which had accused Daniel, and they cast them into the den of lions, them, their children, and their wives; and the lions had the mastery of them, and brake all their bones in pieces or ever they came at the bottom of the den.”—Dan. 6: 24.
38	The men that today rule in “Christendom” and who have joined in a conspiracy against Jehovah and his anointed, and have attempted their destruction, must in harmony with the divine rule be cast to the “lions” of divine justice, and this God will do in his due time. The conspiring satraps who suffered destruction by the lions foreshadowed the fate of 1he modern-day conspirators, including, to be sure, the “man of sin”, whose portion shall be with the hypocrites.—Matt. 24:50,51,
31	The dividing of the people is now in progress because the righteous Judge of Jehovah is now conducting his court of inquiry. The rulers in “Christendom” have already donned the vestments of Satanic worship, and thus they have definitely identified themselves as against God and his kingdom, and they must be brought before and delivered to the “Lion of the tribe of Juda”, to whom is committed all judgment and authority to execute judgment. (Kev. 5: 5; John 5:22,27) It is the day of the vengeance of our Ged, and Christ Jesus is the great Executioner and Vindicator. As the lions “brake all their bones in pieces”, even so Christ will destroy completely Satan’s wicked organization. “The king’s wrath is as the roaring of a lion.” (Prov. 19:12) “The fear of a king is as the roaring of a lion: whoso provoketh him to anger sinncth against his own soul.”—Prov. 20:2.
38	Those who are the chief schemers and conspirators seeking to bring about the destruction of Jehovah’s remnant are the clergy of “Christendom” ami the Judas or “man of sin” class. Those conspirators have shown themselves to be like, wild beasts seeking the unjust punishment and destruction of Jehovah's remnant, and the rule of retributive justice must be applied to them; as it is written: “Therefore I will be unto them as a lion; as a leopard by the way will I observe them: I will meet them as a bear that is bereaved of her whelps, and will rend the caul of their heart, and there will 1 devour them like a lion: the wiki beast shall tear them.”—Dos. 13:7,8.
33	All who now take their stand on the side of the conspirators and against Jehovah, and who render aid and comfort to the conspirators, shall sutler a fate like that which came upon those who conspired against Daniel. The “Lion” of Jehovah, that is, his Executioner, will not spare even the wives and children of this wicked crowd; as it is written: “And to the others he said in mine hearing, Go ye after him through the city, and smite; let not your eye spare, neither have ye pity: slay utterly old and young, both maids, and little children, and women; but come not near’ any man upon whom is the mark; and begin at my sanctuary. Then they began at the ancient men which were before the house.” “Prepare slaughter for his children for the iniquity of their fathers; that they do not rise, nor possess the land, nor fill the face of the world with cities. For I will rise up against them, saith the Lord of hosts, and cut off from Babylon the name, and remnant, and son, and nephew, saith the Lord.” (Ezek. 9: 5, 6; Isa. 14:21, 22) Those wicked conspirator's are so despicable in tire eyes of Jehovah God that, they will not be even accorded a decent burial: “Thou shalt not be joined with them in burial, because thou hast destroyed thy land, and slain thy people: the seed of evil doers shall never be renowned.”—Isa. 14:20.
40 The divine record is that the lions broke the b.mws of the conspiring satraps before they struck the hot-
December 15, 1534
WATCHTOWER.
379
tom of the den. This indicates the swiftness of divine justice: “because a short work will the Lord make upon the earth.” (Rom. 9:28) “I will early destroy all the wicked of the land, that I may cut off all wicked doers from the city of the Lord. ” (Ps. 101: 8) None of that wicked crowd will ever be permitted to abide in God’s kingdom. The Scriptures indicate that some of the remnant will actuallj’ witness the execution of this retributive justice against the conspirators, and this they will witness while on the earth. “And, thou son of man, thus saith the Lord God, Speak unto every feathered fowl, and to every beast of the field [including lions], Assemble yourselves, and come; gather yourselves on every side to my sacrifice that I do sacrifice for you, even a great sacrifice upon the mountains of Israel, that ye may eat flesh, and drink blood.” (Ezek. 39:17) “Only with thine eyes shall thou behold, and see the reward of the wicked.”—Ps. 91:8.
DECREE OF PEACE
The wicked conspirators having been cleared out completely, it was a time for peace. Hence the king issued an appropriate decree: “Then king Darius wrote unto all people, nations, and languages, that dwell in all the earth: Peace be multiplied unto you.” (Dan. 6:25) This clearly seems to foreshadow the proclamation of universal peace that shall be issued by the Lord immediately following the execution of the wicked organization that takes place at Armageddon. “For out of Zion [Jehovah’s capital organization] shall go forth the law,” that is, the rule of action commanding what is right. (Isa. 2:3) It is the great King of Eternity speaking to the survivors of Armageddon by his Chief Officer, the Prince of Peace, and there must then follow the fulfilment of the prophetic utterance, “On earth peace, good will toward mon.” That will mean permanent peace for the peoples of earth; and in no other way can lasting peace come. “Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end, upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with judgment and with justice, from henceforth even for ever. The zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform this.” (Isa. 9:7) “In his days shall the righteous flourish; and abundance of peace so long as the moon endureth.” (Ps. 72:7) The people will then behold the evidence of Jehovah’s expressed wrath and will know that wars arc done for ever and that never again will wickedness rise up.—Ps. 46: 8, 9; Nah. 1: 9.
42	The decree of King Darius brought Daniel prominently before the people and magnified the name of Jehovah, the God of Daniel. In harmony with this Darius wrote in his decrece: “I make a decree, That in every dominion of my kingdom mon tremble and fear before the God of Daniel; for he is the living God, and stedfast for ever, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed, and his dominion shall be even unto the end.”—Dan. 6: 26.
43	That decree seems clearly to foreshadow the fust decree of the new heaven following Armageddon. The remnant being still on earth at that time, the decree of the Lord will necessarily bring them prominently before the people as the faithful servants of the Host High God and of Christ, who maintained their integrity toward Jehovah under the most trying conditions. Then those faithful men and women who have undergone horrid experiences, such as have been inflicted upon Jehovah’s witnesses in New Jersey, will be glad that they had the faith and courage to maintain their integrity toward God. They will look back upon the filthy jails and the harsh words and other unpleasant things that then came to them, and rejoice that it was their privilege to have a part therein, because they were on the right side.
44	The battle of the great day of God Almighty will itself be a decree, because it will be royal expression causing all creation of earth to tremble and fear before Jehovah God. Then they shall know that Jehovah is God. The survivors will see that Jehovah has extended his favor to those faithful witnesses whom he has brought through the great tribulation, and they will know that the preservation of these faithful witnesses is the gracious act of the Almighty God. Then the Jonadabs in such places as New Jersey will rejoice that they insisted on worshiping Almighty God in truth and in spirit. Today only a few are desirous and willing to learn that Jehovah is God. Armageddon will fully convince all that he is the Most High. This the Devil himself must know before he is destroyed, that Jehovah is the all-powerful One. All the nations of earth shall tremble at his presence. (Isa. 64:2) When the storms of Armageddon have passed, then the royal decree will command that all shall fear and tremble before the Most High. “For he is the living God and abideth for ever.”—lioth.
45	When Jehovah gave his law to his people chosen for his name he said to them: “And God spake all these words, saying, I am the Lord thy* God, which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Thou shalt have no other gods before me.” (Ex. 20:1-3) The battle of Armageddon will emphasize this great law to all living creation. Jehovah abides for ever, when all other gods and images are done for and gone for ever. The great controversy Who is The God? will then have been settled for ever. “Therefore, behold, the days come, that I will do judgment upon the graven images of Babylon: and her whole land shall be confounded, and all her slain shall fall in the midst of her. Wherefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that 1 will do judgment upon her graven images: and through all her land the wounded shall groan.” (Jer. 51: 47,52) “The burden of Egypt. Behold, the Lord rideth upon a swift cloud, and shall come into Egypt; and the idols of Egypt shall be moved at his presence, and the heart of Egypt shall melt in the mid.>t of it.”
330
Tile Vv ATC11 TOWE
Brooklyn, N. Y.
(Isa. 19:1) “Thus shall ye say unto them, The gods that have not made the heavens and the earth, even they shall perish from the earth, and from under these heavens. . . . 'They are vanity, and the work of errors: in the time of their visitation they shall perish.”—Jcr. 10:11-15.
** In times past men have thought to establish a government which God would approve and perpetuate, and we know that all their efforts have been in vain. In these last days the nations of “Christendom” have combined to set up a league, which they call the “expression of God's kingdom on earth”, but which in truth and in fact is the great “abomination of desolation” about which God caused Daniel the prophet to prophesy. The decree issued by the king of Medo-Persia foretold the kingdom of God under Christ, and Daniel was divinely directed to write that this is the kingdom of God: “And his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed.” This universal empire is the kingdom of the Most High; and the capital part thereof, the Christ, takes the leading part in the vindication of Jehovah's name and the everlasting rule of righteousness; hence the fruitless efforts of imperfect men to set up a kingdom are for ever at an end.
4T Jehovah God honored Daniel by permitting him to write a prophecy foretelling this great change from wicked earthly kings to his righteous kingdom, when he wrote: “And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.” (Dan. 2:44) This completely and everlastingly settles the question of supremacy and of who shall rule the world, and in that great controversy Jehovah wins, and all who live shall for ever praise his name.
48 Jehovah’s kingdom and righteous rule under Christ shall endure, “and his dominion shall bo even unto the end.” That means that his supremacy and sovereign rule shall continue. Were all other things to end, Jehovah’s supremacy and sovereign rule would continue for ever. “From everlasting to everlasting, thou art God.” The immediate rulership of the world Jehovah confers upon his beloved and chief witness Christ Jesus, and this he caused Daniel to record: “And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages, should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed. And the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints of the Most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey him.”—Dan. 7:14,27.
48 What foolishness and insanity is today manifested by the world rulers in their counsel and conspiracy
against Jehovah and against his anointed! How unwise the people, and what a great exhibition of blindness on their part, when they imagine that the imperfect men who now rule can rid the earth of the testimony of God and his kingdom and hold sway according to their own wicked pleasure! Concerning this great stupidity of man Jehovah long ago caused his prophet to write: “Why do the [nationsj rage, and the people imagine a vain thing? The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take, cotmsel together, against the Lord, and against his anointed, saying, Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us. He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh; the Lord shall have them in derision.” (Ps. 2:14) The present-day rulers of earth who bring forth schemes of so-called “national recovery” would do well to heed the wisdom expressed in the second Psalm, but they will close their eyes and ears entirely to the same. “Then shall he [Jehovah] speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in hi.; sore displeasure. Thou [Christ] shalt break them with a rod of iron; thou shalt dash them in pieces like a. potter’s vessel.”—Ps. 2: 5, 9.
50 In his communication to the people King Darius continued to magnify the supremacy and majesty of Jehovah God: "He delivereth and rescucth, and be worketh signs and wonders in heaven and in earth, who hath delivered Daniel from the power of the lions.” (Dan. (>: 27) Jehovah’s power and goodnes; manifested in the deliverance and rescuing of his faithful ones are exemplified in modern times in his dealing with his remriant and the rescuing of them from the "lions’ den” experiences. Time and again Satan and his agents have committed overt acts in this great conspiracy against God and his hidden on*, s and have attempted to bring about the death of members of the remnant, and time and again God has rescued and delivered them. When the Devil sent forth his mob to take Jesus, the Beloved of Jehovah, the great Master said to the leaders of the mob that he could ask and receive from his Father twelve legions of angels for his protection. (Matt. 26:53) To his faithful witnesses, the remnant now on earth, who have put their trust wholly in Jehovah God, the Most High now says: “For he shall give his angels charge over tb.ee. to keep thee in all thy ways.” ( Ps. 91:11) When the Catholic hierarchy and other Satanic agents, including the strong-arm squad, lay vile hands upon Jehovah’s witnesses, these faithful ones are sure that Jehovah in his own good way and time will rescue them and deliver them from the “lions’ mouths”. “The Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly.” (2 Pet. 2:9) In the day of Jehovah’s wrath these wicked and malicious, false accusers that now rule the world will find no deliverance. Their gods will be utterly helpless and unable to deliver them in their great ordeal. To those wicked agents of Satan, who seek now to destroy the faithful remnant because
Deci'.uber 15, 193-1
WATCHTGWER.
3S1
they arc giving the testimony of Jesus Christ, it will be truly said: “Where are thy gods that thou hast made thee? let them arise, if they can save thee in the time of thy trouble.’’ (Jcr. 2: 28) Tn vain the rulers of “Christendom” have made unto themselves gods. (Isa. 44:17) Those hypocrites and oppressors will find no hope of escape or deliverance.—Jer. 25 : 35.
53 Says the prophecy of Daniel: “And he worketh signs and wonders in heaven and in earth.” For the aid and comfort of the faithful witnesses Jehovah God has revealed to them the meaning of these great signs and wonders which lie has worked in heaven and in earth. lie has shown them the two great “signs”, that is, the organization of Satan and the organization of Jehovah, and at Armageddon God will prove to all that these signs are true. Jehovah has worked signs and wonders in earth by using his faithful remnant, and in due time these also will bo confirmed as true. —Rev. 12:1-5; Ez'-k. 12:11; 24:24; Joel 2:30,31.
C2 The rescue of Daniel from the lions’ den foretold the rescue and delivery of the remnant from the eruel and unrighteous law and from the ravages that will come upon the earth during Armageddon. The remnant’s being on earth after the destruction of the wicked at Armageddon will prove that they arc on earth only by the power and grace of the Almighty God, and this will be a vindication of Jehovah’s name and power, and all creation then must acknowledge that Jehovah is God and that Christ is his chosen One to the glory of the Most High. Satan put forth his strongest efforts to destroy Noah, Daniel and Job, and Jehovah rescued and delivered these men and then caused to be written that he did so because those men were strong in faith and in their obedience to God and hence were righteous in his sight. (Ezck. 14: 14, 20) Likewise the righteousness of the remnant is the reason why God will deliver them. Their righteousness is not by reason of their own inherent goodness, but because they are in Christ Jesus, have full faith and confidence in God’s beloved One, and arc wholly devoted to God and his kingdom. Contrasting the wicked of the world with the meek and faithful remnant God’s Word declares: “Treasures of wickedness profit nothing: but righteousness dcliver-eth from death.” (Prov. .10: 2) “Riches profit not in the day of wrath: but righteousness delivereth from death. ’ ’—Prov. 11: 4.
“’Daniel’s life and course of action continued to be a testimony to the name of Jehovah: “So this Daniel prospered in the reign of Darius, and in the reign of Cyrus the Persian.” (Dan. 6:28) Cyrus, who foreshadowed Christ and who was a nephew of Darius the Mede, did not begin to reign as a successor in power to Darius until the end of the reign of Darius. This suggests that the one-thousand-year reign of Christ Jesus does not begin until after the destruction of Satan and his organization, which results in the vindication of Jehovah’s name. That would mean
that the millennial reign of Christ, together with his 144.000 associates, begins immediately following Armageddon. The battle of the great day of God Almighty will be fought by Christ Jesus as the Executioner and the Vindicator of Jehovah's name. Jehovah’s name being vindicated, then the great antitypical Cyrus succeeds the great antitypical Darius and takes over the entire rulership of the world.
53 The continued prosperity of Daniel would seem to picture the continued opportunity for service by the remnant while on earth and after Armageddon has been fought. Such opportunity for the remnant then would not be as “witnesses” to the name of Jehovah, seeing that Jehovah himself has then risen up for a testimony of his power and majesty. Tt would appear that these opportunities of the remnant after Armageddon would be as helpers and comforters of the people. (Mic. 5:7) The Scriptures do not indicate how long the remnant will be on the earth after Armageddon.
85 In the prophecy of Zechariah Jehovah speaks of Christ as “the man that is my fellow”. (Zech. 13:7; see Pre para lion, page 258) The reign of Cyrus pictured the reign of Christ Jesus, “the man that is my [that is, Jehovah the Great Darius’] fellow.” The name Cyrus, according to the Greeks, was supposed to mean “the sun”. God’s prophet speaks of Christ Jesus as the “Sun of righteousness”. (Mal. 4:2) During the thousand years the reign of Christ Jesus is confined to this earth, and during the period of those years Jehovah reigns over all of his organization throughout the universe. (Eph. 4: 6) “And the seventh angel sounded; and there were great voices in heaven, saying, The kingdoms of this world arc become the kingdoms of our Lord [Jehovah, the Great Darius], and of his Christ [the Great Cyrus]; and he shall reign for ever and ever.” (Rev. 11:15) These precious truths were recorded in times of old for the special help of the remnant in these days of great trial and peril. As they are discerned the unfolding of Jehovah’s prophecies is seen to be a manifestation of God’s loving-kindness toward the remnant, and they in the language of Paul exclaim: “O the. depth of the riches both of the wisdom and kno wcdge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out 1 For who hath known the mind of the Lord? or who hath been his counsellor?”— Rom. 11:33, 34.
58 The year ending has been one of varied experiences, fraught with much peril. The “lions’ mouths” of the wicked organization have often opened to swallow up the faithful remnant, but the great Jehovah God, whom we serve, has delivered his beloved hidden ones from the hands of the wicked. Prison cells will not deter the faithful in giving the testimony to the name of the Most High. By the grace of God the faithful will continue to advertise the King ami his kingdom, and to magnify the name of the .Most High.
382
Sfte WATC HT0WER.
Brooklyn, N. Y.
Trusting implicitly in his everlasting arms to bear them up they will continue to march forward and sing: “There is none like unto the God of Jeshurun.” —Deut. 33: 26, 27.
QUESTIONS FOR STUDY
K 1. What great truth was reflected by the unchangeablencss of the law of the Medea and Persians? Point out illustrations of the application of that truth as it involves the integrity of God’S creatures.
11 2-5. Why'did those conspirators desiie the death of Daniel? Why did they refer to Daniel as “of the children of the captivity of Judah’’ and to his worship of Jehovah in disregard of the king’s decree? Show that the same policy is practiced by the Devil through his representatives today.
Y 6-8. Account for Darius’ standing by his decree though seeing the injustice involved. How does this illustrate the position of the rulers of the present time? Explain and apply verse If.
9-13. What was the occasion, and the purpose, of the assembly mentioned in verse 15? How did that procedure illustrate present-day practice? What was foreshown in Darius' delivering Daniel to the conspirators to be cast into the lions’ den? What further light is shed upon this matter in the record at Mark 13; 9 and at John 19: 11 ? Explain whether Daniel’s position at that point was one of peril, and why. Compare therewith the position of Jehovah’s witnesses at the present time. Quote other scriptures similarly showing the position of those faithfully devoted to the Lord.
U 14, 15. Point out the signilicance of Darius’ statement in the latter part of verse 16. Quote other scriptures of assurance to the same effect. Account for the absence of record of any response by Daniel on that occasion, and point out the lesson contained therein for those now in the position there foreshadowed.
K 16, 17. Eor what pm pose and with what effect was special precaution taken to assure that Daniel should not escape the lions’ mouths? Why did the king himself seal the den? What was foreshown therein?
H 18, 19. What was prophetically pictured in the king’s passing the night “fasting’’, and ‘sleepless’? Point out the timeliness of the apostle’s words of Ephesians 6: 18.
1j 20-23. Apply th.' expression of the king’s solicitude as shown in verse 19. What was foreshown in his waiting until morning before seeking assurance concerning Daniel, and in his crying out in inquiry to Daniel as to his deliverance from the lions?
f 24-28. Why could Daniel, still in the lions’ den, greet the king in the words as recorded in verse 21? Why had the lions not hurt Daniel, according to his words and their meaning? flow does the present position of Jehovah’s witnesses fit this part of the prophetic picture? Quote
other scriptures of assurance and expressions of r>-spon«e and devotion recorded for the aid and comfoit of Jehovah’s faithful witnesses of today.
$ 29-32. Of what was Daniel's preservation a proof and a piophecy? How does that fact serve to strengthen and comfort the faithful remnant at the present time? Show that their position and course of action are in'accord with the information and admonition provided by Jehovah through Christ Jesus and his apostles.
V 33, 34. How do verse 23 here and other scriptures show that, and why, Jehovah has pleasure in preserving Ids faithful witnesses? Point out what is pictured by Darius’ having Daniel taken up out of the lions’ den.
K 35, 36. With other scriptures, show whether, in verse 24, the command given and the action taken were in harmony with God’s law rind expressed judgment.
U 37-40. What is the evidence that Jehovah’s righteous Judge is now conducting his court of inquiry, and that the purposed result thereof is being accomplished? How do other scriptures further express the ultimate lot of the conspirators as pictured in the hitter part of Daniel 6: 24 7
K 41. Apply the picture piescnted in verse 25, and suppoit vsitli other scriptures referring to the universal peace the proclamation of which was heie foreshadowed.
T 42, 43. What was the result of King Darius’ decree recorded in verse 26? What was foreshadowed therein?
1; 44-48. Show, with this (verso 26) and other scriptures, whether Armageddon (a) will terminate the efforts of im-ri to establish a permanent government, (b) will serve to emphasize and confirm the certainty, purpose and justice of Jehovah’s judgments, and (c) will settle the question of supremacy and of who shall rule the world.
H 49. According to the second Psribn, how does Jehovah regard the efforts of present-day rulers ami the attitude of the people? What is his judgment awaiting these nations, as there expressed?
K 50, 51. Relate instances in which Jehovah has ‘delivered and rescued’. In which he has ‘worked signs and wonders in heaven and in earth’.
IT 52. What was foretold in the rescue of Daniel from the lions’ den?
K 53, 54. Referring to verse 28: Point out the relationship of the reign of Darius to that of Cyrus, and the prophetic significance of such relationship. Apply the concluding statement, “This Daniel prospered in the reign of Darius, and in the reign of Cyrus.’’
If 55, 56. Point out the relationship hereto of Zechariah 13: 7, Malachi 4: 2, Ephesians 4: 6, and Revelation 11: 15; also the fitness of Romans 11:33,34 as an expression called forth by the manifestation of Jehovah’s foreknowledge and of his loving-kindness to the faithful remnant of the piefi-ent time. How will these now prove their appreciation of that loving-kindness and of their present privilege?
RICH, BEAUTIFUL, ENTRANCING, THRILLING
My dear Brother Rutherford:
1 just can’t keep from writing you a little of my appreciation of the Lord’s blessing. The last Watchtowers, explaining tlie ‘handwriting on the wall’, give me a thrill I just can't contain. The fulfilment of that prophetic drama is so exactly and minutely traced in the physical facts of recent years that it cannot be otherwise than true, in a general vvay at the very least, as anyone who has lived through it can well testify.
My heart rejoices continually in the ever increasing light and understanding the Lord so giaeiously gives us. That I should ever catch so clear a vision of the glory of the Lord is almost more than I can realize. And to think, almost all of this increased light and understanding has come after I thought I already had it. And now it is clear that the poet had it right: “and still there is more to follow.’’
How rich, how beautiful, how glorious, how entrancing and thrilling it all is: the story of Job, The Revelation, Ezekiel, Esther, Ruth. Zechariah, Daniel, etc.! As the poet says:
“It lifts me up to things above;
It bears on eagle wings;
It gives my joyful soul a taste,
And makes me, even here, to feast
With Jesus’ priests and kings.”
It would seem, Brother Rutherford, that the Lord has caused to be used certain statements, expressions and words as kevs, in opening to us the treasure stores of knowledge and understanding of his Word and purposes. Such, for instance, as:
Prophecy—understood only when physical facts in fulfilment are compared; Jehovah; name; Jehovah’s organization; Cl.nst Jesus, Jehovah’s executive officer; vindication of Jehovah's name; regal power; overlaid; Devil overreaches; int'grity: the use of angels; and including the definition of lore: "the perfect expression of unselfishness”; and of holiness: “complete devotion to God”: etc. Just as one has to know bow to use a key, the careful study and understanding of tlu'i-e points have aided me to see the vision that the Loid promised “young men” would see.
Another thing I know you will be glad to know is, that after ‘eldeiing’ for twenty-live or thirty years and going through all that nightmare of class trouble I was glad to sec the temple cleansed. And let me tell you something about that, will you please? I have not yet seen a single word tl.ot y.,u have said about that that is at all out of the way. If there is one single individual in all this wide world who doesn’t like this cleansing of the temple, it is the best possible proof he
L'ec;:mi5Fr 15, 1931
Tile WATCHTOWER.
383
can offer that bn is not of the temple clnt-3. And I am not .■feeling badly toward anybody, either.
Well I know it I were teihng you all this face to face before I had hardly got through you would ask me how the witness work was getting on in these parts.
When we camo here live years ngo we found only two Jw’s, away out in the country, afoot (no car). They were alite, though,-and they ate still alive; also a pioneer just leaving the teriiloty. They all sail], “Yon can’t do nothing in Sulphur, in Davi-, in Murray county. It’s hard territory.” We said we are hero to stay, so we will have to go see them. We have been over the county hou-e to house three times straight, and the towns in every' testimony period, and last spring a troupe of pioneers came into the county and they worked it out, and the towns and business closely. Now there are a lot of people more or less interested, and several squarely on the Lord’s side. Several ft'alchtovy <-.< and GoMui Ayas are earning here, and there ate even phonograph records to lie heard hereabouts.
If this sounds good to you, it may sound eten better when I toll you that not once lia\o we stopped (yes, ‘stop’ is right) to do so-called “preaching” (public speaking), and, what is more, we have done it rill jovially. Truly, the way the Lord has provided is the best way to witness the truth; and we are glad to du it Uis way.
It Las been intensely interesting to me to watch the progress of the truth and the witnessing. The use of the radio, and then the tniii«cription machines, and now this little phonograph with the fcur-and-one-hali’-niinute records. And talk about a brief, pointed [testimony]: it looks like the last word.
You know, in 1925, at Indianapolis convention, at a service meeting I Was asked to demom-tiate a ten-minute ••tarvass”. I completed in ten minutes without hurry, and was asked to repent, and did it again in the same time. When I returned home to Forth Worth I reduced that time in denioii.-tratiijg to seven minutes. And now you have me beat away yonder. When I beard that little record, so deliberate, so plain and so forceful and so much, 1 just heaved :>. sigh uf joy'. What a boon to the worker! While they are reading the card one can be getting the phonograph ready, and while it is going they are deciding what they are going to do; and all so quick. Evon the card method alone is better than anything yet. The other Sunday we stopped at the first Louse. Sister went in. I booked our starting time. The witness was given and a placement made. We drove away', opcuing two gates, and were at the next house a quarter of a mile away in exactly ten minutes.
Yours in His love and favor,
Geo. 5L Kea.
SERVICE APPOINTMENTS
T. E. BANKS
W. J. THORN
Chattanooga. Tenn.___.Tan. 8,9
KnoxHlle. T.nn......- ” 10, IL
Johiibon City. Tenn. .. ” 12, 13
Menukiin Citj, Tenn. *’ 15, tG
Lebanon, Tvnr:....... ”	17, IS
NasliviHe, Tenn. ........ ** 19, 20
Clarksville. Tenn.Jan. 22, 23
.Memphis, Tenn......... ”	24, 25
Trumann, Ark........... ”	20,27
S.irdh, Mi<.s.......... ”	29, 30
Sledge, Ml- •.....Jan. 31, Feb. 1
Clarksdale, Miss......Feb. 2, 3
G. H. DRAPER
Salem, N. J.........«...Jan,	3, 4
Wilmington, Del....... ”	5,6
Chester. Pa............ ”	8,9
V » r Chester, Pa..... ”	19
Oxford, Pa............. "	I I.
Heilwood, pa........... ”	12
L:in<H«br, Pa......... ,r	13, 1 I
Rlieptns, Pa........... u	16
York, Pa............... ”	17.18
Littletoun. Pn........Jan.
Harridnirg, Fa........ ”
High 8p«ro, Fa........ ”
Carlisle, Fa. ........ ”
Reading, Pa........... ”
Pottstown, Pa......... ”
Bn vertown, Pa........ ”
Linfield, Pa.......... ”
Norristown, Pa........ Feb.
19
20, 2 I
23
2 1
25, 26
•0. 31
Mills, N. Mex	„Jnn.	2		Marfa, Tev. .....		Jan.	20
SpH tiger, N. Me.v		”	3	Mertzon, Tex. . .		22
Trilliiliul, Colo		"	4 11	San Angelo, Tev	If	23
Albuquerque. N. Mex,	"	8, !>	Robert !.<»<», Te.x.		24
A latnogordo, N. Mox. ..	’»	IL	Big Spring, Te.x.		 ”	25
Hili, N.Mex		”	12	Colorado, Tex. .		 ”	26
Drilling. N.Mex. 			”	13	Swceiwaler, 'J’ex		 ”	27. 2S
Sliver City, N.Mex. ..	”	15	Snyder, 'Je\-				”	30
El Paso, Tex		" 17, is	Lamesa, Tex			31
M. L. HERR
S. IL TOUTJIAN
Meyersdale, Pa...Jan. 10,11
Markleysburg, Ibu	”	12,13
(‘onnMUvillo, F:t.....-	”	15,16
Rices Landing. Fa.... ”	17, IS
Waynesburg, Fa. _____ "	19,20
A. H. MACMILLAN
Providence. R. I. .... Jan. 3,4
Now Haven, Conn...... ”	5. 6
Hartford. Conn......... ”	8.9
Bridgeport, Conn..... ” 10, 11
Darien, Conn.........- ” 12, 13
Port Chester, N. Y. n 15,10
Brine, Pa.............Jan.	22, 23
Marietta. Ohio ........ ”	24,25
Gallipolis, <»hio ..... ”	20,27
Ashland, Ky............ "	29,30
Portsmouth, Ohio Jan. 31, Feb. 1
Yonkers, N.Y......Jan. 17,18
New York, N. Y........ ”	19, 20
Jersey Cit\, N.J...... ”	22,23
Pajonne, N.J.......... ”	24,25
Newark, N.J........... ”	26,27
Bloomfield, N. J...... ”	29, 30
Anniston, Ala........Jan.	1
( hatfanoogu, Tenn.	..	”	2,3
Dunlap, Tenn.......... ”	4
Marud, Tenn...........  ”	5
Rnoxtille, Tenn....... ’*	6, 7
Johnson City, Torn.	..	°	9
Bi ishd. Twm..........  ”	10
Kinvport, Tenn........*•	11
J.ew Tazewell, Tenn.	” 12, 13
Luf troll, Tenn. ..... ”	15
Udkdulv, Tenn......... ”	16
J. C. WATT
Marietta, Ohio .......Jan. 2,3
GlotlAer, Ohio ....... ”	4
Athens, Ohio ......... ’*	5
Shav>n,le. Ohio ...... *’	6
Crook" ille, Ohio .... ”	8, 9
Zincline, OHo ........ ”	10,	11
Cambridge. Ohio ...... ”	12,13
Pro.Mh.ui, Ohio ...... ”	15
Coshocton, Ohio ...... ”	16
Lebanon- Tenn. _______ Jan.	17,18
Naslmlle, Tenn........ ” 19,20
Smvrna, Tenn.......... ”	22
Milton, Tenn........... ”	23
Greenbrier. Tenn...... ’*	21
Claiksdlle, Tenn. ...... "	25
Lovington Tenn........ ”	26
Jackson, Tenn......... **	27
D.veiJung, Tenn....... ”	29
Covington, Tenn, ...... ”	30
Memphis, Tenn. ....Jan.31,1’eb. 1
Newcom erst own. Ohio Jan. 17 New Philad’a, Ohio .. ” IT 19 Canton, Ohio .......... "	2 >,21.
Ma>Ml!en, Ohio ........ ”	22, 2 f
Dalton, Ohio .......... "	25
Akron, Ohio ........... “	2G 28
Illyria, Ohio ......... ”	30
Lorain, Ohio ......Jan. 31, Feb. 1
Cleveland, Ohio ......Feb. 2 G
SOUND CAR NO. 1—T. E. KLEIN
E. D. ORRELL
Long Beach, Calif.	....Jan.	3,4
Santa Ana, Calif. .	..... ”	5, 6
Rherside, Calif. ...		 ”	8, 9
Monrovia. Calif. ...		 ”	10, 11
Rosemead, (‘alif. ...		 ■’	12, 13
Pasadena, Calif. ...		 ”	15, 10
Glendale, Calif			 ”	17,18
Ventura, Calif........Jan. 19, 20
Santa Barbara, Calif. ”	22
Faso Rubles, Calif. .. ” 23,24 Pacific Groxe, Calif. .. ”	25
Santa Cruz, Calif..... ” 26,27
Sun Jose, Calif....... ” 29. 30
S.Francisco, Calif. Jan. 31, Feb. 1
Sparta, Ga.............Jan.	1-3
Tennille, Ga............ ”	4-6
(Jordon, Ga............. ”	8-10
Wrightsville,	Ga...... ”	11-13
Su aiusboro, Ga......... ”	15-17
SOUND CAR NO. 2—GEO. YOUNG
Cochran, Ga.........Jan.	18-29
Soperton, Ga......... ”	22-2 4
Metter. Ga........... ”	25-27
Lumber City, Ga..... ”	29-31
McKae, Ga........._.Feb. 1-3
J. C. RAINBOW
Belton, Mo...........Jan.
Archie, Mo.......-..._ "
Collins, Mo..........  "
Macks Creek, Mo....... ”
Crocker, Mo. —......— ”
Lebanon. Mo........... ”
ButTilo, Mo.......... •’
Bolivar, Mo........... "
Arcola, Mo............ "
Golden City. Mo....... ”
Ash Grove, Mo. „...... ”
5	Springfield, Mo....... Jan. 18,19
6	Cabool, Mo.............. ”	20
8	Macomb, Mo.............. ”	22
9	Billing*. Mo............ ”	23
10	Larussell, Mo........... ”	24
11	Carthnge, Mo............ ”	25
12 Alba. Mo.............«...	”	26
13	Joplin, Mo.............. ”	27,28
15	Monett, Mo............ ’*	30
10	Verona, Mo.............. ”	31
17	Fiotem, Mo.............Feb.	1
Roanoke, Ala.........Jam	1-3
■Ipclika. Ala........ ”	4-0
Notnsulu-a, Ala...... ”	S-10
Vuitin Springs, Ala.	.. "	11-13
Lufaula, Ala......... ”	15-17
Elba, Ala..............Jan.	1- 23
Opp, Ala................ "	22 21
Au<lalu.-.ia, Ala....... ”	2’5 27
Georidana, Ala.......... ”	g'.i-Xl
Wajiiejboro, Hiss. .. Feb.	1-3
SOUND CAR NO. 3—H. G. HENSCHEL
Syb-oitrr, Ga........Jan.	1-3
Adel, V.a.............. ”	4 0
Bo-ton, Ga............. ”	S-10
Meigs, Ga............. "	11-13
Donalsonville, G.i. —	’’	15-17
Blakely, Ga.	 ......Jan.	1-’-20
Camilla, Ga............ "	22 21
Arlm.-ron, Ga.......... ”	2.5 27
Edison, Ga............. ”	29-31
Fort Gaines,	Ga.... Fib,	1-3
INDEX FOR 1934
JANUARY 1
Hope .................................. 3
iiie Nations ....................... (5
Inriuute of Jiis Government .......... Di
OppoMUvn ........................... 12
bouillon ........................... 13
Annual Report ...................... 13
A Uruiy Blessed year	(Letter) ....... 15
Radio .service ....................... Id
JHtidlng the People ................... 2
“Dividing the People” Testimony Period 2
1'co/ ZfooA ..........................  2
MAY 1
His Covenants (Pan 3) ............... 131
Important .......................... B 2
Inauguration ....................... 132
Reqiiirmnents ...................... 13!
Protest ............................ 1 12
Good Hopes for 1934-1935 -........... 142
Service Leaders and Regional Directors 112
Radio Service ...................... 144
“Nations' Hope” Testimony Period .... 130
World Rccoteryf .................... 130
Literature for the Blind .............. 130
SEPTEMBER 1
Wicked Spirits (Fart 1> ............ 239
Epitome .......................... 259
The Rebellion ...-............... 260
‘Sons ot God” .................... 2 <1
Wickedness ........-.............. - >2
Resurrection and Sin-Offering .... 2>>6
Exalting Jehovah’s Name ............ 26b
Noah Dne< Well.(Letter) ............ 2/1
Radio Sei vice ..................... 2 72
Kingdom Praise Period ............. 25b
Notice of Annual Meet hr; .......... 238
JANUARY 15
“Satisfied with Thy Likeness” ........ 19
True .Meaning ..............■....... 21
Order ot Resurrection .............. 31
Application ........................ 2G
Supreme Sacrilice Foreshadowed ....... 28
Loiters .............................. 30
Prison-Keepers Alarmed ............. 30
Rervlee Appointments ................. 32
/JuiWmf/ hie People .................. is
Soliciting .........................   Ls
advertising Watchtower Programs ...... 18
MAY 15
His Covenants (Part 4) ................ 7-17
Unto Zion .......................... 147
Mho Are Ministers ...............   ]5t)
Reflecting His Glory ............... 150
Liberty ............................ 152
Vision ............................. 153
Satan and Egypt and Assyria .......... 161
1 lie Real Sacrificial Lamb .......... 157
Loners ..............................  IGO
Service Appointments ................. K>0
Transcription Mat Hues ............... lid
SEPTEMBER 15
Wicked Spirits (Part 2) ........... 275
Final Judgment ..............-... 27s
Sentenced to Death .............. 27b
Communicauon ................... 2-'O
Deceivers ......................   21
Paramount Truth ................. 2S2
Safety ........................... 2s2
Temple Company ................... 2 - J
Jonadab Company .................. 2 3
The Body of The Christ .............. 2 '“>
Letters ............................ 2->7
FEBRUARY 1
Hope of a Tree ..................... 05
rrochumition ....................  33
The Tive ........................ 3.)
The Stump ........................ 41
Purpose of Covenant	by	Sacriiive ... 42
Job’s Exp‘“uemes	prophetic ......... 41
Letters ............................ 4G
Radio Service ...................... 48
Memorial ........................... 31
Convention ..........................31
Lectures by Transcription .......... 31
JUNE 1
His Covenants (Part 5) ............ 163
'The Remnant bived .....  ...... 103
Tim pie Open ...................  IG5
Keturah ......................,... 166
His Organisation ................ 167
By Adoption ..................... 169
Earth’s New Ruhuj*: , Hnw Chosen .. 171
Was Jesus Part God,	Part	Man? ... 173
Heard First Tim* in	Grenada ....... 175
Toronto Convention	........... 1G2
Factory and Oilire Closed Two Weeks .. 1G2
OCTOBER 1
The Crucible (Part 1) .............. 291
Questions for Study ...	.......... 2us
Purpose of Gathering the Saints .... 298
F.celesiustieibm Indicted ........... 3 *1
Radio Service ....................... 3<>4
Kingdom Praise Period ............... 290
Ha< Your Subscription Expired? .... 2b*n
Public Lectures by TrnnM nplion ..... 299
Notice ot Annual Meeting ............ 290
FEBRUARY 15
Tree nf Hope ........................ 51
“Seven limes” ..................... 51
“Lowest of Men” ................... 52
“I'ndorstamling Returned” ......... 56
New 'free ......................... 57
Law Covenant Prophetic .............. 59
Birth of The Son of Man.............. 61
Letters ..........................-.. 03
Service Appointments ..............   61
Transcription Machines .............. So
Memorial ............................ 50
MARCH 1
His Name (Part 1> .................. <*7
iMvemint—Law and New .............. OS
Conspiracy ........................ 68
Shepherds ....................... <•*>
Consistency ....................... 70
The Plagues ....................... 71
(inly Perfect Mau liver I loin ...... 75
Jehovah Hoars Sighing Prisoners ..... 77
Traimcripiion Maeidncs .............. GG
'thanksgiving Testimony ............ G’>
Memorial ............................ 00
MARCH 15
Mis Name (Part 2) ................... «3
Plague Three ...................... S3
Plague Ten ........................ 90
Firstborn ......................... 01
Other Types Fuhilled .............. 92
Who May Celebrate the Feast ....... 93
Satan’s Organization: Egypt ......... Pl
Thanksgiving Testimony .............. 82
Ti(inscription Machines ............. 82
Memorial ........................... 8*2
Los Angeles Convention .............. 82
APRIL 1
His Covenants (Part 1) ............... 99
Points ............................ 100
New Covenant ...................... 101
Mediator ......................... 19.3
Advocate .......................... H'5
The Covenant by .Sacrifice .......... 197
Letters ............................. 109
Lectures by Transcription ............ 98
Has Your Subscription Expired? ....... 99
Announcing Cocnp.iuv Meetings ........ 9s
Literature for the Blind ............. 9s
JUNE 15
His Covenants (Part G) ............... 179
Foreshado ved ...................... 179
M ini Taken Xr ..................... J so
Time of Judgment ................... 1'0
The Song ............................ IM
His Name .........................   1S3
Hh Prophet ........................  1'5
The Patience of J< b ................. is 6
CmrapUng of ChriMianity .............. 1U9
Letters ..............f........................ 191
Beyond the Grave, Hi* Works ................ 178
JULY 1
His Covenants (Part 7) ............    195
Remnant Brought Jn ................. 196
R< quirements ...................... 197
Purpose of Justification ............. 292
Temple of God and Antichrist.......... 20 X
The Riglit May (Resolution, Jonadnbs) 20i
Radio Service .............-.......... 298
London Convention .................... 191
fh’ymtd the Grave, Ifix Wotks ........ 194
“Nations* Hope” T« sUnrnuy Period .... 194
Factory and O.lice Closed Two Meeks .. 191
JULY 15
His Covenants (Part 8) ................ 2H
Restitution .......................  211
Times uf Refreshing ..............   213
Tabernacle of David ................ 215
Covenant by Sacrifice: Requirements .. 218
Life for Mankind by a Ransom..........220
Proclaiming Earths New Leadership .. 222
Service Appointments ................. 221
Public Lectures by Transcription ..... 210
Radio and the Printed Word ........... 210
Announcing Company Meetings .......... 210
AUGUST 1
His Kindness (Part 1) ..............   227
Cities of Refuge.................... 227
“Lnawares” ......................... 229
The Avenger ........................ 250
Eiders ............................. 232
Kin gdom Proclamation ................ 231
Satan’s Counterfeit of Hie True ...... 236
Letters .............................. 2”s
London Convention .................... 226
Advertising datchtower Programs ...... 226
Transcription .Machinos .............. 22G
OCTOBER 15
The Crucible (Part 2) ...........   307
Questions for Study ............. -”>11
An Assyria in Modern Style ........ 315
Place of the Sin-Atonement ........ 318
Service Appointments .............. 320
Angela ............................ 306
Announcing Company Meetings ....... 3m*
Servant's Testimony Period ........ 300
Notice of Annual Meeting ......... 3o*»
NOVEMBER 1
Fen^t of Conspirators (i’ait	1) .... 323
rpihiHte. ........:.............. 32,’
Belshazzar and His Fe.ist	...... 323
, Handwriting'.................... 32G
Christians Persecuted : Mhy	Fenutllcd 3 .2
Lettvrx ....... .................   ”.:i
Phonneraph Records a Blissing ...... 331
Radio Service ......................  ‘6
Atlanta Convention ................. 322
Servant’s Testimony Period	..... 2.22
Angels ............................. 322
NOVEMBER 15
Feast of Conspirators (Pait 2) ........ 339
Whom Dani<4 Foreshadow ed ........... 3 11
Questions for Study..................3 1"
Temptation and Fall of E< drsi:: ,ihFin 3*b
The Issue and the Witnesses ........... 35Q
Service Apiiointments .................. 352
Jehovah ................................................. 3.3b
Phonographs ............................—. 33s
Atlanta Convention ..................... 33s
DECEMBER 1
“Lions’ Mouths” (Part 1)	...’’>5
Epitome ........................... *’56
Betrayers ......................... ‘.39
Faithful M'itnesses .................3'2
Que'-tmns for Study ................. 3c •
Chief One of the New Cteation............’65
Praise the Lord for .Truths	d.Hkr) ... ’ '’7
Radio Service ......................... 36s
J cur Btio’c for 1935 ................... ”5	1
1935 Calendar ........;............... 2.51
Jthnvah ..........-.................... 331
APRIL 15
His Covenants (Part 2) .............. 115
Relationship ...................... U5
The Blond ......................... 116
With Whom Maile ................... 117
Israel and Judah .................. 120
Ransom Forodiad »wed in Passover .... 122
God’s Empire and Its Rulers ......... 124
“Job’s Comforters” .................. 12G
Doings ot God (Letter) .............. 12
Radio and the Printed Word .......... 114
Transcription Machines .............. 114
AUGUST 15
Uis Kindness (Parr 2) .............. 213
Seeking Refuge ................... 2 *4
Applies When? .................... 217
Others ........................... 248
‘.May Be Hid’ .................... 248
Method of Study .................. 250
Redemption bv a Ran-om ............. 251
Job’*, “Friends” ................... 253
Tabernacle of the Ltvv Covenant .... 254
Ktf/hfer>ug Ruler ................... 242
Kingdom Praise Period .............. 212
DECEMBER 15
“Lions’ Mouths”	(Port 2) ................ 371
Safety ...................................  7	1
God's Angels ......................... ‘‘Tu
Retribution ........................... 37s
Decree of Peace........................;7.»
Rich, Beautiful. Entrancing (Letter) .. :*'2 Service Appointments ........................
index for 1934 ......................... ’ ■ f
5 ear Book for 1935 ......................^70
1935 Calendar ..........................
Jehovah ........................................ ... ->'» »