Safe Food for Everyone
EATING wholesome food is a delight. But as we have seen, such food is not always easy to come by. Worse yet, there are millions of people who do not have the luxury of worrying about whether their food is sufficiently safe or healthful. They are preoccupied with finding enough food just to survive. Can it be that God intended for things to be this way?
Think about it. When God put man and woman on the earth, did they have any cause to worry about food? No, not at all! The account in the Bible book of Genesis says: “Jehovah God made to grow out of the ground every tree desirable to one’s sight and good for food.” (Genesis 2:9) So Adam and Eve had a delightful variety of foods as well as an abundant, endless supply. The God who created them knew precisely what they needed nutritionally; he also knew what would bring them joy. Granted, we are not in the garden of Eden today. But has God changed his original purpose for mankind and the earth?
We have sound reason to believe that soon everyone on earth will enjoy healthful, wholesome food in abundance! This belief can be a powerful aid to our keeping a balanced attitude on the issue of food safety today. Such a hope, if sure and reliable, can help us to avoid developing fanatic or extreme views.
Why can we be so sure that life will soon be different? Keen students of the Word of God know that we are currently living in “the last days” of this system of things. The present system is governed by human wisdom, which in many fields of life is uncertain and relies on trial and error. When it comes to techniques of processing food, there is considerable uncertainty as to whether they are safe or hazardous. Such uncertainty breeds fear, discord, and disunity.—2 Timothy 3:1-5.
Mankind’s Creator has promised to replace this present system of things with a completely new one. His original purpose—for the entire earth to be a paradise like the garden of Eden, populated with a happy and healthy human family—will be fulfilled. The unifying force of perfect godly wisdom will then fill the earth. (Isaiah 11:9) Uncertain human wisdom will no longer prevail. The new system of God’s making will dispel all need for doubt about the safety of our food. Is it not logical to conclude that the God who created humans would also understand our nutritional needs?
Perfect Food From the Creator
The Bible contains vivid prophecies about living conditions under the coming system of things. The prophet Isaiah wrote: “[God] will certainly give the rain for your seed with which you sow the ground, and as the produce of the ground bread, which must become fat and oily. Your livestock will graze in that day in a spacious pasture. And the cattle and the full-grown asses cultivating the ground will eat fodder seasoned with sorrel, which was winnowed with the shovel and with the fork.”
Isaiah’s prophecy also states: “Jehovah of armies will certainly make for all the peoples, in this mountain, a banquet of well-oiled dishes, a banquet of wine kept on the dregs, of well-oiled dishes filled with marrow, of wine kept on the dregs, filtered.” The New American Bible renders that last phrase, “a feast of rich food and choice wines, juicy, rich food and pure, choice wines.”—Isaiah 25:6; 30:23, 24.
Does that sound appealing to you? Isaiah’s prophecy assures us that everyone living under God’s new system will have more than enough physical food. Will it be safe to eat? Without a doubt. Another prophecy assures us that God’s people “will actually sit, each one under his vine and under his fig tree, and there will be no one making them tremble.” (Micah 4:4) Such utter security will be guaranteed by God’s Messianic Kingdom, which will take up ruling over all the earth in the near future.—Isaiah 9:6, 7.
Never again will there be uncertainty about whether food is safe or not. On the contrary, we will delight in saying to one another: “Enjoy your meal” or “guten Appetit” or “bon appétit.”
[Blurb on page 12]
Soon everyone on earth will enjoy healthful, wholesome food in abundance
[Picture on page 10]
God promises safe, wholesome food for all

