From Our Readers
Children Leaving Home  I was comforted by the series “When Children Leave Home.” (January 22, 1998) Three of our four children left home three years ago. Though I raised them with the expectation that the time would come for them to leave, I never imagined that three would leave at the same time! I really appreciate the concern the Watch Tower Society shows for the feelings of parents.
M. S., Japan
At the moment, my wife and I are serving as special pioneers, or full-time evangelizers, outside our home state. Your advice on how to show our parents that although we are far away, they are still loved and dear to us really works.
M. M. S., Brazil
I am 11 years old. I did not view household chores as training for being an adult. But these articles have helped me to think differently. Thanks for caring about us young people.
D. U., Yugoslavia
Gorillas  The article “Visiting the Mountain Gorillas” (January 22, 1998) was enjoyable reading. I never thought a human could get so close to gorillas without a violent encounter. In the movies they are usually represented as ferocious beasts. Thanks for such an excellent article.
R. P., Venezuela
Stuttering  My sincere thanks for the article “How I Cope With Stuttering.” (January 22, 1998) Sven Sievers’ experience was especially encouraging to me, since I face a similar struggle. Over the years, the Theocratic Ministry School has helped me to become a more fluent speaker.
E. Z. S., Brazil
The Theocratic Ministry School is conducted every week at local Kingdom Halls of Jehovah’s Witnesses.—ED.
Sven Sievers’ positive attitude in the face of setbacks impressed me. In our congregation there is one brother who is struggling with stuttering. I will now speak to him with more respect and concern.
K. K., Japan
I too have been a stutterer since childhood. You hit the nail on the head when you said that one should try to understand a stutterer rather than pity him. Thanks for this article.
E. C., Italy
Parental Opposition  I just received the January 22, 1998, issue and read “Young People Ask . . . What if My Parents Oppose My Marriage?” I thought I was wrong in opposing my daughter’s getting married. But the article included everything that concerned me—her young age, the prospective mate’s personality, the prospect of her being unevenly yoked to an unbeliever, the possibility of AIDS, and the differences in culture. I pray that this article reaches my daughter’s heart.
N. B., United States
What a well-written article! You touched upon a sensitive subject and dealt with it very nicely. Many different issues were brought up, helping the reader to have an open mind on these matters.
S. C., United States
I have been a full-time evangelizer for eight years. My parents are also Christians, and I had a disagreement with them over my decision to get married. Thank you very much for providing this helpful information.
T. C. F., Tanzania

