How the Congregation Book Study Arrangement Helps Us
 1. How do our five weekly meetings help us?
1 Each of our five weekly meetings is different in its format and purpose. Yet, all of them are important in helping us to “consider one another to incite to love and fine works.” (Heb. 10:24, 25) What are some unique and beneficial features of the Congregation Book Study arrangement?
 2. What benefits come from meeting with a smaller group at the book study?
2 Help to Progress Spiritually: The number of people attending a book study is generally far less than the number attending the other congregation meetings. This makes it easier to develop friendships that are a source of spiritual support. (Prov. 18:24) Have you made an effort to get to know everyone in your book study group, perhaps asking each one to work with you in the ministry? The book study arrangement also enables the book study overseer to know the unique circumstances of each one in the group and to provide personal encouragement.​—Prov. 27:23.
 3. How does the book study arrangement promote commenting as well as attendance by Bible students?
3 Have you invited your Bible students to attend the book study with you? Interested ones who are reluctant to attend our larger meetings may be less nervous about attending a smaller meeting, especially in a private home. The intimate atmosphere makes it easier for young ones and those newly associated to share in commenting. And since the group is smaller, we have more opportunities to participate and praise Jehovah.​—Ps. 111:1.
 4. The book study arrangement may be convenient in what ways?
4 Book studies are generally held at convenient locations throughout the territory. While it is not possible for all to be assigned to the location nearest them, attending our assigned book study may require less travel than attending other congregation meetings. The book study location may also serve as a convenient meeting place for field service.
 5. How may we receive help in the ministry from our book study overseer?
5 Help for the Ministry: The book study overseer is interested in assisting each one to have a regular, meaningful, and joyful share in the ministry. Therefore, he endeavors to work with everyone in the group, giving personal assistance in various features of the ministry. If you find a particular aspect of the ministry to be challenging, such as making return visits, let your book study overseer know. Perhaps he can arrange for you to work with an experienced publisher in the group. Your ability to teach on Bible studies will be refined by paying careful attention to the book study overseer’s good teaching methods as he conducts the book study.​—1 Cor. 4:17.
 6. Why should we seek to benefit from the book study arrangement to the full?
6 What a blessing the Congregation Book Study is! This loving arrangement from Jehovah helps us maintain our sure spiritual footing during the challenging times in which we live.​—Ps. 26:12.

