Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting August 13
Song 20
15 min: Local announcements. Using the suggestions on page 8 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the August 15 Watchtower and the August Awake! In one demonstration, have the publisher use one of the suggestions in paragraph 3 on page 3 of this issue of Our Kingdom Ministry to raise a question that he will answer on the return visit. Discuss “New Circuit Assembly Program.” Announce the date of the next circuit assembly if available.
15 min: Benefiting From Theocratic Subjection. Talk and audience discussion based on chapter 15 of Organized to Do Jehovah’s Will.
15 min: “Worshipping Jehovah as a Family.”a Invite the audience to comment on how they have benefited from sharing in the ministry as a family. One or two comments may be arranged in advance.
Song 48 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting August 20
Song 100
10 min: Local announcements. Discuss “New Special Assembly Day Program,” and announce the date of the next special assembly day if known.
15 min: Start a Bible Study on the Initial Call During September. Audience discussion. During September we will offer the Bible Teach book and endeavor to discuss a few paragraphs with the householder on the initial visit. Review the suggestions in the January 2006 Our Kingdom Ministry insert, and have one or two demonstrations showing how to start a Bible study on the initial call.
20 min: “How the Congregation Book Study Arrangement Helps Us.”b When considering paragraph 5, include comments from the Organized book, page 41, paragraph 2.
Song 6 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting August 27
Song 98
10 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Using the suggestions on page 8 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the September 1 Watchtower and the September Awake!
10 min: ‘Make Friends by Means of the Unrighteous Riches.’ Talk by an elder based on the December 1, 1994, Watchtower, pages 13-18.
25 min: “A Worthy Goal for the New Service Year.”c Interview one or two who served as auxiliary pioneers recently. What adjustments did they make in their schedule? How did they benefit? If available, one of those interviewed could be someone who was able to auxiliary pioneer because of the help and support of others in his household. When discussing paragraph 9, mention the dates of the circuit overseer’s next visit if known.
Song 196 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 3
Song 50
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for August.
15 min: “We Cherish Our Privileges!”d As time permits, invite audience to comment on the cited scriptures.
20 min: “How to Turn Magazine Placements Into Bible Studies.”e Include a brief demonstration of one of the suggestions in paragraph 2. Remind publishers that a Bible study may be reported when it has been conducted two times after the study arrangement was demonstrated and if there is reason to believe that the study will continue.
Song 2 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

