We Cherish Our Privileges!
1 Throughout mankind’s existence, Jehovah has extended to his servants many types of privileges. He has given privileges to them regardless of their gender, age, or station in life. (Luke 1:41, 42; Acts 7:46; Phil. 1:29) What privileges does he extend to us today?
2 Some of Our Privileges: We have the privilege of being taught by Jehovah. (Matt. 13:11, 15) Praising Jehovah by our expressions during congregation meetings is another privilege we enjoy. (Ps. 35:18) When we have opportunities to comment, we do so eagerly. Similarly, if we view each assignment in the congregation as an honor, we will fulfill it to the best of our ability. Do we regularly participate in the privilege of keeping the Kingdom Hall clean and in good repair?
3 Although millions wonder if their prayers are heard by God, we enjoy the privilege of having our prayers heard by the most important Personage in the universe. (Prov. 15:29) Jehovah personally listens to the prayers of his servants. (1 Pet. 3:12) He places no limit on how often we can approach him. What a cherished gift we have, to be able to pray “on every occasion”!​—Eph. 6:18.
4 “God’s Fellow Workers”: One of our finest privileges is that of proclaiming the good news of God’s Kingdom as “God’s fellow workers.” (1 Cor. 3:9) This is a work that brings satisfaction and refreshment. (John 4:34) Jehovah does not have to use humans to accomplish this work, but he has given us this assignment as an expression of his love. (Luke 19:39, 40) In doing so, Jehovah has not given this privilege to just anyone. Those who share in the public ministry must meet and maintain certain spiritual qualifications. (Isa. 52:11) Do we show that we value this privilege by making the ministry an important part of our weekly routine?
5 Privileges from Jehovah make our life rich. (Prov. 10:22) Never take them for granted! By demonstrating that we truly cherish our privileges of service, we please our heavenly Father, the Giver of “every good gift and every perfect present.”​—Jas. 1:17.

