Worshipping Jehovah as a Family
1 In Bible times, family members did many things together. They performed daily chores and primarily worshipped Jehovah as a family. (Lev. 10:12-14; Deut. 31:12) Today, in many places, family members do very little together. However, Christians recognize the value of engaging in activities as a family, especially when it comes to worship. How it must please the Originator of the family to see families worshipping him in unity!
2 Preach Together: Working together to preach the good news strengthens the family bond. Therefore, in addition to accompanying others in the congregation to preach, an elder will also regularly work with his wife and children. (1 Tim. 3:4, 5) Despite having a full schedule, even traveling overseers arrange time to work with their wives in the ministry.
3 Parents who preach with their children are able to help them progress as evangelizers. Not only will children observe their parents’ joy and satisfaction in the ministry but they will see their parents express their own love for Jehovah and for fellow humans. (Deut. 6:5-7) The importance of this does not diminish as children in the home grow older. One couple with three sons between the ages of 15 and 21 continue to accompany them in the ministry on a regular basis. The father said: “We teach them something every time. And we make sure that it is an enjoyable, encouraging experience.”
4 Prepare Together: Families have found it beneficial to prepare for the ministry together. Children often enjoy practice sessions with members of the family taking turns giving the presentation or being the householder. Some use a few minutes at the end of the family study to do this.
5 Our joy is increased when we engage in important and satisfying activities with those we love. How enjoyable it is for family members to work together in the field ministry from house to house as well as in making return visits and conducting Bible studies! As you thus worship Jehovah with your family, you can joyfully declare: “As for me and my household, we shall serve Jehovah.”​—Josh. 24:15.

