Insight on the News
Marriage a Sin?
● When Walter Imbiorski, a former Roman Catholic priest, died recently in Chicago, he was denied a funeral Mass by hierarchy officials. Why? What was his “sin”? The “National Catholic Reporter” explained: “He had left the priesthood in 1975 and married.”
God ordained marriage. (Gen. 2:18-25) So his Word speaks of those who “will forbid marriage” as having departed “from the faith, giving heed to deceitful spirits and doctrines of devils, speaking lies hypocritically,” as the “Catholic Confraternity” version puts it. (1 Tim. 4:1-3) How inappropriate, then, to disapprove of marriage, a lawful act in God’s sight!
Rudeness Increasing​—Why?
● In many places the increase of rudeness is being described as “an epidemic.” “U.S.News & World Report” comments: “In stores, in offices, even in the White House, ordinary courtesy seems to be going out of style.” A Texas resident noted: “It’s gotten to the point that if people weren’t rude, I wouldn’t know what to think.” J. Ponder, an official at a Los Angeles hospital that runs a tension-control program, acknowledges “a definite decline in courtesy over the last five to 10 years.” He says that people “are more self-centered. They’re asking, ‘What can I get?’ instead of asking, ‘What can I give?’”
One area where this is proving very costly is driving. Professor J. Freedman of New York’s Columbia University said: “Many people are driving incredibly rudely, . . . It’s almost a battleground on the highways.” The Royal Bank of Canada “Monthly Letter” speaks of “the relentless carnage on the roads” in that country as being “another manifestation of man’s inhumanity to man.” It adds: “The core of the problem is uncivil behaviour. The courtesy, consideration, forbearance, tolerance and respect for human rights which go to make up civilization are disgracefully lacking.”
When asked why there is this huge increase in uncivil behavior, psychologist Freedman answered: “We don’t really know.” But long ago, God’s prophetic Word foretold that this would be an evidence of the “last days,” declaring: “For men will be lovers of themselves, . . . self-assuming, haughty, . . . unthankful, . . . having no natural affection, not open to any agreement, . . . without self-control, fierce.”​—2 Tim. 3:1-4.
Unity in Disunity?
● The president of the American Lutheran Church, clergyman David Preus, says that there does not need to be unity among Christians. Asserting that the Bible supports this view, he pointed to the Sadducees, Pharisees and scribes with their different teachings and stated: “They differed with each other but maintained the unity of the family.”
However, true Christianity is not just a matter of family unity, since even atheists can attain that. And the example of the Sadducees, Pharisees and scribes, far from supporting disunity, condemns it, for Jesus said to them: “Why is it you also overstep the commandment of God because of your tradition? . . . You have made the word of God invalid because of your tradition.” Thus, Jesus rejected their form of worship, declaring: “It is in vain that they keep worshiping [God], because they teach commands of men as doctrines.”​—Matt. 15:3-9.
The apostle Paul clearly showed that true Christians “should all speak in agreement, and that there should not be divisions among you.”​—1 Cor. 1:10.

