Loving Concern for Unbelieving Relatives
1 Among the 297,872 who were baptized last year, many were the relatives of persons who had earlier become Jehovah’s witnesses. There is no question about it, people usually listen much more readily to someone they know than to a stranger who comes to their door. Are we taking full advantage of that fact to help our relatives?
2 Who is there to consider? Certainly those in our own households; also parents and children who no longer live in the same house. And what about grandparents, grandchildren, aunts, uncles, nephews, nieces and others? Perhaps you recall that among Jesus’ apostles were three​—the sons of Zebedee and the son of Alphaeus—​who evidently were his cousins. Obviously he had witnessed to them.
3 But maybe you have tried to share the good news with your relatives and had little success. Similarly, Jesus’ brothers were “not exercising faith in him” even three years after his baptism. (John 7:5) Yet Jesus did not quit trying to help them. Evidently it was to his half brother James that Jesus appeared even after his resurrection, and with good results. (1 Cor. 15:7; Jas. 1:1) Not everyone will respond favorably, to be sure. But is it possible that further efforts to aid certain ones of your relatives would bear good fruit?
4 There are many ways to go about it. Letters can be written; personal visits might be made. Making available the Society’s literature that discusses points of interest to them is beneficial. Gift subscriptions for The Watchtower and Awake! could be sent. Sometimes direct Bible discussions are what are needed. On the other hand, in dealing with an unbelieving husband, the apostle Peter recommended, not a lot of arguments to prove that he is wrong, but fine conduct together with “deep respect’’ on the part of the wife.​—1 Pet. 3:1, 2.
5 In like manner, when other publishers visit the home, in some cases it is better not to start preaching, but just to be friendly, to get acquainted. It may be possible to relate experiences without making the other person feel that he is being preached to. Of course, if questions are asked, answer them. Use discernment, and when you feel it is appropriate, whether on the first visit or later, offer to study regularly with the unbeliever.
6 Think about the possibilities. Discuss these with others. And pray for Jehovah’s direction as you seek to locate, among the relatives of those already in the congregation, others whose hearts will respond to the good news.
[Blurb on page 4]
Aid Your Relatives to Put Faith in Jehovah.

