Opportunities That Are Open
1 There is a fine spirit among Jehovah’s people, a willingness to serve. (Ps. 110:3) So it is not unusual to hear someone ask, What opportunities are there for me to enlarge my service to Jehovah?
2 There are many opportunities, involving every aspect of our Christian lives. We cannot cover them all here, but let’s briefly discuss the field service, which is a vital part of our worship. We all know that we are to serve Jehovah whole-souled, but, of course, we as souls differ one from the other. (Luke 10:25-27) Not all have the same health and strength; nor do all have the same family responsibilities. Nevertheless, a willing heart will move us to share as fully as our circumstances permit in preaching the good news to others. It is good to consider personally and prayerfully the opportunities that are open.
3 Last year, in the United States, on an average, 15,880 reported each month as temporary pioneers. Were you one of them? Could you be this year? What about during March, April or May, when much special activity is planned? Could you do it at vacation time? To qualify, you must be baptized and have a reputation for good Christian conduct. You should also have plans made that will enable you to devote 100 hours to the field service during the month, or 75 hours for the month if you plan to pioneer for two weeks. To enroll, simply ask one of the local elders for an application. With good planning, you will find temporary pioneering to be spiritually refreshing! We encourage you to do it often.
4 Thousands are able to pioneer month after month, devoting 1,200 hours to the field service during the year, and, of course, the regular pioneer service is open to them. Did you know that in Japan, over 25 percent of all our brothers and sisters are in some branch of the pioneer service every month? In Hawaii, 17 percent. Are there more of us for whom whole-souled service might include being a pioneer? If you will be graduating from high school in a few months, now is the time to start thinking about what you are going to do afterward. Study carefully what the Organization book says about regular pioneer service. Personally assess the prospects. Talk to your circuit overseer and others who are making a success of pioneering. Then, if you realize that this is an opportunity that can be yours, take hold of it, looking to Jehovah to bless your efforts.
5 Of course, some who wish that they could pioneer may not be able to do so. But could they set aside 30, 40 or 50 hours each month for field service? Then why not seize hold of the opportunity to share to that extent in the grand work that Jehovah has given us to do?
6 Some have inquired about opportunities for special pioneer service. What does this involve? It is open to those who are already regular pioneers, ones who are able to move to any territory where they might be assigned. Much of the need is for brothers and married married couples in the colder north-central states. They agree to devote 150 hours to the field service each month, and, since their work is to develop interest in seldom-worked territory, they need to be effective in conducting Bible studies. If you are in position to share in this service, you may make that known to your circuit overseer.
7 Be realistic in your planning. In view of the world’s present economic situation, those who are special pioneers usually need savings on which they can draw or some manner of income that will not be very time-consuming, to supplement the modest monthly allowance of $50 (plus a maximum of $15 for travel), which is provided by the Society on request. Those who need to do regular secular work to support themselves may also volunteer to serve in these areas where there is specially great need, but they may decide that it would be better to do so as regular pioneers or as congregation publishers.
8 There is still preaching and disciple-making work to be done, and the time is limited. But the opportunities open are varied. What could be a greater privilege than serving as witnesses for the Sovereign of the universe and as publicity agents for his grand Messianic kingdom? Now is the time to take full advantage of the opportunities within your reach.

