Presenting the Good News​—Making Use of the Bible
1 One of the things that was so striking about the ministry of Jesus and his apostles was their constant use of the Scriptures. (John 7:16; Acts 17:2) Wisely we too endeavor to copy this example. But, on a personal basis, are you able to use the Bible as effectively as you would like? Aside from personal or family study, how can we get better acquainted with the Bible?
2 One way is to use it more during our meetings. For example, during the public talk, do you personally look up the scriptures mentioned by the speaker? If you do, and read them as he does, they will make a more lasting impression on your mind. Also, if you do something to aid in locating again key scriptures that you believe will be helpful at a later time, you will improve your ability to make use of the Bible. You may find it helpful to make some notes on a slip of paper to keep in your Bible. Or, during the meeting you may want to circle a verse number or perhaps neatly underline a key word that conveys the basic idea of the scripture so you will be able to find it again.
3 It is not difficult to use the Bible when making return visits. You could begin your presentation by mentioning that you have an interesting point to bring to the householder’s attention and ask if he has his Bible handy. You may choose to read from the book you left with him, looking up the scriptures together even if quoted. Doing this initially will build confidence in the publication.
4 If the householder does not know how to find scriptures in his Bible, why not help him? Show him the alphabetical index of Bible books and the use of the bold-faced chapter numbers with smaller verse numbers. If the householder is reluctant to use the Bible, or other circumstances make it advisable, simply discuss the subject, paraphrasing the scriptures.
5 But what can you do when the householder asks a question not answered by your presentation? If you reply by first asking how he feels about it, this will give you time to locate an appropriate scripture. Some publishers have a copy of Sermon Outlines fastened in the back of their Bible and refer to it when answering questions. If you do not have one, why not obtain a copy and see if it does not aid you as well. Certain questions usually arise more frequently than others. Preparation for these might include marking down, either in personal study or at a meeting, scriptures that you would like to use in answer. With each text, note clearly the subject involved. Some publishers do this in a notebook, on a slip of paper carried in the Bible or on the front or back endsheet of their Bible. If it will help you, you may want to do that with the following: “God is not dead​—2 Pet. 3:9”; “World conditions​—2 Tim. 3:1-5”; “Sickness​—Rev. 21:4,” etc. Then, whenever these topics come up, you will have a fitting scripture.
6 It will not be difficult to make good use of your Bible in the field service if you make good use of it at meetings and in your personal study.​—1 Tim. 4:16.

