Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 9
13 min: Song 105. Introductory comments based on article “Jehovah’s Witnesses Move Ahead in Canada,” from January 15 Watchtower. Include also brief comments about what is being done locally. Invite those who are studying and who desire to start in field service to make that known; help will be provided. Tie in day’s text.
15 min: Singing as a Part of Our Worship. Discuss January 1 Watchtower article “Expressing Appreciation in Song.” Encourage all to share in heartfelt congregation singing. Actually sing together a couple of stanzas of Song 110.
20 min: “A People on the Move.” Questions and answers. With paragraph 4, demonstrate suggested presentation, including subscription offer. With paragraph 5, have demonstration showing experienced publisher encouraging newer one to make return visits; they plan together what to do and what to say.
12 min: Concluding comments. Comment briefly on congregation accounts; commend congregation for generosity; tell them that details of report will be on information board. Encourage all to order special magazines for April, as discussed in Branch Letter. Comment also on fourth item under Announcements. Ask audience: What did you learn this evening? Song 63.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 16
Aiding Unbelieving Relatives to Appreciate the Good News
15 min: Song 115. In introductory remarks read and comment briefly on John 1:40, 41. Then discuss, with audience participation, the article “Loving Concern for Unbelieving Relatives.”
25 min: What Would You Do?
“One or two publishers approach elder, saying that they want to help unbelieving relatives to learn the truth, but are not having much success. Elder suggests they get ideas from audience, many of whom have had personal experience. (Cover the following points; in some cases present the problem in the form of a very brief demonstration, and then ask for suggestions. Avoid making rules.) (1) When housewife becomes a Witness, what changes take place in the way she uses her time? Why might this cause resentment on part of husband? What can be done to keep mate from feeling left out? (Apply this also to situation when man accepts truth but not his wife.) (w71 pp. 204-206, 210) (2) If unbelieving husband does things that are unscriptural, what might be the effect if wife scolded him, telling him that Jehovah does not approve of what he does? What might it be better to say when confronted with these situations? (w71 p. 207) (3) What suggestions do you have as to how a believer might share the Bible’s message with an unbelieving mate? (w71 pp. 208, 211) (4) What can young folks do to help unbelieving parents to appreciate the truth? (w71 p. 213; yb71 p. 277 ¶13) (5) If a widow or a divorcee has teenage children when she learns the truth and they do not want to give up worldly habits and go to meetings, what can she do? (In commenting on use of Yearbook at home, mention briefly what text for today is.) (w62 pp. 211, 212) (6) Perhaps you want to write a letter to an uncle or a cousin or someone else whom you have not seen for years to witness to him. What could you say? (7) What can be done to share the truth with grandchildren or nephews or nieces whose parents are not responsive to truth? (8) Which of the Society’s publications might you first give to a relative whom you want to help? How do you determine this?
20 min: How Results Have Been Obtained.
Interview some in congregation who formerly were unbelieving relatives. Ask how they reacted to various efforts to witness to them. What was it that finally helped them to see the truth?
As time permits, relate (or have someone in audience relate) some of the following experiences: yb75 p. 8 ¶12; w71 p. 206; yb71 p. 76 ¶1, p. 120 ¶1, p. 228 ¶2, p. 317 ¶2; yb70 p. 146 ¶2, p. 154 ¶1, p. 196 ¶1; yb69 p. 280 ¶1. With each, emphasize the method used.
Encourage publishers to tell elders if unbelieving family members are ill for an extended period or are in the hospital; they might be encouraged by a show of kindly interest on the part of some in congregation.
Concluding comments. Ask audience: What did you learn this evening? How do you plan to use it? (Mention that when a subscription slip is marked “Gift,” the Society always sends a letter to the recipient to tell him who made the gift. Such subscriptions can be sent to others besides relatives.) Song 61.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 23
15 min: Song 78. In opening remarks, quote latter part of 1 John 5:4. Then ask audience to comment on these questions: What is faith? What foundation must true faith have? How can we strengthen our faith? What reason is there for faith that God will bless our efforts to obtain material necessities? Why do we have faith that God’s promises concerning the New Order will really be fulfilled? (See Aid, pp. 561, 562 “Make Sure,” pp. 184-189. Bible or “Make Sure” may be used to answer questions.) Brief remark showing how day’s text contributes to our faith.
20 min: Zealously Declaring the Good News Despite Difficulties. Pose questions designed to promote discussion of 1975 Yearbook, pp. 53-71. Answers to be given from memory or brief notes by panel of brothers and sisters, who also relate incidents reported in Yearbook as time permits. Cannot mention every detail, but cover the story and highlight points most likely to aid local congregation. On pages cited, can ask: (1) How did Brother Russell declare the good news on the public platform? Should importance be attached to him as a man? (P. 54) (2) Recount one of Russell’s noted debates. Is debating a preferred way to present the good news? (Pp. 54-56) (3) What spirit did Jehovah’s people display during early conventions? (Pp. 57, 58) (4) What was the “Photo-Drama of Creation”? How did it prove to be an excellent way to declare the good news? (Pp. 58-60) (5) Who were the colporteurs, and how did Jehovah care for them? Did they face any difficulties? Tell us something about their activities in declaring the good news. (Pp. 61-64) (6) Difficulties experienced by Brother Russell included what domestic problems? Were the Russells ever divorced? Did Mrs. Russell charge her husband with adultery? During such difficulties, how did Jehovah aid and use Brother Russell? Should we expect to be maligned? (Pp. 65-71)
15 min: “Opportunities That Are Open.” Audience participation. Include some local experiences showing why, how and when some have shared in temporary pioneer service. Encourage temporary pioneering.
10 min: Concluding comments. Report on number of subscriptions obtained to date. Comment on fifth item under Announcements. Ask: What did you learn this evening? How do you plan to use it? Song 109.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 2
Develop Your Ability to Use the Bible
20 min: Song 20. Using the Bible Skillfully as a Family Head. Chairman: Discuss theme of entire meeting, using 2 Timothy 3:16.
Set scene for handling family problems. Mother tells father children seeking bad company. Children indifferent.
Chairman asks audience for suggestions as to how it could be handled differently.
Father now proceeds, using Bible to instruct children’s hearts. Has son read 1 Cor. 15:33 and explain. Asks why Jehovah gave principle. Do they know children who had difficulty due to bad associations? Children cite example. (Read together Genesis 34:1, 2.) Then father comments on 2 Timothy 2:22 and Jude 16. Father explains Jehovah’s commands for our good, a protection like a fence to keep harm away. Father builds appreciation for Jehovah’s loving care.
Chairman asks audience what may happen if parent reaches minds only and not hearts. When tempted, heart may lead in wrong course. (Jer. 17:9) But what happens if minds and hearts are unified when one is tempted? There is little doubt that they will do Jehovah’s will. To offer such specific instruction requires preparation, using the Aid book, Watch Tower Publications Indexes, talking to others, such as elders, and perhaps those who have solved family problems successfully.
20 min: Presenting the Good News. Questions and answers. On paragraph 5 invite audience to write the three headings and three scriptures on a slip of paper to carry in the Bible. Some may want to write in their Bibles. Allow time for this. Encourage them to do so neatly; an excessively marked or messy Bible is not desirable for use in field service. Also take time to demonstrate what to do when householder changes subject. Publisher begins talking about Kingdom. Householder asks if God really cares about us. Chairman stops publisher and asks what he will do. Publisher states he has scripture on that subject noted down. While turning to it, he plans to ask householder what his own views are. Proceed with witness. Highlight benefits of marking scriptures under brief topics in Bible.
10 min: Using the Concordance in Your Bible Effectively. Chairman uses following texts or others he may select and has brothers try to find their location by using concordance in Bible. This can aid in finding them quickly. Chairman reads each text with audience, isolates main word or words and together find it in concordance: Deut. 30:19 (Choose); Ps. 55:22 (Burden); Prov. 27:11 (Wise); Jonah 2:2 (Sheol; have audience look up “Hell” first); John 14:28 (Greater).
10 min: Concluding comments. Ask audience to name benefits of using Bible itself in field service, also when counseling children. Song 89.

