Announcements
● Literature offer for September: My Book of Bible Stories on a contribution of $2.50, or, if not available, use any 192-page book on a contribution of 75c. October and November: Subscription for either The Watchtower or Awake! or for both magazines on a contribution of $3.50 for each subscription. December: New World Translation and “Let Your Kingdom Come.” Use older editions of the New World Translation first, along with new book on a contribution of $3.25. If older editions are out of stock, then use 1981 edition and new book on a contribution of $3.75.
● New Publications Available:
Holy Bible—Persian (Congregation, public and pioneer: $7.15)
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures (1981 edition with black cover) (Congregation and public: $3.00; pioneers: $1.50)—English
Choosing the Best Way of Life—Chinese, Greek
Happiness—How to Find It—Chinese, Portuguese
“Let Your Kingdom Come”—English, Spanish
● New cassette recordings available:
“Jehovah’s Name to Be Declared in All the Earth” (Drama) (single cassette)—English
The Good News According to Luke (set of two cassettes)—English
The First of Peter through The Letter of Jude (single cassette)—English
A Revelation to John (single cassette)—English
Kingdom Melodies No. 2 (single cassette)
Kingdom Recordings Album (Holds 24 unboxed cassettes.) (Congregation and public: $5.50; pioneers: $4.50)
Album with complete Greek Scriptures (18 cassettes) (Congregation and public: $30.00; pioneers: $20.00)—English
● Please note that while the 1981 black-cover edition of the New World Translation is $3.00 for congregation and $1.50 for pioneers, older editions of the New World Translation, both regular green-cover and pocket editions, remain at $2.50 for congregation and public and $1.25 for pioneers.
● We are pleased to announce that a new Cost List has been prepared. Four copies are being sent to each congregation. The secretary should keep one copy; the other three should be given to the brothers caring for the literature, magazines and accounts.
● The congregation accounts should be audited on September 1, or as soon thereafter as possible, by the presiding overseer or someone appointed by him.
● The book “Things in Which It Is Impossible for God to Lie” is available again in English. Those who would like copies for themselves or for their Bible students may order them through the congregation. We do not recommend that congregations order a large stock of these books, but order only as copies are requested by publishers and pioneers.
● Congregations will be charged at the rate of $7.00 per thousand for the tract Kingdom News No. 30. Both publishers and pioneers may obtain their supply at the congregation literature counter at 35c per 50 copies. This tract is to be distributed free to the public.

