Presenting the Good News—With The Watchtower and Awake!
1 We all know how much we personally have benefited from the abundance of fine material in The Watchtower and Awake! For this reason we desire to do everything possible to assist those in our territory to benefit also from these two fine magazines on a regular basis.
2 How can we best use the magazines in our field service? First of all, there is need to schedule time to offer the magazines regularly, utilizing the second and fourth Saturdays particularly.
3 Having personal subscriptions will aid us in getting acquainted with each magazine before offering it in the field. In this way most of us will generally be able to read the latest issue before copies are picked up at the Kingdom Hall. Do you have a personal subscription? If not, why not give this your prompt consideration?
4 We know that good preparation is essential to make the best use of magazines in field service. In addition to reading the magazines before offering them to others, a selection can be made of specific points to use for brief presentations. What are some things to consider in preparation sessions? For one thing, we know there is a variety of people to whom we witness. So we are interested in what may appeal to younger ones, older ones, men, women, professional people, and so forth. Why not make notes in your personal copy of points to use, if that will help?
5 Elders and ministerial servants, as well as pioneers, can aid you in using the magazines effectively. You might be able to arrange to work along with them, or other capable publishers, in the service to get suggestions on various ways to present the magazines effectively. Those with more experience can show you how to adapt material to the householder’s needs and interest, and which subjects may be of particular interest to certain ones, and so forth. (2 Tim. 2:2) Newer ones may want to give just a simple presentation. Others may want to widen out and work on the use of questions and other teaching aids.—See the School Guidebook, Study 10, for suggestions.
6 Younger ones particularly may need help to give meaningful presentations. Initially they may just want to say, “I have the latest Watchtower and Awake! and we place them for a contribution of 15c each.” However, they should be helped progressively to add to their presentation, using a few words to call attention to a particular point or article.
7 While there is still time remaining, let us use The Watchtower and Awake! to accomplish our ministry fully, begging persons to become “reconciled to God.”—2 Cor. 5:20.

