Seize the Opportunity to Defend Our Faith!
1 The congregation of God is “a pillar and support of the truth.” (1 Tim. 3:15) As individual members of the congregation, are we doing our part in upholding and supporting the truth? A splendid opportunity currently exists for Jehovah’s Witnesses to make known to millions of persons the truth about creation, as opposed to evolution. Why is this an especially favorable time? 1) As never before, the evolution theory is being strongly disputed. 2) As many students return to their classrooms, pressure is building up on educators to present “the other side,” that is, information about creation. 3) The September 22, 1981, issue of Awake! is specially designed to present the facts in a clear manner, pointing to the Bible’s truthful account of creation.
2 To take advantage of this unique opportunity, all are encouraged to put forth an extra effort to distribute this special issue of Awake! Members of local school boards, principals and teachers should be made aware of this valuable and useful information. State legislators can be contacted. Copies can be presented to federal or state agencies within your territory that concern themselves with education and public schools. If you wish to share in the above aspects of this campaign, please talk to your service overseer who will be coordinating the work.
3 Youths of school age have a very special opportunity to show their personal concern for supporting the truth. They can courageously present their teachers with this issue of Awake! Perhaps some will be allowed the opportunity to give a report in class on the subject. Or, they may arrange for a capable brother to give a talk to their class about the Bible’s account of how life came to be. Not to be forgotten are the parents we meet from door to door, on the streets or informally. Many of them are concerned about what their children are learning in school.
4 Do not allow this opportunity to slip away. (Eph. 5:15, 16) Be ready to “make a defense” with the aid of the September 22 Awake! (1 Pet. 3:15) Unitedly, let us make known our position by publicly supporting the Bible’s account of creation.—Rom. 1:20.

