Training Children in the Way of Life
1 Obedience to God’s requirements leads to life—disobedience to his law leads to sure disappointment and death. This simple but powerful lesson we learn from the experience of Adam and Eve. By continued obedience they could have lived forever, yet they chose to disobey God and died as a result. All Christian parents should ask themselves: What am I teaching my children? Are they learning the rewards of obedience and the consequences of disobedience? Are they learning to love Jehovah from their hearts? What are they learning from my example?
DISCIPLINE MUST BE CONSISTENT
2 To teach obedience it is good for you who are parents to set up reasonable yet clear-cut rules to guide the conduct of your children. Let them see your own example in obeying rules. Warn them about breaking rules—that it leads to sure punishment. Be swift about keeping your word; do not nag, yell or be inconsistent. (Eph. 6:4) Both parents should agree on rules of discipline; both should enforce them to retain the respect of the child. When parents administer loving discipline, children learn that punishment is the penalty for intentional wrongdoing. But they also learn that obedience brings pleasure by means of commendation and rewards. (Eph. 6:1-3; Heb. 11:6) If your children learn while young that they will most certainly ‘reap what they sow’ you will save them from many disappointments and possible death.—Gal. 6:7; Prov. 23:13, 14.
3 Obedience involves listening. Do you teach your children to listen? Are they required to attend meetings? Also, are they expected to pay attention? Some parents train their children to listen at home. They set aside a regular time to read to their children. During this time youngsters are required to sit still and pay attention. If this is done patiently, in time the children will develop the capacity to listen and concentrate on the spoken word and will not be so easily distracted during meetings. Again, parents must set the example, not being easily distracted themselves or looking around each time there is a minor disturbance during meetings. Additionally, youths enjoy meetings when they are prepared to participate. If a young one participates, giving an answer or two in his own words, doubtless he will pay closer attention and feel more rewarded. Having children look up Bible texts cited by the speakers will keep them alert and will be good training as well.
4 Sometimes at meetings children become restless after an hour or so. They may turn around and try to get the attention of others. Or they may bring toys or other objects for their personal amusement and this results in distracting others. We must not forget that even the “little ones” in Israel were commanded to assemble to “listen” and “learn.” (Deut. 31:12) In order to find an excuse to move around, children occasionally get into the habit of running to the restroom a number of times during the meeting, causing considerable disturbance to others. Yet these same children can play for hours at a time without experiencing any such problem. If parents insist that each of their children use the restroom before the meeting begins, there is usually no real need for them to disturb the meeting a short while later.
SET THEOCRATIC GOALS FOR CHILDREN
5 Training children in the way of life also means directing them from tender years on up toward a life of greatest service. Help them to see how they can be like Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Isaiah and others who devoted their lives to Jehovah’s service. Open up to their vision the modern-day opportunities that lie before them in the service of God’s kingdom. Impress on their minds the self-sacrificing example of Christ Jesus. Encourage them to pray regularly to Jehovah from their hearts. And, most of all, let them see your own good example—how you derive joy from wholehearted service to God. Then when your child expresses the desire to dedicate his life to Jehovah and symbolize this by water baptism, what joy you will have as a result of having helped him to make this decision.

