Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
One of the big questions that Jehovah’s witnesses everywhere are asking is, How are our brothers and sisters who fled from Malawi?
Perhaps you read news reports about the critical conditions in the refugee camp at Sinda Misale. Later dispatches declared that, under the supervision of UN representatives, the Witnesses had “willingly” been returned to their villages in Malawi. Are these reports true? Where are those brothers now? And what happened to the ones who fled into Mozambique?
It has now been possible to interview hundred of these brothers, and a detailed report is being published in this March 8 issue of Awake! They have undergone severe hardships, and these are not over. But Jehovah has sustained them, and the majority have maintained their integrity despite everything that Satan has brought against them.​—John 14:30.
The treatment to which our brothers in Malawi have been subjected is something that the world ought to know. This provides good opportunity to set before them again our Scriptural position toward involvement in the political affairs of the nations and to let them know that our support goes only to Jehovah God and his kingdom in time hands of Jesus Christ. Awake! sets forth the issues clearly.
The Society believes that a fine witness can be given, to Jehovah’s honor, by getting this March 8 issue of Awake! into the hands of public officials and news editors everywhere. Who is willing to have a part in the work?
A special letter outlining how it is to be done will be sent to each congregation. The activity should be coordinated by the field overseer in cooperation with the presiding overseer. In order to get the work under way, we encourage each congregation to estimate how many additional copies of the magazine will be needed for special distribution to officials and for house-to-house work. Then send off your order by airmail right away.
This will be a big job. But with concerted effort a grand witness can be accomplished.
May Jehovah bless you all as, by your zeal in his work, you show that you truly are living in accord with his purpose in delivering his people.
Your fellow servants,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

