Let the Magazines Help You to Preach
1 How much can you tell a person about the Kingdom while standing on his doorstep? If you can speak with him for several minutes, this is fine. But, if you can also leave at least two magazines for reading later, think how much more is accomplished. The magazines can be “preaching” while you are busy reaching still others.
2 Obviously, the more magazines we place, the more the magazines help us to preach. And the more time we spend in magazine distribution, the more placements will be made. Have you reviewed your personal arrangements lately for sharing in this work?
3 Do you have definite arrangements for magazine service? Leaving things to chance seldom produces as good results. You may be able regularly to support the congregation magazine day, and if so, this is fine. But, suppose you cannot go out on this particular day. If you took the initiative to invite others, there is a good possibility that you would find at least one or two other publishers who would join you at another time in the magazine work. Magazine distribution is appropriate on any day of the week.
4 It is suggested that the field overseer review the congregation’s arrangements for magazine distribution to see if any adjustments are advisable; also to see what can be done to encourage more to share in magazine distribution. If some cannot fit magazine service into their schedule otherwise, a portion of their regular house-to-house witnessing could be devoted to working with magazines only.
5 In many congregations magazine day is on Saturday, but if some have shifted their house-to-house work with the regular offer to Saturday, then Sunday might be used effectively for magazine day.
6 What about additional opportunities for placing magazines? If you are alert to possibilities throughout the week, hardly a day will go by without your placing copies where they can begin to “preach” instead of accumulating at home. There are friends, relatives and tradesmen who visit. You usually are going places too: to the store, to your job, to visit others. Why not take magazines with you? The Watchtower and Awake! are available in many languages. A householder’s accepting them often depends on your having them in the right language. Do not let any opportunity go by. In the short time remaining, let us preach with added zeal and urgency, and place the magazines so that they can help us to preach.

