Living According to God’s Purpose in Delivering Us
1 It is good to know that we are still living in the “day of salvation.” The apostle Paul wrote to Christians when that day for Christians was in its early ‘hours’: “Working together with [God], we also entreat you not to accept the undeserved kindness of God and miss its purpose. For he says: ‘In an acceptable time I heard you, and in a day of salvation I helped you.’ Look! Now is the especially acceptable time. Look! Now is the day of salvation.”​—2 Cor. 6:1, 2.
2 That “day of salvation” is more than 1,900 years advanced and it now nears its conclusion. But its being still in effect gives us yet a short time to prove our own integrity to Jehovah’s sovereignty by clean living and right works. We also can build ourselves up for the stresses to come as we get very close to the ending of God’s “acceptable time.”
3 God is providing this “acceptable” time, not merely for us who are now Jehovah’s witnesses, but also for others whose lives are in imminent danger. Here is further opportunity for us to prove our devotion and love. For we show genuine love for Jehovah when we demonstrate love for our fellowman by bringing him the good news. In many cases it means ‘putting ourselves out,’ but are we not glad someone has done that very thing for us?
4 The month of March is filled with opportunities for helping those who manifest interest in God’s purposes. An outstanding feature is the special public talk, “How Resurrection Benefits All the Dead in Hell,” to be delivered at all Kingdom Halls on Sunday, March 25. Invite people to the talk. Their attention should be aroused by the striking title of the talk, with the words “resurrection” and “hell” in the same sentence. All who attend the special talk should also be invited to attend the Memorial on April 17.
5 In addition to each one of us sharing fully in the field ministry during March and April, let us make a special effort to help new ones with whom we have been studying and who qualify to begin sharing in the public ministry.
6 This third month of the subscription campaign is a good time to review your possibilities for obtaining subscriptions. It may be that you have the names of several who promised to subscribe. Be sure to call back on them as you continue to share fully in the house-to-house work.
7 As you sincerely present the subscription offer, honest-hearted ones will see the value of the magazines. Even with rising costs, a year’s subscription can still be provided at the amazingly low cost of $1.50. Spiritually hungry ones count this as nothing compared to the comfort and enlightenment received.
8 In the closing ‘hours’ of God’s “day of salvation,” it is indeed a happy time to be alive, spending our lives according to God’s purpose. May we assist many others to share this happiness and walk with us in the way to everlasting life before Jehovah closes the “acceptable time” and begins his day of wrath.
[Blurb on page 1]
Living according to God’s purpose in delivering us.

