Presenting the Good News​—With the Subscription Offer
1 Many are finding the opening articles in The Watchtower during the campaign very helpful in presenting the subscription offer. They are about the qualities of Jehovah, and it is just natural for us to talk about our God, is it not?
2 You will likely find other articles in The Watchtower that you can feature enthusiastically in presenting the subscription offer. Check each issue to see what might appeal to people in your territory. It is important to have some definite points in mind to talk about. These can be woven around the suggested theme of “Getting to Know God,” or another of your choice.
3 The April 15 issue of The Watchtower will be a special issue, featuring the subject “How Resurrection Benefits All the Dead in Hell.” You and many interested ones will hear this interestingly discussed in the public talk on March 25, but since it will be in The Watchtower, you will be able to give this attention-getting and heart-cheering information to others.
4 How can you approach people on this subject? Well, if you find that a person believes in hellfire, or wants to know something about the subject, you could ask, “Do you think that hell will ever be done away with?” Or, when you present the article, the householder may express a fundamentalist belief in a “burning hell” or he may reply with the commonly held idea that we have our “hell here on earth.” Whatever view is expressed, you will be able to point to the Bible’s clarification on this subject of hell.
5 You might ask the householder if he remembers Jesus’ words that he has the “keys of death and of hell.” (Rev. 1:17, 18, Douay) If Jesus opens hell, as this scripture implies, will this bring back the worst kind of people, making our earth an even more dangerous place to live? After establishing that the “hell” this case is the common grave of mankind, we can point to John 5:26-29. While there will be a resurrection of both the righteous and the wicked, never again will Jehovah allow the wicked to take over this earth. True, God has mercifully arranged for billions to come forth in the resurrection. But they will be under the control of his Messianic kingdom. Rebellious ones will not be permitted to harm others. Ask the householder if he is not thrilled at the prospect of seeing loved ones lost in death brought back into such a fine world.
6 Depending upon dominant attitudes in your territory, you will be able to adapt your comments so as to be most effective. Be positive in presenting the subscription offer. Many are finding that people will accept the double subscription for $3.00 just as readily as the single subscription. Why not try it? The magazines bring life-giving information.

