Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING MARCH 11
12 min: Song 18. Introduction, text and comments. Discussion of Branch Letter by field overseer.
 3 min: Accounts Report.
13 min: “Living According to God’s Purpose in Delivering Us.” Using article in “Kingdom Ministry,” group discuss how they plan to enlarge their ministerial privileges during remainder of March and in April.
20 min: “Organization” book, p. 113, par. 3, to p. 116, par. 2. Questions, with answers from audience. Highlight the scriptures cited in support and illustration of points made.
12 min: Concluding comments. Discuss briefly congregation report for February and encourage all to consider how they might increase time devoted to the field ministry during March and April. Are some new ones ready to begin field service? Can more be temporary pioneers? Song 21.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 18
10 min: Song 27. Introduction, text and comments. Theocratic News.
18 min: “Let the Magazines Help You to Preach.” Questions and an-answers. Interview several publishers who have good success in placing magazines. Have them tell briefly how and when they do it.
20 min: “Organization” book, p. 116, par. 3, to p. 120, par. 4. The brother handling this part may want to consider the sections in this portion by interviewing brothers looking after the literature and territory for the congregation, also one or two book study conductors. If this is not convenient, the part may be handled by a talk or by questions and answers.
12 min: Concluding comments. Encourage all to participate fully in Jehovah’s service by imitating the Master, Christ Jesus. Use highlights of his ministry as discussed in January 1, 1973, “Watchtower.” Song 51.
WEEK STARTING MARCH 25
 8 min: Song 28. Introduction, text and comments.
20 min: “Organization” book, p. 121, par. 1, to p. 124, par. 4. Questions and answers from audience. May take material by sections so as to emphasize following points: Reasons for revisits (p. 121, pars. 1-4); reasons for home Bible studies and how to start them (p. 121., par. 5, to p. 122, par.1); method of conducting studies (p. 122, par 2); building proper qualities in disciples (p. 123, par. 1, to p. 124, par. 1) and developing heart appreciation (p. 124, pars. 2-4).
16 min: Making a Personal Examination. (To be handled by or in cooperation with field overseer.) All publishers invited to reflect back over the past year to see what has been personally accomplished in the field ministry as the activity of the congregation for the past year is briefly considered. Nationally there have been fewer hours devoted to the field ministry during the past service year in comparison to the previous year, even with more publishers sharing, in the preaching work. And hours continue to be slightly lower for this service year. Why?
Could it be that some of us have had a little difficulty doing our best without goals being stressed or special efforts being made to help us to get out in field service and to report each month? Now that there is less checking of records to see who have not reported and what we are doing in preaching, we are put more on our own, are we not? It puts us to the test as to what we will do without someone urging us regularly to share in the field service.
As we individually think about what we have been able to do during the past year, likely some fine blessings will be recalled. Our own hours may not have dropped off but may actually have increased. We may now have a Bible study. These are causes for rejoicing. But where we find room for improvement, we will want to put forth the effort needed to refine our schedules or show more love and zeal for Jehovah’s service. We may find that our hours have decreased without real cause and perhaps, if a study was discontinued, added effort could enable us to replace it with another one. Or, if we have never conducted study, it may be possible to start one now as we continue without letup, looking to Jehovah to bless us.
It is good to examine our own activity from time to time and draw our own conclusions about what has been accomplished and what might be improved. In coming months, will it be possible to spend more time in the field service? You may find that you can be a temporary pioneer during April. Each one can make his own analysis without making comparisons with another.
The field overseer can begin preparing for this part several weeks in advance. (Your congregation may be doing fine, and new ones coming in. If so, this discussion can be adjusted in harmony with local circumstances.) The Publisher’s Record cards should be posted through February. The congregation can be told that the field overseer will be at a particular location in the Kingdom Hall after the meeting and if anyone wishes to see his Publisher’s Record card, he may do so. This may be helpful to some in reflecting on what has been accomplished and what might be done to improve their personal ministry. (If the congregation is large, he may need assistance in distributing the cards and collecting them again.)
Good work is being done and the publishers should be encouraged, but as we finish up the preaching of this good news and the gathering of the remaining ones of the Lord’s “sheep,” we do not want to slow down. Wherever we can, we want to speed up the witness, because the time is short.
16 min: Concluding comments. Discuss the prospects of having new ones we have been studying with to join us in the field service during April. They will particularly enjoy placing the special magazines in April. Help them to see their responsibility to share in Kingdom-preaching as they otherwise progress toward dedication and baptism. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports. Song 52.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 1
12 min: Song 36. Introduction, text and comments.
20 min: ‘Organization” book, p. 124, par. 5, to p. 128, par. 2. Symposium by two brothers if available. First talk: “Helping Interested Ones to Advance” (p. 124, par. 5, to p. 125, par. 3). Second talk: “Reports and Why They Are Helpful” (p. 126, par. 1, to p. 128, par. 2). Emphasize the reasons for and the proper view of reporting.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News.” Discuss and demonstrate suggested presentations.
13 min: Concluding comments. Include discussion of Question Box and announcements on page 3 that apply. Encourage temporary pioneering for April. Song 38.
WEEK STARTING APRIL 8
10 min: Song 88. Introduction, text and comments.
20 min: “Organization” book, p. 128, par. 3, to p. 132, par. 2. Talk, with audience reading some Bible texts cited. Emphasize need to impress on interested person’s mind and heart that it is part of true worship, part of the WAY of life to follow the principles outlined in God’s Word. Vital for our worship to be acceptable to Jehovah. Information under “Reasons for Joyful Confidence” will be very encouraging if properly presented to the brothers.
18 min: “Encouraging All to Attend the Lord’s Evening Meal.” Questions and answers.
12 min: Concluding comments. Discuss what congregation was able to do in field ministry during March and plans made to make April a fine month. Song 47.

