VOL. XXVII DECEMBER 15 No. 24 
A.D., 1906-A.M., 6035 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 387 

New Motives and Methods in Foreign 

Missions 387 

An Apostasy or a Revival 388 

The Cost of Conversions 388 

Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society's Report 
for 1906 388 

"A Little Child Shall Lead Them" (Poem) 394 

"If I Go Away I Will Come Again" 394 

Beginning at Jerusalem 395 

"This Same Jesus Shall So Come" 396 

The Story of Jesus in Review 397 

page 386 



LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



NEW MOTTO CARDS. 



We have new full lines of Motto Cards, put up in $1 packages. 
If you desire large cards, so specify; otherwise we will 
send the medium and small sizes and the more of them. We 
supply these at about cost. German Mottoes ($1 pks.) we send 
direct from Germany. 

WATCH TOWER BINDERS. 



These are substantially made of stiff cloth boards, and can 
hold two years' issues of the WATCH TOWER. They prevent 
soiling and loss. Price, postpaid, 50c. 



Friends sending in orders are specially requested to inquire 
at their local express offices about the time the package 



should arrive, as we fill all orders by express wherever possible, 

rather than by mail. In our usual great congestion of 

work at this season this will save unnecessary correspondence. 

R3909 : page 386 



ITALIAN Vol. I. is again in stock. Price same as the English 
edition. FRENCH translation of "Hell" booklet can also 
now be supplied at 10c. each, 50c. per doz. 



Colporteurs will please use our Order blanks and direct 
letters to "Colporteur Department." 



R3905 : page 387 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
NEW MOTIVES AND METHODS IN FOREIGN MISSIONS 



AS general doubt begins to overshadow the Bible and 
its teachings, many intelligent people begin to 
wonder whether or not there is any future life. 
Decrying the Bible as the work of man, all higher critics 
and evolutionists are thrown upon the resources of their 
own judgment respecting the future, and they are very 
conscious that their intelligence on the subject is a 
large blank— a guess. Rejection of the doctrine of 
eternal torment as the punishment for sin, and the supposition 
that that doctrine is taught in the Scriptures, 
was the foundation for their scepticism, which now has 
spread so that their entire faith has been undermined, 
and what Jesus said of the Samaritans of old is true of 
them, "Ye believe ye know not what."— John 4:22. 
The religious instincts of man lead him to some 
kind of worship, and a desire to serve his God in some 
manner, whether that god be a stick or a stone or the 
sun or the true God. Hence Christian people of various 
shades of faith and doubt have during the past century 
contributed liberally for mission work under the stimulating 
thought that the poor heathen were going into 
death at the rate of 90,000 a day without a knowledge 
of the only name given under heaven and amongst men 
whereby men must be saved. But now as doubts become 
confirmed and faith weakens there is a slackening 

R3906 : page 387 

of the energies formerly put forth on behalf of the 



heathen. Furthermore it is beyond question that missionary 
effort has accomplished little in heathen lands 
in the way of making saints, and that its chief showing 
has been along the lines of civilizing influences introduced. 
And is this not true throughout Christendom? 

The new thought is that this civilizing influence 
called Christianization can be introduced better and 
more quickly by national treaties, etc. Thus Secretary 
Root's last visit to South America in the interest 
of better business relationship between those countries 
and the United States is pointed out by some as having 
been a great missionary enterprise. So greatly do the 
ideas of man gradually swing around! We quote below 
from the Springfield (Mass.) Union on this subject as 
follows:— 

Rev. Newton M. Hall, pastor of North Congregational 
Church, preached yesterday morning on the modern 
motive for missions, as a timely topic, in view of 
the meeting of the American Board of Commissioners 
for Foreign Missions in North Adams this week. He 
showed how the old-time motive of soul-saving had 
largely given place to the motive of Christian work to 
uplift and better the conditions of the non-Christian 
peoples. He said in part: 

"We must admit that the impulse for missions 
simply from the standpoint of soul-saving is not as 
strong as it was a century ago. We may regret this, 
but we must face the facts. Yet the interest in missions 
must not die. No greater calamity, from both moral 
and economic standpoints, could happen to America 
than to lose interest in foreign missions. What, then, 
is to be the new motive for missions? It must be the 
motive, old, yet new, set forth by Paul in the text; the 
oneness of God, the brotherhood of all men as proclaimed 
and mediated by Jesus Christ. It is not our 
civilization which we wish to impose upon alien peoples, 
for we are far from being Christian, but the civilization 
which, please God, we mean to have. Brotherhood, 
fraternity, is the message, the lifting up of other races, 
not to our level only, but far beyond. 

"Now and then you will find a man who will defend 
the religions of the East. Do not believe him. Ask 
the men who have lived 
'East of Suez, 

Where the best is like the worst,' 
who have looked the gods of the East in the face, and 
they will tell you that the work of Buddha and Krishna 
and the rest is the work of the beast. 

"We want to save men from bestiality and the superstition 
of heathendom to the glory of the brotherhood 
of Jesus. The mission of Mr. Root to South America 
was in a large sense a missionary journey. He went 
not with threats, but in the Christian spirit of love and 
brotherhood. Every missionary is first an ambassador 

R3906 : page 388 



of the Lord Jesus, and then God's ordained apostle of 
liberty and democracy. The peoples of the earth, the 
downcast, the oppressed, the king-ridden are on the 
march to freedom. Missionary activity in the 20th century 
means that we are to aid them in their progress. 
The haystack missionaries sought its individuals. We 
are to seek the nations and help them in the struggle 
until all shall come in the unity of the faith, to the 
kingdom which hath no end, the joy and expectation of 
the whole earth." 

AN APOSTASY OR A REVIVAL 



The editor of Ram's Horn declares that the Christian 
Church is facing an apostasy or a revival. He 
says:— 

"For nearly twenty years we have been marking 
time, but we have not been making progress. True, 
we have been adding wealth and numbers, but 
we have not been gaining power. Sporadic revivals 
break out in places, but evangelism does not spread 
like a holy contagion. There is no use blinking 
facts. Conditions are serious. But they are not 
exceptional. Compared with those of some previous 
periods they are discouraging, but compared 
with other epochs they appear far from hopeless. The 
march of the Kingdom seems to be measured by the 
ebb and flow of the spiritual tide. Today the tide is 
low. It has been falling steadily since the stirring 
days of Dwight L. Moody. There are many signs that 
low-water mark has been registered, and that henceforth 
we will see a rising flood. But whether it comes 
this year, or next, or in five or ten years, Christ's people 
will not lose faith or courage. God is in this world 
with a purpose, and that purpose cannot be thwarted 
or defeated. He can do wonders with only a few to 
help him. He is in need of real Gideons, men and women 
whose primary business it is to serve God. Perhaps 
there are more of these faithful ones than we 
realize. Jonah was deceived by superficial appearances 
in Nineveh. Doubtless there are more amongst 
us than we think who have not bowed the knee to Baal. 
So we will be hopeful and charitable, yet alert and discerning 
God is calling the Church and individual 
Christians to higher walks of faith and duty. It must 
be either advance or apostasy." 

THE COST OF CONVERSIONS 



The value of a genuine conversion from sin to the 
Lord— to saintship, to a membership in the "little flock" 



of the footstep followers of the Lamb— is almost beyond 
estimation; because they are all "Jewels." But when 
we think of the common run of Church membership, 
unregenerate, merely bearing a gloss of civilization, the 
following figures from a more than ordinarily reliable 
channel seem very high for the results obtained. We 
quote the following from the Pittsburg 
Chronicle-Telegraph:— 

VILLAGE SINNERS CONVERTED CHEAPLY; IT'S DIFFERENT 
WITH THE CITY ONES 

Frankfort, Ind., Oct. 11.— The closing session of 
the Indiana synod of the Presbyterian Church was made 
interesting by a report on the money it costs to convert 
a sinner and bring him into the Church. The report 
was made by the Rev. Dr. Donald Morrison, who 
showed that the cost in cities with the large churches 
is greatest. 

He found that the average ranges from $27 in villages 
to $212 in cities. In large churches the cost is 
greatly increased. Dr. Morrison showed that the cost 
to a Church for each sinner brought within its pale in 
Indianapolis is $620. 

There was no adverse comment on these figures. 
The Indianapolis sinner is supposed to be worth the 
time, effort and money required to get him into the 
Church. 



R3906 : page 388 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY'S REPORT 

-DECEMBER 1, 1905, TO DECEMBER 1, 1906.- 

VIEWED from the standpoint of the great institutions 
of the world, Bible Societies, Tract Societies, 
etc., ours is a very small work, if the measurement 
be by the amount of dollars received and expended; 
but if the measurement, on the contrary, be by 
the amount of work accomplished, we are certainly in 
the first rank so far as we know. We distance all tract 
circulators in the tract matter distributed freely, in 
the Bible Study Helps put into the hands of the people, 
etc., etc. God forbid that we should boast: we have 
nothing that we have not received of divine favor, and 
if the work has prospered we believe that it is of the 
Lord's providence and blessing and not by human wisdom 
and might. However, surrounded by much opposition 
from the world, the flesh and the devil, and the 
nominal Church, we have need to encourage ourselves 
in every way possible, and believe it to be the Lord's 
will that we should communicate these encouraging 
features to you all, knowing well that you will share in 



the trials and discouragements which the Lord forewarned 
us we should expect if we would be faithful to 
him and his Word. 

By the grace of God the report of this year is the 
most encouraging we have ever had to present to you. 
It shows progress, increase, all along the line. But 
there is one report we cannot set forth in dollars or figures 
of any kind, yet it is the most important of all— 
the report of the spiritual condition of those who are in 
the light of Present Truth. It is not for us to judge the 
hearts except in the general sense that the Lord directed, 
that we may know the difference between thorns and 
grapes and between brambles and figs. "By their fruits 
ye shall know them." 

Viewing the entire harvest field from this standpoint 
which the Lord gives us, we are encouraged to 
believe that the spirituality of the flock is as high or 
higher than it has ever before been. We feel like saying 
higher than ever before, nevertheless remember that 
the Lord's dear people in various quarters have had 
some very severe trials during the year, from which, we 

R3906 : page 389 

trust, however, they are emerging purified and polished, 
better fitted for the presence of the King and for a 
share of his glory. These trials, for the most part, have 
come apparently from the outside: and although the 
Apostle suggests "false brethren," we like to hope that 
some who have apparently filled that role were not at 
heart false, but merely temporarily blinded by ambition 
or some other unworthy motive; and we like to hope 
also that, by the Lord's grace, some at least of these 
will ultimately overcome, realizing the force of the 
Apostle's argument that the Lord resisteth the proud 
and shows his favor to the humble. "Humble yourselves 
therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may 
exalt you in due time." 

R3907 : page 389 

Though such storms and shakings may, while being 
experienced, seem very disastrous, we feel sure that the 
Lord will not forget his own, as it is written, "The 
Lord knoweth them that are his." We may be sure that 
he will not suffer them to be tempted above that they 
are able— that if they see to it that their hearts are loyal 
to him such experiences will not work them injury but 
really benefit, for are not all the Lord's people to be 
"overcomers"? and is it not by the "trial of their faith" 
that they are to be tested and proved? and is it not for 
this reason that the Lord permits such shakings? And 
are not the brethren the stronger after they have passed 
through such an experience and reached the further 
side in safety? Are they not the more reliant upon the 
Lord and the power of his might? And will they not 



more closely watch, not only to keep their own garments 
unspotted, but to assist all the Lord's dear flock 
who may be in any danger or trouble through their own 
weaknesses or those of others? 

One lesson in this is that we are our "brother's 
keeper;" that in meekness and gentleness we are to be 
courageous for the right, for the Truth, and thus to assist 
the weaker ones of the flock. As the years roll on 
we may expect more and more of these testings and 
shakings and siftings. We are not to suppose that all 
who have heard the message and received it with joy 
will ultimately be worthy a place in the Kingdom: hence 
"think it not strange concerning the fiery trial that 
shall try you, as though some strange thing had happened 
unto you."— I Pet. 4:12. 

OUR GROWING Z.W.T. LISTS 

It is with great pleasure that we announce that our 
subscription list has grown about 5000 since our last 
report a year ago. Today we have approximately 27,000 
WATCH TOWER subscribers, which we may hope represents 
at least twice or three times that number of readers. 
We print 30,000 of each issue now, which allows 
some for sample copies, etc. Our financial sheet shows 
that our 27,000 subscribers paid us $12,666.59. Thus, 
with 5,000 increase in numbers on our lists, we have 
but $542 extra in money to show for it. Some might say 
that this was a bad showing, but not so we— we are glad 
to have it so. We have known for some time that many 
have been interested in the reading of the DAWNS and 
attending meetings that have not felt that they could 
afford to subscribe for the WATCH TOWER even at its 
low price of $ 1 per year. We have urged that these be 
encouraged by all the dear friends to send in their 
names either with the subscription price or without it— 
either telling us that they are too poor or that they 
would like to have the TOWER on credit, etc. 

The increase of our list with the small increase of 
money receipts encourages us to think that some of 
these friends, who ought to be getting the WATCH TOWER 
(free, if they cannot afford to pay for it), have been 
reached and are being thus served with the spiritual 
food according to the Lord's good pleasure. We urge 
that all the dear friends keep this in mind— that we are 
desirous of having on our lists the addresses of all who 
are truly interested in the Present Truth, in the harvest 
work and message— especially the consecrated. If you 
know of those who are not subscribers but interested 
in the Truth, assure them of our good pleasure in respect 
to the visits of the TOWER whether they can afford 
to pay for it or not. Assure them that there are good 
friends of theirs and of the Truth glad to make good 
the deficiency, and that we would much prefer to have 
them on the lists. Please remember, too, that we like 
to hear from subscribers yearly, and that those poor 



who request the TOWER are expected to renew their request 
each year about June 1st, because that is a less 
busy season with us. 

THE COLPORTEUR WORK 

This branch of the harvest work seems to be particularly 
blessed and used of the Lord, and our friends 
as well as our enemies are astonished at the results 
being obtained. In every part of the civilized world 
these ministers of the harvest time, of the King and his 
coming Kingdom, are going persistently and quietly, 
making their way against opposition. Our opponents, 
indeed, are almost without exception those who have 
never read our books or tracts, and we look for great 
things from the wide circulation of this reading matter 
in the near future. By and by, when some of the 
changes which we see clearly set forth in the Scriptures, 
and which we see rapidly approaching, shall have 
reached the world so as to be visible to others, then we 
may be sure there will be a great awakening of the foolish 
virgin class, a great trimming of their lamps, a 
preparation of them for the great time of trouble 
through which they must pass to wash their robes and 
make them white in the blood of the Lamb.— Rev. 7:14. 

It will astonish you all, dear friends, as it does us, 
to find it possible to make a better report this year than 
last. When last year we announced that 254,083 copies 
of the DAWN had been put into circulation during the 
year, we were afraid to express any hope of even equaling 
that large number for the year ensuing. We merely 
determined to do all in our power. Now we have to 
announce to you that during the past year, 1906, we 
have exceeded the output of 1905 by nearly 50 per cent., 
the total being 377,959. What this means can to some 
extent be grasped when we point out that this represents 
an output of over 1200 volumes for each working 
day of the year. 

Now, how about next year? Shall we set our standard 

R3907 : page 390 

higher or lower? We believe that we may not go far 
astray if we set our mark for the coming year at 500,000 
copies. No other books in the world are selling at this 
rate— no, nor anything like it!— and no other books in 
the world carry this glorious message of the Millennial 
Dawn, of the Parousia of the great King, of the harvesting 
of the wheat, and the things necessary to the 
preparation of God's people for a share in the Kingdom. 
Under God's providence much depends, of 
course, upon each one of our readers, as well as upon 
the colporteurs who reach the public in a more direct 
manner. 

The secret of this large output during the year has 
been the realization on the part of the dear friends that 



the harvest is great and the laborers are few, that the 
work of harvest will not last very long, and that he that 
reapeth receiveth wages— most wonderful wages of divine 
favor and blessing upon his own heart now, besides 
the gracious things which the Father hath in reservation 
for them that love him. The thought is gradually 
pressing itself home upon the dear flock that not 
many years remain in which this harvest work can be 
carried on— that "the night cometh in which no man 
can work"— that we are even now approximately in the 
eleventh hour. We have every reason to suppose that 
we shall have at least three more years of good 
opportunities; by that time apparently the forces of 
evil will be permitted to more or less shackle and restrain 
our efforts to tell the good tidings, because the 
work of harvest will be nearly ended, the wheat will 
nearly all be garnered. With such expectations, hopes, 
prospects before us, who that has the opportunity could 
sit idly by? Who that has the Spirit of the Lord will 
not strive to make opportunity for service? 

We encourage those who are free from encumbrances, 
whose hearts are full of zeal for the Lord and 
his cause, and who have any kind of reasonable address, 
to engage in this blessed service. And as for 
others, whose time and opportunities are less, we suggest 
to them that they earn those gracious words which 
our Lord gave to Mary, "She hath done what she 
could." Do what you can to forward the Truth amongst 
your friends, neighbors and acquaintances, either by 
loaning the books or, preferably, by selling them— 
because people will generally read more carefully that 
for which they have paid money, from the natural desire 
to get back again their money's worth. And when 
we consider that these books are sold at about one-fifth 
the usual price of such books, and that the Lord's 
message is precious beyond price, we see readily that 
we are extending the richest and best of bargains to 
all our dear acquaintances. If each of our readers 
would sell during the year but one half-dozen copies, 
we might feel very sure of being able to reach the high 
mark set; and if each would sell at least a dozen copies, 
we should be almost certain of reaching that high mark, 
Love— Service. 

THE TRACT WORK OF THE YEAR 

Notwithstanding a handicap put upon us by the 
post-office department in ruling our Old Theology 
Quarterly Primary Scripture Studies as not entitled to 
the specially cheap newspaper rate of postage, our 
tract distribution for the year shows up wonderfully. 
It cost considerably more, too, for the extra postage ran 
into thousands of dollars. However, what we cannot 
hinder we must conclude that the Lord has permitted, 
and neither murmur nor repine. We are glad that we 
can render so good a report for the year. 



What we term the "volunteer" work has handled 
almost all of these tracts. We explain its operation for 
the benefit of those unfamiliar. We get out a special 
issue of our quarterly at the beginning of each year and 
use it as our "volunteer" number. All the dear friends 
far and near, in every land, are welcome to order of this 
special issue all that they can use in free distribution. 
We pay the freight charges. The method is that in each 
little Bible Study class a Captain be elected to take the 
supervision of this volunteer work. He in a general 
way districts the city and asks for the election of 
enough lieutenants to take charge of the different divisions 
of the city as he outlines them. Then, as many 
of the dear friends as can arrange their affairs to suit, 
meet every Sunday for tract distribution, each being 

R3908 : page 390 

enrolled as a worker under the general direction of the 
captain and the special care and direction of the lieutenant. 
In this way the distribution is thoroughly done, 
no part skipped and none done twice. Many of these 
companies of volunteers, after having completed their 
work of distribution in their own city, go out in little 
bands of two or three or more to adjoining towns and 
cities by electric or steam cars or otherwise. Thus the 
work of circulating the Truth is done in a most 
thorough manner. Only districts known to be strongly 
foreign or Roman Catholic are omitted. 

The dear friends assure us (and we could see it 
without their assurances) that this work, whether it 
accomplishes much or little for others, is a great blessing 
to their own hearts. It certainly does help to develop 
the courage necessary to those who would be 
"more than conquerors." Some who at first felt like 
hiring newsboys to be their substitutes in the work 
have found how great a blessing they have been missing, 
and are now engaging regularly in the service- 
soldiers of the Truth, soldiers of the Lord. Amongst 
those who are thus engaged are many brethren and 
sisters of fine education, good address, and some of 
them of considerable business standing as merchants, 
bankers' clerks, physicians, etc. The intelligence of 
the person handing the tract or putting it under the 
door gives weight and influence to the tract itself, and, 
as for the day, no better day than Sunday could be found 
for such a circulation of the words of the living God. 
We would be glad to know that ministers in their pulpits 
accomplish as much good by their sermons as do 
those who thus circulate interesting and profitable discourses 
free of all charge. 

Whatever the world may think of these dear volunteers, 
and whether it hates their message or forbears, 
we know how the Lord and the brethren esteem them, 
and that the day is coming when the Master— who said, 



R3908 : page 391 

If any man be ashamed of me and of my words, of him 
will I be ashamed when I come in the glory of the 
Father and all the holy angels with me— to each one 
of these will say, "Well done, good and faithful servant, 
enter thou into the joys of thy Lord." Not that we are 
putting works before faith, but as the Apostle says, we 
show our faith by our works. We believe, and therefore 
speak— give utterance to the Truth, scattering it 
everywhere by word and pen and printed page. The 
great Chief Reaper has so arranged matters as to test 
us along these various lines of love for him, for his 
Word, for his brethren— to test our courage or our 
shame, to prove whether or not we are true soldiers of 
the cross and followers of the Lamb. 

All cannot engage in the colporteur work, but nearly 
all deprived of that privilege can if they will engage in 
the volunteer work. If they do not so engage we do not 
judge them: we will rather think kindly and generously 
of them, and assume that circumstances, of which we 
may or may not have knowledge, hinder them from doing 
all that they would do in this blessed work. But 
God, who knoweth the heart, will say the "Well done, 
good and faithful servant," only to those who are found 
zealous in his service. Let us strive to be pleasing to 
the Lord; let that be our standard. And in harmony 
with our text for the year let us "set our affections on 
things above, and not on things on earth." Let us 
remember that, whatever the opinions of men may be 
respecting us, we serve the Lord Christ, we have accepted 
his standard, receive our directions from him, and 
are satisfied to be found well pleasing in his sight, even 
though some who have named the name of Christ have 
not received the Truth in the love of it— 2 Thess. 2:10. 

THE PILGRIM WORK 

This branch of the service is, we believe, a very useful 
one— one which we feel sure has been very profitable 
to the Lord's dear flock during the year past. The "Pilgrims" 
are brethren recognized as having not only a 
clear knowledge of the Truth, but as additionally possessing 
more than average ability in its presentation to 
others. They go from place to place at the Society's expense, 
and meet with the dear friends for usually about 
two days at each place. They are prepared to speak at 
least twice every day if suitable arrangements can be 
made for them. We urge that not more than one-half 
of the meetings at any place be for the public, allowing 
the other half to be especially for the interested, 
and we are urging that the "Pilgrims" during the coming 
year shall make a specialty of giving examples of 
the successful way of conducting Berean Studies at 
each of their visits. 

We do this because we know how profitable these 



studies are to those who have learned how to conduct 
them along proper lines, and how insipid they may be 
if the real spirit of them be not caught by the leader 
and the class. In those classes where these studies 
have been most carefully and earnestly followed, and 
where tactful leaders have been chosen— leaders who 
will draw the answers to the questions from the classes 
rather than give the answers themselves, and then in 
conclusion will summarize the answers— results are 
excellent. We trust that all the dear friends will take 
hold of these Berean Studies. The majority of people 
neither know how to study nor how to teach, and hence 
fail to get the real food, nourishment, out of what they 
hear and what they read. Permit the "Pilgrims" to 
help you still more in this direction during the coming 
year. 

"Pilgrim" appointments are only made where we 
have a positive request, and each May we publish a 
series of interrogatories, requesting answers thereto 
from those who desire "Pilgrim" visits, that we may 
judge the better as to the needs and the possibility for 
public and private meetings. We are always glad to 
receive these from any of the dear friends, and your 
contributions to the Tract Fund, while appreciated, are 
not allowed weight or influence in the matter. We 
seek to supply the "Pilgrims" where they are needed 
and would do the most good, leaving it to the Lord to 
find the means for the expenses thus incurred. 
The fact that you may be quite a distance need 
not hinder you from answering these questions, 
and be assured that we shall respond as well as we are 
able to all such appeals and as often as the men and 
the expenses and the money at our command will permit. 
It is too late to make the request when you notice 
that a "Pilgrim" is headed your way, for their 
routes are made out several months in advance, and 
they generally go in continuous journey, thus effecting 
a great saving of traveling expenses. The labors of 
this department and the cost of the same shown in our 
reports will be interesting and are encouraging, though 
not all that we could have hoped. 

THE YEAR'S CONVENTION WORK 

We need not go into details respecting these gatherings, 
as we keep you informed from time to time. 
We merely remark here that we are realizing the Lord's 
blessing upon this feature of the work more and more. 
We are finding that the One-Day Conventions as a rule 
are preferable as respects opportunities for reaching 
the public, that the General Conventions are preferable 
as respects the assembling of those who are already 
interested in the Truth, for spiritual refreshment and 
further development. The latter, we find, can advantageously 
cover a longer period of time, even though 
all cannot attend throughout the entire session. Some 



combine with the Conventions their vacation, and anyway 

are much less fatigued by having the Convention 

meetings spread over a longer period with larger opportunities 

for rest and social intercourse in the interim. 

The General Conventions of the year at Asbury 

Park, N.J., St. Paul, Minn., and Dallas, Tex., were 

very interesting indeed, and we believe highly profitable 

to the Lord's dear people, who attended in large 

numbers. 

The One-Day Conventions are growing in interest 
and in results as the dear friends learn the necessity 
for business methods in respect to their arrangements. 

R3908 : page 392 

To reach the public it is necessary first to have a first-class 

hall, and such halls are expensive and cannot be 

indulged in advantageously unless a corresponding 

amount of money be spent for advertising purposes. 

This the dear friends have learned, and, following it 

with success, are greatly encouraged. This year we 

have requested the treasurers of these One-Day Conventions 

to send us a report of the total amount of the 

cost of the Conventions to the local congregations for 

hall, advertising, etc., and the amount of the expenses 

has been credited to those congregations as so much 

donated to the Tract Fund. This item, therefore, 

swells the Tract Fund contributions and correspondingly 

appears as an increased outlay in connection 

with the increased branch of the "Pilgrim" branch of 

the work. Of late we think it an excellent plan to follow 

these One-Day Conventions and their large crowds 

with Chart talks on the following Sundays, the latter 

being advertised at the large meeting. We thus seek 

to gather and hold all the interest created by the first 

widely advertised meeting. The Chart talk usually 

helps to fix the Truth in the minds of these dear 

friends, and the larger number are thus introduced to 

the local classes. 

PILGRIM WORK SUMMARY, INCLUDING ALL CONVENTIONS 

Total number who served as "Pilgrims," 1906 30 

" of visits made 1821 

" of miles traveled in preaching tours.. 176,167 

" of public meetings held 1667 

" of parlor meetings 3529 

The above does not include Pilgrim and Convention 
work of other lands, Great Britain, Germany, Denmark, 
Sweden, Switzerland, France, Italy and 
Australia. 

R3909 : page 392 

NEWSPAPER HARVEST WORK 



Very few probably realize what a great work is possible 
through the newspapers. This work does not conflict 
with the other departments of the service, but 
rather co-operates. The immense circulation of newspapers 
in our day amongst all classes of thinking people 
gives the public press a wonderful power for good 
or for evil. Why should we not seek to use these channels, 
these implements, in the harvest work? The Lord 
directed that in the Jewish harvest the message should 
be scattered everywhere, and we apply the same rules 
to the present harvest. At the present time and for a 
good while back Brother Russell's discourses are published 
regularly in five different newspapers whose 
combined circulation is 1 19,000 copies. This in a year 
represents 6,188,000 sermons printed and scattered 
broadcast amongst reading people. Besides this, in all 
the cities where one-day conventions are held the newspapers 
publish one of these discourses. So that altogether 
we would be quite safe in estimating that over 
7,000,000 sermons were printed and scattered during 
the year. While we cannot say that 7,000,000 people 
were turned to the Lord and to his Truth thereby, 
we do know that some have been interested, profited, 
blest, brought into the Truth through this channel. 
What more can we expect? Besides, these lessons reach 
many who are not entirely convinced thereby, but whose 
prejudice against the Truth melts away gradually, preparing 
them for further blessings of the Lord now or in 
the future. The cause is indebted to many of the Lord's 
people for this circulation, for if you did not subscribe 
for these journals and thus encourage their publishers 
many of them would surely discontinue the service. 
All subscriptions should be sent through the WATCH 
TOWER office, except where the newspapers can be 
bought on the street. 

If these sermons in the newspapers were calculated 
on the basis of tract pages they would represent 20 
pages each or a total of over 140,000,000. We estimate 
therefore that this is a very valuable feature of the 
harvest work. Indeed, we all know that many will read 
a newspaper article who will decline to read a tract. We 
are looking to the Lord for possible further opening of 
doors in this direction, and if we learn of any way in 
which you can assist we will be pleased to communicate 
with you. Postal cards to the editors of journals 
publishing the discourses serve to show the interest 
and encourage publishers. 

OUR CORRESPONDENCE DEPARTMENT 

We are always glad to have letters from the interested 
and rejoice that the Lord has granted such wonderful 
opportunities for mail communication in our 
day. Should we not estimate that all these arrangements 
are designed of the Lord primarily as aids in the 



harvest work? We see that the harvest of the Jewish 

age covered but a small field, Palestine and vicinity, 

whereas the harvest of this age properly extends to 

every part of the world where there are thoroughly consecrated 

Christian people. And yet the same length of 

time, forty years, was apportioned to each harvest. How 

necessary, then, it was that the Lord should arrange 

greater convenience for the harvest work in our day. 

And how we see that railroads, steamships, telegraph 

and mail services all co-operate and were evidently expected 

to co-operate as factors in this harvest work. 

Shall we say that these things were designed for the 

world, and that we are permitted to profit by them? 

Shall we not the rather say that these things were necessary 

and intended for the harvest work, and that the 

world is permitted to profit by them? 

Total letters and cards received 51,656 

Total letters and cards sent out 40,681 

If sometimes the dear friends receive very brief 
replies to their lengthy letters they must not understand 
this to signify a lack of appreciation. Your letters 
are all very welcome indeed, but especially so if 
they are plainly written and concisely stated. Some 
letters do not seem to need a reply. When you do wish 
for information please make your question quite distinct. 
Do not be surprised if sometimes to your 
lengthy questions we send very brief replies, perhaps 
on postal-cards. We answer many questions by referring 
to our wide-margin Bible, noting there the reference 

R3909 : page 393 

to the treatment of the verse in the DAWNS or 
TOWERS. We call your attention to the same, knowing 
that the printed explanations are much more comprehensive 
than anything that we could take time to write 
by pen in a letter. Give us credit always, dear Brethren 
and Sisters, for having the very best and kindest 
intentions toward you all and toward the cause we 
serve, and be assured that we feel the same interest in 
those who get their TOWERS free and make no remittances 
to the Tract Fund. When receiving a brief letter reflect 
that we have 26,000 subscribers, and that we write 
lengthy letters twice every month to every one, to you 
—the various issues of the WATCH TOWER. Accept 
these as our principal replies to your kind letters, and 
our brief replies as mere post-scripts. 

In this connection, we remark that the wide-margin 
Bibles can no longer be supplied, and the little booklet 
promised some time ago, giving helpful references and 
texts, may be expected early in the new year. Due 
notice will be given in these columns. 

HARVEST WORK IN FOREIGN LANDS 



The harvest work is prospering greatly in Great 
Britain and Australia and fairly well in other quarters, 
Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Germany, Switzerland, 
France, Italy, Greece and near our own doors in the 
island of Jamaica— amongst the colored people. Reports 
from these fields are crowded out of this issue, 
but may be expected in the January 1st number. 

THE FINANCIAL SHOWING 

The receipts and expenditures of the year exceed 
those of any previous year. Not only so, but the shortage 
of last year has been overcome and we have a 
credit balance to carry over for 1907. We do not boast; 
—we are aware that our totals are as nothing compared 
with the millions devoted annually to the propaganda 
of error in its various compounds and delusions. 
Were it not for those millions spent in salaries for ministers, 
in Church edifices, etc., the bad tidings of great 
misery for all people except the elect would speedily give 
place to the "good tidings of great joy which shall be 
unto all people." 

Evidently the Lord has designed the permission of 
this great misrepresentation of his character and name 
by the Adversary who for so long has deluded so many 
of the true household of faith and totally blinded those 
who believe not. (2 Cor. 4:4.) And doubtless, too, it 
is of the Lord's permission that now, as the clearer 
light shines in upon his Word, that those millions 
should gradually turn to the support of that "religious 
infidelity" called "Higher Criticism" and its twin sister, 
the Evolution theory, which repudiate the Bible 
record that Adam was created an earthly image of 
God and fell into imperfection and death through disobedience; 
that hence the race needed the work of the 
Redeemer at Calvary for their forgiveness; and will 
yet need that Redeemer's work of restitution back to all 
that was lost in Adam (during the Millennium), ere 
God's plan of salvation is completed. (Acts 3:19-21.) 
Doubtless these "strong delusions," together with that 
of Spiritism and Christian Science falsely so-called 
are permitted now for the testing of Laodicea (Rev. 3:14), 
the separation of the wheat from the chaff and 
tares. "Even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy 
sight." It consoles us to know that "The Lord knoweth 
them that are his," and that none of these shall be 
plucked from his hand, his power, his care. It will 
not be possible in this day for those strong delusions 
to "deceive the very elect," however ignorant or humble 
they may be. 

On the other hand we note that the Lord wonderfully 
blesses what money his wisdom does provide. 
And the very scarcity of money becomes a blessing in 
that it encourages the faithful to economy and self-denials 
which doubtless inure to their greater spiritual 



profit, in various ways. Doing what we can let us be 
thankful and content. "Thy will be done!" 

1906--SUMMARY OF THE OUTPUT--1906 

Total output of DAWNS, "Scripture Studies," cloth-bound, 

sold at cost 377,959 

Total output DAWN, Vol. I., magazine form, sold at 

cost 43,100 

Total output of free TOWERS, Tracts and newspaper 
publication of our sermons, stated in usual form 
of tract pages 215,308,672 

1906-FINANCIAL STATEMENT-- 1906 

Receipts 

"Good Hopes" realized $36,127.02 

Tract Fund from other sources 29,134.05 

$65,261.07 

Expenditures 

Deficit of 1905, paid $ 3,952.73 

Pilgrim and Convention expenses 11,752.45 

For Tracts, free TOWERS and newspaper 

publishings 36,490.31 

Maintenance of Foreign Branches 9,715.83 

$61,911.32 

Balance, overplus, 1906 $ 3,349.75 



R3910 : page 393 

Let us permit the blessings of this year to encourage 
and strengthen and nerve us for the New Year. It may 
be a strain upon our faith to expect still greater things 
in 1907, but who knows the mind of the Lord to the 
contrary? Let us do our parts faithfully and leave the 
results to him. He is able to put millions into the work 
through seemingly natural means if he choose; and 
as we approach the close of the reaping time it should 
not surprise us to see the work extend wonderfully in the 
next three years, and then more rapidly close. 

If we are doing all in our power, let us not worry 
but go on contentedly. If we on examination find that 
we are not doing all in our power we should not be content, 
but should watch and pray and strive to be of 
those of whom the Lord will say, "She hath done what 
she could." Remember that the best thing for your 
friend to read is STUDIES (or DAWN), Vol. I. Remember 
that every DAWN reader should be on the TOWER 
list. Remember that you can at no cost but time be a 
"Volunteer" -tract distributor. 



R3919 : page 394 

"A LITTLE CHILD SHALL LEAD THEM" 

-ISAIAH 11:6.— 

A little child shall lead them! 
Oh blessed, blessed time— 
The Universe will be at peace, 
The Bells of Heaven will chime, 
As Angel Choirs again will sing 
The song of Bethlehem's plain, 
Glory to God! "How good He is!" 
On Earth good will to men. 

A little child shall lead them; 

The fierce— the meek— the strong 

No chains shall hold, nor fetters bind 

The captives in that throng. 

But Love shall be the leading string 

The Universe to sway! 

A Baby's fingers will control 

And guide them in the way. 

A little child shall lead them; 
The pride and pomp of War, 
The captives' groan, the angry tone 
The battle's awful roar- 
No more disturb the harmony 
Of Earth's long-sought repose; 
And Wilderness and desert place 
Shall blossom as the rose. 

A little child shall lead them; 
The meek, so long oppressed, 
Will then rejoice in perfect peace 
And all the earth possess. 
No more will vain ambition rule 
Nor drench with blood the sod, 
But all the ransomed human sons 
Rejoice before their God. 

Oh Precious Master, in whose arms 
The little ones were blessed, 
Unmindful of the clamoring crowd 
That round thy pathway pressed,— 
Fill our hearts with childlike faith, 
Let Love expel the leaven 
Of Sin's unholy blighting power, 
For of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. 
—Anonymous. 



R3910 : page 394 



"IF I GO AWAY I WILL COME AGAIN" 

--LUKE 24:36-53.-DECEMBER 23.- 

Golden Text:— "While he blessed them, he was 
parted from them, and was received up into heaven." 

THIS lesson connects with our previous one, and is 

Luke's brief summary of our Lord's manifestations 

during the forty days of his presence up to the time 

when he left his disciples by ascending to heaven. It presents 

what in our last lesson we designated the fifth and 

eleventh manifestations of the risen Messiah to his faithful 

apostles, who were to be his witnesses to the Jews and indirectly 

to the whole world. The forepart, from verses 36-43 

inclusive, show how carefully, how wisely, our Lord presented 

the Truth, so that none of his followers would have occasion 

for stumbling, although he well knew that he was to 

be for a stone of stumbling, a rock of offence, to both the 

houses of Israel, the Jewish and the Gospel nominal 

churches. 

The account graphically sets forth how on the evening 
of his resurrection, while his apostles were gathered discussing 
the incidents of the day, the reported meeting, interview, 
etc., Jesus himself stood in their midst, the doors being 
shut. No wonder they were affrighted, for they were in a 
nervous condition throughout the day, not only fearing apprehension 
by the rulers but perplexed respecting the meaning 
of the day's incidents. What could they think now but 
that a spirit being stood in their midst? how could any other 
come in while the doors were shut? As a matter of fact, we 
have seen that although the Lord was put to death in the 
flesh, he was quickened, made alive in the Spirit, and that 
he was no longer a human being but born of the Spirit, and 
that it was by reason of his power as a spirit being that he 
was able to come into their presence, the doors being shut. 

We have seen that he could have manifested himself as 
a spirit being as he did to Saul of Tarsus later, but that instead 
of so doing he assumed a body of flesh so that they 
might be without distraction. The wisdom of his course is 
shown by the alarm of the disciples and his ability to assure 
them that what they saw was not a spirit but flesh and 
bones. His words were, "A spirit hath not flesh and bones 
as ye see me have." But spirit beings had assumed flesh 
and bones as Jesus did, and had thus appeared to men to 
deliver divine messages. We have already noticed such an 
appearance of our Lord and two angels to Abraham, and how 
they ate and talked with Abraham. Similarly in this case 
our Lord, to prove that his body was of flesh and bones, 
called for food and ate before them some broiled fish and 
honeycomb. 

Their fears thus allayed, they were the better prepared 
to receive the appropriate instructions of the hour— prepared 
as they could not have been under any other conditions of 
which we can think. Evidently our Lord chose the very best 



way of proving the two facts: first that he was risen, that it 
was his very self; and, secondly, that he was changed, not 
the same as previously, because now, as the angels, he had 
power to come and go, to appear and disappear, to assume 
one form and clothing or another as suited convenience and 
the objects he wished to serve. 

OPENED UNTO THEM THE SCRIPTURES 

Their fears allayed, they were prepared for further instruction 
—an explanation of the wonderful experiences 
through which they had recently been passing. We could 
hardly think of our dear Redeemer speaking to his loved 
ones upon any other topic at such a time. He explained 
that what they were experiencing was the fulfilment of his 
words while he was yet with them— intimating that he was 
no longer with them in the same sense as formerly. He proceeded 
to explain to them the necessity for their trying experience 
and his, that the Father had so arranged from the 
beginning, and had so outlined the matter in the prophecies 
of Moses and all the prophets, including the Psalms wherever 
they referred to him. Thus he opened their understanding, 
their minds, that they could appreciate the Scriptures. His 
words served as a Bible Key, bringing order out of their previous 
confusion. 

The fact that the Scriptures are so written that they 
cannot be understood without certain divine assistance is incomprehensible 
to the world. Not seeing the divine plan 
worldly minds think it unreasonable that God should hide 
his purposes from the wise and prudent and reveal them 
unto babes (Matt. 1 1:25); they think it strange that he so 
arranged his revelations through the prophets that they could 
not be understood except as he would furnish the necessary 
elucidation, keys or instructions. However, to us who do see 

R3910 : page 395 

the divine plan with a measure of clearness, it was evidently 
not only the wisest way but the best in every sense of the 
word for God to arrange his plan so that only those in heart 
harmony with him would be able to appreciate it in advance of 
its fulfilment, as the Lord declared, To you it is given to know 
the mysteries of the Kingdom, but to all outsiders these things 
are spoken in parables and dark sayings, that they might not 
understand; and again he said even to his faithful ones, "I 
have many things to tell you, but ye cannot bear them now." 
-John 16:12. 

The things which our Lord revealed to his disciples on 
this occasion as a key to their understanding of the Scriptures 
could not properly have been given them previously; 
those truths would not have been meat in due season to the 
household of faith earlier. They would do them more good 
now than at any other time— now that their minds were 
quickened and they were awakened, energized by the stirring 
events and perplexities; they now were ready to see the 
course of divine wisdom in the arrangement of the plan. And 



is it so now— today? As one by one the Lord's people come 
to that condition of mind and heart development where they 
are ready for it the Lord is pleased to give them more light 
of "present truth"; and when once their eyes of understanding 
are opened they wonder why they have been so blind 
that they did not see these things before. The secret is that 
they were not previously prepared: other lessons must first 
be learned before the deeper truths could be appreciated; 
and the great Teacher, reading the heart, was able to give 
them the opening of the understanding at the appropriate 
time for the highest welfare of his followers. 

We are not to suppose that our Lord worked some miracle 
upon the minds of his followers to open their understanding: 
rather we are to suppose that he operated then as 
he still operates in giving instruction; that he used natural 
means, that he reasoned with them, explaining to them the 
necessity for the one feature and the other of the divine plan, 
until they got before their minds the logical order and 
sequence of affairs and were able to some extent to grasp 
the divine purpose. We are sure, however, that they did not 
comprehend the Scriptures perfectly, because this was not to 
be their experience, according to our Lord's own words, until 
after he had ascended on high and sent forth the holy Spirit, 
which would guide them into all Truth, yea, into the deep 
things of God. 

What our Lord did do was to give all the details that 
the natural man in a consecrated condition of mind could 
appreciate and act upon. He doubtless showed them briefly 
that the sacrifices of the Law typified his own sacrifice, that 
the atonement for sin was necessary on a higher scale by 
better sacrifices before the real reconciliation could be effected 
and the whole world of mankind be permitted to come 
back into relationship with God and to have an opportunity 
for life eternal. He doubtless showed them that natural 
Israel was not worthy to constitute the Kingdom class, that 
therefore only those accepting him had been chosen— "The 
election hath received it and the rest were blinded."— 
Rom. 11:7. 

He showed them, further, the work expected of them— 
to declare not only his righteousness but that he was the 
sin-offering, and that although he died he arose again to give 
the blessing as the antitypical High Priest. He showed them 
that repentance would be granted through the merit of his 
death and the remission of sins, and that this would be open 
and applicable to all mankind— all nations. Evidently, however, 
he did not explain to them that the Gentiles were to be 
fellow-heirs with themselves in the great honor of being the 

R3911 : page 395 

antitypical Israel, Spiritual Israel, joint-heirs with Messiah 
in the Kingdom; because we find that Peter and the other 
apostles were quite ignorant of this feature of the divine 
plan until the time of Cornelius and the special manifestations 
connected therewith. Their witness was to begin at 
Jerusalem, but not to end there. 



"BEGINNING AT JERUSALEM." 

The call to membership in the Bride of Christ must be 
thoroughly promulgated amongst the natural seed of Abraham 
that it might select as many as were Israelites indeed 
before it would be extended to the Gentiles. They were to 
tarry in Jerusalem also to await enduement from on high— 
the holy Spirit's anointing and begetting. He referred to the 
Pentecostal blessing, saying, "Behold, I send the promise of 
the Father upon you, but tarry ye in Jerusalem until ye be 
endued with power from on high." The Apostle tells us that 
the sending of the holy Spirit at Pentecost became a witness 
or sign of God's acceptance of our Lord Jesus' sacrifice, and 
thus a sign of his acceptance of the Church and household 
of faith, whose sins alone were covered by that sacrifice. His 
words are, "Therefore being by the right hand of God exalted, 
and having received of the Father the holy Spirit of 
promise, he hath shed forth this which ye now see and hear." 
This was the seal of the Father's approval of the sacrifice of 
Jesus, and of the forgiveness of sins of those for whom his 
precious blood was applied; as the Apostle Paul declares, 
"He ascended up on high there to appear in the presence of 
God on our behalf— as the Advocate of believers, but not as 
the world's Advocate."— Acts 2:33. 

The record is that the apostles did tarry at Jerusalem 
until they received the Pentecostal blessing, and the lesson 
to all the Lord's disciples from that day to the present time 
is that none except those thus endued with power from on 
high— none except those who come under the blessing of the 
Spirit of the Lord, the holy mind of Christ— none others are 
qualified to be the ambassadors for God and his representatives 
before men. When our Lord sent forth his apostles 
during his ministry he put his Spirit or power upon them, 
which enabled them to preach and cast out devils, in harmony 
with his wishes and instructions; but as soon as he was 
gone they might do no more work until they received the 
actual blessing in their own hearts. 

We fear that a general trouble amongst those teaching 
in the name of the Lord today and in times past has been 
that they did not tarry until they were endued with the holy 
Spirit, but recklessly pressed into the ministry without this, 
the real credential of divine authorization. Let us not make 
the same mistake; let us realize that work not done under the 
guidance of the holy Spirit is sure to be defective and in 
some respects evil, and to result in evil fruitage, of which we 

R3911 : page 396 

can see so much everywhere about us in Babylon. Let us 
then not only see to it that we have come under the anointing 
which has been on the body since Pentecost, but see also 
that we abide in this condition, that we grieve not the holy 
Spirit, and that thus we shall be qualified to be witnesses for 
the Truth, ambassadors for God, servants of the Most High, 
co-laborers in the vineyard. At no time was this more necessary 



than now in the harvest time. All of the Lord's people 
should be awake to a realization that the Truth, the light 
now due to the household of faith, is not to be expected 
through any but sanctified channels. 

"WITNESSES OF THESE THINGS." 

The apostles as witnesses were not merely to tell about the 
Redeemer's virgin birth, nor merely about his holy, devoted life, 
nor merely about his Calvary cross, nor merely of our Lord's resurrection, 
nor merely of his ascension, but in addition to all 
these facts they are to tell that he was a properly qualified Redeemer, 
that he met all the conditions of the Law, and that 
now he ever liveth to succor those who come unto the Father 
through him. How faithfully the apostles performed their 
mission! how truly, as the Apostle Paul declared, they 
shunned not to declare the whole counsel! Worldly wisdom 
might intimate that to own a Master and Teacher who had 
been executed as a felon would be to their discredit, and 
thoroughly hinder them from progress in gathering followers 
to their Leader. But these faithful witnesses consulted not 
with flesh and blood as to what they should preach— they 
told the story simply in all of its details, not neglecting even 
those features which showed their own weaknesses, as in the 
cases of Peter and Judas, and the disputing as to which 
should be greatest, etc. The Truth in the simplicity in 
which God intended it to be delivered has evidently come 
down to us in the Bible account. 

Now we in our turn are the witnesses charged with the 
responsibility of carrying forward this same message— the 
message of our Lord's purity, that he was holy, harmless, 
undefiled, separate from sinners; the message of his loving 
devotion to the Father's glorious plan unto death, even 
the death of the cross, his resurrection and his ascension, and 
his promise to come again to receive his faithful to himself 
and establish his Kingdom. Nothing less than the whole 
Gospel should be witnessed, and it is for each of us to say 
to what extent we are faithfully using our privileges. He 
who is ashamed of the Lord and his cause, or of anything 
pertaining to him— he who is ashamed of his agents and 
agencies of the past or of the present, is not a faithful witness 
and has the Master's word that "he that is ashamed of 
me or of my words, of him will I be ashamed when I come 
in my Kingdom." (Mark 8:38.) Let us, therefore, dearly beloved, 
not allow pride or any other evil condition of mind to 
hinder us from full heart-confession of what great thing the 
Lord has done for us, and of all the steps which he has been 
pleased to use in the doing of them. 

"HE WAS PARTED FROM THEM" 

Bethany was on the Mount of Olives, but a little distance 
from Jerusalem, and thither the Lord led his disciples 
at the end of the forty days, after having given them the 
various manifestations of his resurrection and change already 
mentioned. We read, "While he blessed them he was parted 



from them and carried up into heaven." Another account 
says, "A cloud received him out of their sight." We must 
remember that the apostles were still natural men, that the 
holy Spirit had not yet been shed forth upon them: hence 
we see the necessity for the Lord's giving them such evidence 
as natural men could understand. 

He could have vanished out of their sight as he did 
after talking with them and eating of the broiled fish and 
honeycomb in the upper room. But had he so vanished and 
ascended to the Father how would they have known about 
the matter? Would they not have been in doubt as to 
whether or not he had ever gone away to appear in the 
presence of God on our behalf? But when the changed 
Lord, the quickened spirit, was about to ascend to the Father, 
his last manifestation was in a body of flesh, and he was 
gradually parted from them and gradually ascended into 
the sky and was lost to their sight, so that they might have 
before their minds the thought that he was gone, that they 
were not to expect him to appear and disappear in the future 
as he had done during those forty days, that they were to 
think of him now as being with the Father in the heavenly 
glory. Now they could call to mind his promise, "If I go 
away I will come again and receive you unto myself." 
Henceforth their minds would center upon his second coming 
and the glorious things then to be accomplished for them 
and for the world. Doubtless this was part of what our 
Lord made plain to them in opening the Scriptures— that he 
accepted them and all spiritual Israelites indeed as his 
jewels, and was selecting these during this Gospel age, and 
at its close would come again and would receive them to 
himself as his Bride, and establish his Kingdom with power 
and great glory in the earth. 

"THIS SAME JESUS SHALL SO COME" 

Another account tells us that while they were looking 
upward to the point in heaven where last they had seen the 
Lord, two angels appeared and said to them, "Ye men of 
Galilee, why stand ye here gazing up into heaven? This 
same Jesus ye have seen go into heaven will so come in 
like manner as ye have seen him go." The lesson was a 
complete one and was well understood by the apostles; they 
fully believed that the Master had gone from them and that 
as truly he would come again. 

They did not forget his statement either, "Lo, I am with 
you alway, even to the end of the age," but accepted this 
properly as signifying that he would be with them in the 
plenitude of his power to protect them, to oversee their interests 
through various agencies at his command. But as to 
his actual presence, that was gone— "Ye shall see me no 
more until that day when ye shall say, Blessed is he that 
cometh in the name of the Lord." (Matt. 21:9.) He went 
from them quietly, unostentatiously, unknown to the world. 
Hence his followers are to be on the watch for the signs that 
will indicate the presence of the Son of man in the end of 
the Gospel age, and are to remember that it will be in his 



day as it was in the days of Noah, men will be eating and 
drinking, planting and building, marrying and giving in 
marriage, not discerning, knowing not that the Son of man 

R3911 : page 397 

is present, that the Gospel age is closing, that a new dispensation 
is about to dawn, to be inaugurated by the complete 
change of the members of the body of Christ, because flesh 
and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom. 

"THEY WORSHIPED HIM" 

Although our Lord taught us to worship the Father in 
spirit and in truth, and again to pray, "Our Father which 
art in heaven," and although the Apostle said, "I bow my 
knees to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ," 
(Eph. 3:14), nevertheless the general sentiment of Scripture 
seems to imply that there will be nothing wrong in our addressing 
a petition to our Lord Jesus direct if any so desire 
at any time. As the head of the body it is but the appropriate 
thing that, as every member of the natural body makes 
known its desires, its petitions, to its own head, so the Church, 
the body of Christ, should be permitted to address him, and 
thus we read in our lesson that the apostles worshiped the 
ascended Jesus— they recognized his greatness and dignity 
and honor as the Messiah, the Son of the living God, the 
Redeemer of the world, who in due time shall come and receive 
his faithful to himself and establish his Kingdom for 
the blessing of the world. The Lord's own words are appropriate 
here: he says, "That all men should honor the Son 
even as they honor the Father."— John 5:23. 

Matters had now taken a changed form in the minds 
of the disciples: their perplexities were gone, they understood 

R3912: page 397 

why Jesus had died, the necessity for this, and that it 
was related to his second coming and the Kingdom then to 
be established— that it was the very basis of his future work. 
They knew not, indeed, how long it would be before he 
would come again— the Lord graciously kept this from them 
lest the length of the period might have discouraged them. 
Nor was it necessary either to them or their successors, because 
not one of them would live the entire period, and it 
was appropriate that each one should live his space of years 
in expectancy that the Kingdom might come in his day, and 
with the desire that he might be ready for it at any moment. 
We who live today have the happy lot to live "in the days 
of the Son of man"— in the days of his second presence— in 
the days of the establishment of his Kingdom— in the day of 
all days the best. 

Instead of being discouraged the disciples now had 
great joy as they waited for the promised holy Spirit of the 
fiftieth day. Meantime they were continually in the Temple 
—not that they lived there, but as we say today of a regular 



attendant of Church, "He goes to Church all the time," 
meaning regularly. So with the apostles: they were from 
Galilee, and had no special business in Jerusalem during the 
remaining ten days till Pentecost, and they improved the 
opportunity of spending much of their time in the Temple, 
praising God, thanking him, desiring to cultivate in themselves 
more and more the Spirit of the Lord. Applying this 
feature to ourselves, is it not true of us also that we have 
had great joy from the time the Lord opened the eyes of our 
understanding, that we might see his Word in its true light, 
that we might be his witnesses? All of this class, truly 
members of his body, are represented as abiding in the 
Temple, the Tabernacle, the Holy, as the Apostle says: "We 
are seated together with Christ in the holies," our hearts 
have fellowship with him, prayer and praise and worship 
seem to rank amongst the highest and most appreciated privileges. 
We have less to ask the Lord for than formerly, 
more to thank him for, as we begin to realize what great 
things the Lord hath done for us. 



R3912: page 397 

THE STORY OF JESUS IN REVIEW 

-DECEMBER 30.- 

Golden Text:— "His name shall be called Wonderful, 
Counsellor, The Mighty God, The Everlasting Father, 
The Prince of Peace."— Isa. 9:6. 

THE closing lesson of the year is a review of the quarter's 
study of the blessed Redeemer, and truly the 
Golden Text serves well to congregate and crystalize 
all of our previous studies of the wonderful character 
and work of the Prince of Life, the world's Redeemer, the 
Church's Advocate, and soon to be the world's Mediator. 

Many are the names of the Son of man— the man 
Christ Jesus, the Son of God, who was made flesh that he 
by the grace of God should taste death for every man. The 
first name given in the list of the Prophet is called Wonderful, 
and is surely appropriate. His is the most wonderful 
career and the most wonderful character of which we have 
any knowledge. Who else than he left the glories of the 
heavenly state for human conditions? as he himself said, 
"No man hath ascended up to heaven save he which came 
down from heaven." (John 3:13.) He alone left the glory 
which he had with the Father before the world was; he 
alone exercised that wonderful faith in the Father which 
permitted him to sacrifice everything with joy, delighting to 
do the Father's will, with confidence that in due time the 
rewards of the Father's favor and love would more than 
compensate for every sacrifice. 

Wonderful, too, was his life amongst men, the Light 
shining in the darkness, the darkness comprehending it not. 



More and more as we come into the light ourselves we are 
able to comprehend this Wonderful One. As the Apostle 
suggests, the eyes of our understanding being opened we are 
able to comprehend with all saints the heights and depths 
and lengths and breadths of the love of God which passes 
all understanding, such love being manifested, exhibited, 
illustrated in this Wonderful One. Wonderful also was his 
resurrection, the "first that should rise from the dead," "the 
first-born amongst many brethren," "highly exalted, given a 
name that is above every name, that at the name of Jesus 
every knee should bow."— Rom. 8:29; Col. 1:15,18; 
Phil. 2:9,10. 

The second name on the list, "Counsellor," is also appropriate. 
Who else is such a Counsellor? Who else is 

R3912: page 398 

able to be touched with the feeling of our infirmities? Who 

else is able always to guide us with his eye? Who else 

has assured us that all things shall work together for our 

good? Happy are they who have made the acquaintance 

of this Counsellor, whom God hath set forth to be the satisfaction 

for our sins and to be the Counsellor, the Leader, 

the Guide, the Instructor of his people, and to bring them 

out of darkness into his marvellous light, out of the chains 

of sin and bondage of death back to full liberty of the sons 

of God. Let us more and more heed the voice that speaketh 

from heaven, our Counsellor. 

"The Mighty God," another of his names, is also appropriate. 
If the angels were called Elohim, gods, and if the 
angels appearing to men in the past were called Elohim, 
gods, because they were the representatives of divine power, 
surely much more appropriate is the name to him whom the 
Father specially sent as his special messenger to men. If 
elohim signifies a mighty one, surely he is above the other 
mighty ones, next to the Father himself, and may therefore 
most properly be termed the mighty Elohim— the Mighty 
God— the one mighty amongst the mighty. "Mighty to save" 
we sometimes sing; yea, says the Word of the Lord, "He is 
able to save unto the uttermost all who come unto the 
Father through him." (Heb. 7:25) Such a mighty Savior 
we need, one not only able to sympathize with us and to 
instruct us, but able also to deliver us from the Evil One and 
from our own weaknesses as well as from the divine sentence 
against our race as sinners. Let us exult in this "Mighty 
One," whom the heavenly Father, Jehovah, has sent forth 
as the Arm of Jehovah for deliverance from sin and 
death. 

The title "Everlasting Father" will in due time be appropriately 
his— but not yet. These words are a prophecy; 
some of them have been already fulfilled and others are yet to 
be fulfilled. When they were written Jesus had not yet left 
the heavenly glory. Jesus is not the everlasting Father to 
the Church. No; the Scriptures reveal him as our elder 
Brother, and again as our Bridegroom. The Apostle most 
explicitly tells us that Jehovah is our Father, saying, "The God 



and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ hath begotten us"— we 
are his children. The dear Redeemer himself taught us to 
pray, "Our Father which art in heaven"; and again after his 
resurrection he sent the message to Peter and others of his 
followers, "I ascend to my Father and your Father, to my 
God and your God."— John 20:17. 

In due time he will be the everlasting Father to the 
world— to those of the world who, during the Millennial 
age, will hearken to his voice and receive of his life— restitution 
blessings. Jesus purchased Adam and all of his children 
by the sacrifice of himself: they are his, to make out 
of them everything possible and to bring as many as possible 
back into harmony with the Father and to eternal life. 
They died under divine condemnation; what they now need 
is life, and the Father has arranged that Jesus may be their 
Life-Giver, and to this end he has already given his life, 
purchased them, that in due time, during his Millennial 
Kingdom, he may offer them the return of all that was lost 
in Adam, for it is written, "He came to seek and to save that 
which was lost." 

Since that life which Jesus will give to the world during 
the Millennial age is the fruitage of his own sacrifice, therefore 
he is said to be the Father, the Life-Giver to the world. 
And since the life that he will give will not be merely a 
temporary one, but by obedience to him all those who receive 
of his life may be brought to perfection, and maintain 
that life eternally, therefore he is the Everlasting Father. 
He gives the everlasting life in contradistinction to Adam, 
who attempted to be the Father to the race, but through his 
disobedience brought forth his children to a dying condition. 
No so the everlasting life: the life which he gives to his 
children during the period of the Millennium, and which 
will accomplish the regeneration of the world, or of so many 
of the world as will accept his favor, will be unto life 
eternal. 

Not yet is he the Prince of Peace and King of Glory, 
but very soon he will take unto himself his great power and 
reign. Far from peaceful will be its beginning. The Scriptural 
description is that the nations will be angry and divine 
wrath will come upon them, and that they shall be broken 
in pieces as a potter's vessel: that the Lord will speak to 
them in his sore displeasure, and that there will be a time 
of trouble such as was not since there was a nation.— Psa. 2:5; 
Dan. 12:1. 

But the Lord wounds to heal, he chastises to correct, 
and will not "keep his anger forever," but will ultimately 
prove that he is "plenteous in mercy." The result of his 
righteous indignation against sin and all unrighteousness 
and iniquity will be the establishment of justice upon a 
firm footing throughout the world. Then as a consequence 
peace will reign and the King of Glory will be known as 
the Prince of Peace, whose blessings will fill the earth for 
the refreshment of every creature and the bringing of so many 
as will into full harmony with God through the processes 
of restitution. 



page 398 

As we long for the glorious day let us prepare our 
hearts that we may be approved of the King— that we may 
be accepted even as his Bride through his mercy and grace. 
Let us not forget that there are conditions expressed by the 
Apostle in the words, "If we suffer with him, we shall also 
reign with him," "If we be dead with him we shall also live 
with him"— "heirs of God, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our 
Lord, if so be that we suffer with him, that we may also be 
glorified together." A little while and the trials shall be 
over; a little while and if faithful we shall have the crown 
and hear the blessed words, "Well done, good and faithful 
servant, enter thou into the joys of thy Lord. Thou hast 
been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over 
many things. "-Matt. 25:21,23. 


