VOL. XXVIII FEBRUARY 15 No. 4 
A.D. 1907-A.M. 6035 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 51 

Current Affairs in Germany 51 

"Tongues of Fire" 52 

The Doctrine of the Virgin Birth of Christ as 

an Essential 53 

News from Kingston, Jamaica 53 

Take Heed to Yourselves 53 

Harvest Work Amongst the Blacks 54 

The Oath-Bound Covenant 56 

Abraham's Prayer for Sodom 59 

Some Interesting Questions- 
Trading with our "Pounds" 63 

Love the Fulfilling of the Law 63 

page 50 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R3942 : page 50 

SHALL WE SING UNITEDLY? 



"Many men of many minds," writes the poet; but God's 
people are striving daily to have "the mind of Christ" and to 
"all mind the same things." We commend this same course 
in respect to our hymns. When we meet in One-Day Conventions 
and General Conventions let us be able to sing unitedly. 
We now have, prepared at considerable trouble and expense, 
two hymn books with music: one of these, Hymns of Dawn, 
containing beyond all dispute 333 of the best of all hymns of all 
denominations, is supplied in cloth binding, 35 cents, postpaid, 
about one-fourth the usual price; the other is a choice collection 
of 54 new hymns, Zion's Glad Songs, at 5 cents, postpaid. 
Are not these enough? Do we know them all so as to sing 
them well? Each one, of course, has the liberty to buy and to 
sing as he may please, but is it expedient to distract with too 
great variety? We incline to think not; and hence keep in 
stock and supply only the above described. 

page 50 

EXTRA COPIES OF MONDAY'S "DISPATCH" 



We are privileged to send extra copies of Monday's Pittsburg 
Dispatch, containing Pastor Russell's sermons, to anyone 
who is a regular subscriber. Thus many friends at one place can 
get supplies through one of their number. Such papers, however, 
require extra wrapping and postage. The following will 
be the rates:— 

7 copies Monday's Dispatch for 12 weeks $1.50 

15 " " " " 12 " 3.00 

50 " " " " 12 " 9.00 

For 6 months the prices would be double the above. For 
a year multiply prices by four. 

THE PASSOVER MEMORIAL, MARCH 28, 1907 



The date for the observance of the Memorial of our Lord's 
"Last Supper" this year will be Thursday night (after 6 p.m.), 
March 28th. We trust that our readers in Asia, Africa, Australia 
and Alaska will get this notice in season and celebrate in 
unison with us the great event which sealed the Abrahamic or 
"Everlasting Covenant" for us, and will seal the "New Covenant" 
for Israel and the whole world, shortly. 

WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES ABOUT SPIRITISM? 

WHO ARE THE SPIRITS IN PRISON? AND WHY ARE THEY THERE? 



This booklet is now ready and will be supplied at 10 cents 
each: wholesale rates 50 cents per dozen are open to all TOWER 
readers who may desire to circulate these among their friends. 



In leatherette binding, 25 cents. Prices include postage. 
SEND A MARKED COPY TO US 



Slanderous and nonsensical reports respecting the Editor 
of this journal and our Society's work, etc., have appeared in 
various newspapers. Friends are requested on finding such to 
send us a copy of such papers— marked: not merely a clipping. 



Colporteurs will please use our Order blanks and direct 
letters to "Colporteur Department." 



R3940 : page 51 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
CURRENT AFFAIRS IN GERMANY 



ACCORDING to the advices received from the Society's 
representative in Germany there is a 
great religious unrest there at the present 
time. Roman Catholics are stoutly resisting the movement 
known as "Los von Rom"— i.e., "Away from 
Rome"— and the tendency of our times to individual 
thinking on the part of its supporters. Its party in the 
German parliament— the Reichstag— is now very necessary 
to the government in connection with the passage 
of government measures, because the Socialist party 
has become so strong. Under the patronage of the 
Emperor, Catholics are proclaiming loudly the duty of 
loyalty to religion and the government, even though 
not a great while ago they were quite willing to inveigh 
against that very same government. The cry now is 
for the necessity of all religious people uniting in opposition 
to infidelity and revolutionary parties. Protestants, 
under similar influences, are taking somewhat 
the same stand, but decline to be brought too closely 
into union with the Church of Rome. Thus the question 
of the hour is held to be outward formalistic religion 
and patriotism to the government. Under this 
plea, no doubt, Socialists and Revolutionists will be 
more and more opposed year by year, and no doubt 
ourselves, and others considered out of line with the 
majority of "Orthodoxy," will be similarly brought under 
the ban, and treated as though we were in some 
way associated with or responsible for the revolutionary 
conditions and their program. 
Unable to secure legislation desired by him Emperor 



William recently dissolved the German Reichstag 
(Congress) and ordered a fresh election at which a 
stout contest was made by the three leading parties, 
one of which, the Social-Democrat, had been too powerful 
for the Emperor's purposes. It is claimed that 
the Emperor appealed to the Pope to influence the 
Catholic vote away from the Socialist party because 
they were a menace to both Church and State. The 
election certainly reflects this, for in it the Socialists 
lost 34 members of the Reichstag. The event was 
celebrated at Berlin, where noisy crowds saluted the 
Emperor and subsequently the Crown Prince. 

The effect will be to more than ever separate the 
religious from the Socialists and drive the irreligious 
to them. Thus we see the cleavage coming along the 
very lines laid down in prophecy— on the one side "the 
Beast and his Image and the Kings of the earth and 
their armies" or supporters, and on the other side the 
army of anarchy, which unwittingly will as "the Lord's 
great army" overthrow all present institutions preparatory 
to the Millennial reign of peace and righteousness. 
But let us never lose sight of the fact that the "saints," 
the "elect," have nothing to do with supporting or assisting 
either side in that awful conflict. It is the Father 
that shall put all things under the control of the Christ. 
It will be accomplished by the letting go of natural 
laws, "the loosing of the winds," which will allow 
human selfishness on both sides to wreck the present 

R3941 : page 51 

civilization in a time of trouble such as was not before 
since there was a nation. 

Emperor William at a banquet recently took occasion 
to emphasize his opposition to all who in any wise 
think or speak pessimistically, as implying and preaching 
trouble,— financial, social and religious— as we do. 
He declares that all pessimists should leave the country, 
and intimated that only those taking a hopeful view 
of matters need expect imperial favors. Nevertheless, the 
newspapers of Germany, religious and secular, are disputing 
both the accuracy and wisdom of the Emperor's 
words. They seem to believe that denying the existence 
of evils will not cure them. They are surely right; 
the Emperor is surely wrong: nevertheless we may 
readily imagine how he and others of like mind and 
political influence, combining with Churchianity, 
Roman and Protestant, will be ready to go great 
lengths in crying "Peace, peace, when there is no 
peace," and in harshly treating those who proclaim the 
message of the Bible respecting "a time of trouble such 
as was not since there was a nation" as being at hand. 

R3941 : page 52 

We are reminded in this connection of the experiences 



of Jeremiah with the king and princes of Judah— that 

time and again he was cast into the dungeon for proclaiming 

the Word of the Lord respecting approaching 

calamities. 

Spiritism is said to be making considerable progress 
in Germany, too. Books on the spirit land, proclaiming 
that the dead are not dead— that all when they 
seem to die pass to a more complete enjoyment of life 
—are having wide sale. As already pointed out, Spiritism 
is bound to have a mighty influence in the next 
few years in deluding the people: everything is surely 
well prepared in that direction. The views of Christendom, 
that the dead are alive, have been thoroughly 
absorbed by the public; and as now doubt is creating 
individual thought along religious lines, Spiritism 
steps to the front, claiming to have the only torch to 
light the gloom beyond, and many are walking in its 
false light. It is difficult to know in advance how serious 
its misleadings may yet become— everywhere 
throughout Christendom. From Germany also comes 
confirmation of a report current there that a certain kind 
of "revival" has sprung up in India, attended with 
peculiar manifestations of an unseen power— apparently 
a counterfeit of some of the manifestations in the 
early Church following Pentecost— speaking with unknown 
tongues, not leading, however, toward intelligent 
knowledge of the Lord and his plan, but toward 
fanaticism. 

"TONGUES OF FIRE" 



From all parts of the world, but especially from 
the Pacific coast, come reports of what its friends call 
a fresh Pentecostal blessing— an outpouring of the holy 
Spirit, etc., and what its opponents call a religious insanity. 
The movement is amongst so-called "holiness 
people" of various sects and parties— "missions," as 
their meetings are generally styled. People who have 
been seeking and claiming "divine healing" seem to be 
among the most susceptible. Amongst these are some 
who give evidence of deep sincerity and a superficial 
knowledge of God's Word. Though generally swift to 
speak and slow to hear, they, through indolence or 
fear, neglect systematic study of the divine message. 
They seem to come under the head mentioned by the 
Prophet (Hosea 4:6), "My people perish for lack of 
knowledge." 

Reports of the movement in various directions 
seemed so absurd that we declined to believe them, 
supposing that since they were sent out by the 
secular press the facts must surely be misrepresented. 
Now, however, the "flame," as it is called, has reached 
Pittsburg, where at one of the Christian Alliance Missions 
we have an ocular demonstration of this 



delusion. 

What we see here corresponds well with the general 
reports from elsewhere. The meetings are "bedlam:" 
everything is confusion, prayers to God are 
yelled or groaned or barked,— yelped. Now and then 
someone "gets the blessing" and falls in a trance-like 
condition on the floor, to remain rigid, perhaps, for 
hours. Another begins to talk some sort of gibberish 
interspersed with English. Another in a different guttural 
mumbles and then gives an interpretation in 
English. These are said to have the "unknown tongues" 
of Pentecost; but we remember that foreigners present 
did recognize those tongues as bona fide and got a gospel 
message from them.— Acts 2:8. 

The people in attendance pay little heed to what is 
uttered by these "tongues" and their interpretations. 
Some are simply curious and attend as a free show: 
others are too engrossed with their desire to have a 
trance or an "unknown tongue" to do anything else 
than groan their prayers to God for those "gifts," as 
evidences of his favor. Frenzied hugging and kissing 
and rolling on the floor (reported from elsewhere) are 
amongst the evidences that these poor people are 
surely under some spirit influence. And it certainly 
does not appear to be "the spirit of a sound mind."— 
2 Tim. 1:7. 

It is quite true that there was confusion at Pentecost, 
caused by so many speaking at once in foreign 
languages; but nothing in the record implies insanity 
or fanaticism: nor could we expect either of such sound 
logicians as the apostolic epistles show them to have 
been. On the contrary our experiences corroborate 
the declaration of St. Paul, that the operation of the 
holy Spirit of God in our hearts and minds has been 
favorable to the development of greater soundness of 
mind, by reason of our heed to the Word and its wisdom, 
which cometh from above. A WATCH TOWER reader 
in Los Angeles, Cal., writes that a neighbor woman 
got this so-called gift of tongues, and that a reputable 
Chinaman hearing her said that he understood 
her quite well— that she spoke his dialect of Chinese. 
Pressed for an interpretation he declined, saying that 
the utterance was the vilest of the vile. 

In our judgment the facts justify the conclusion 
that these "flames" are of an unholy spirit, of Satan: 
that he is now producing a poor counterfeit for the deception 
of a class whom he cannot reach through Spiritism, 
Christian Science, Hypnotic New Thought nor 
Higher Critic Evolution theories. 

Is it asked, Why would the Lord permit Satan to 
delude honest souls? We reply, that he has permitted 
"doctrines of devils" these many centuries amongst the 
heathen (I Tim. 4:1), some of whom doubtless are also 
sincere. The time for the binding of Satan is not yet- 
though we believe it is very near. (Rev. 20:2.) Doubtless 
Satan realizes better than we can how the binding 



or restraining is coming, and is actively maneuvering 
to avoid it; while God on the other hand is willing to 
permit his activity because it can now serve a purpose 
—a sifting work— which must reach and touch every 
class and condition of professed Christians everywhere; 
—to test and prove them. Thus we consider this one 
of the many delusions of our day. Mark the Apostle's 
forceful words respecting this day of trial with which 

R3941 : page 53 

this age ends and the next is ushered in. He says: 

For this cause "God shall send them strong delusion 

that they should believe a lie." Why? "That they 

[who fall] all might be [thus] condemned"— be manifested 

as not right, as out of harmony with God— as 

unfit to be of the "Bride" class. But why so? "Because 

they received not the truth in the love of it," but "had 

pleasure in untruth."— 2 Thess. 2:10,12. 

In other words, the "Present Truth" has been sent 
hither and thither throughout the bounds of Christendom 
that, like as a magnet would attract all the particles 
of steel within the radius of its influence, the 
Truth might attract all the Israelites indeed, for further 
schooling and ripening, preparatory to their 
"change" to Kingdom glory. Meantime, the Lord allows 
Satan to organize various human agencies, 
those not of his "very elect," that such may fall farther 
and farther from the Truth, until finally none will 
"stand" except the elect, and they "on the sea of glass 
mingled with fire." (Rev. 15:2.) All others are to fall 
more or less, through some will subsequently be rescued 
from the catastrophe— "saved so as by fire."— 
I Cor. 3:15. 

THE DOCTRINE OF THE VIRGIN BIRTH OF CHRIST AS AN 
ESSENTIAL 



In the North American Review Professor C. A. 
Briggs, D.D., D.Lit., in an article entitled, "Criticism 
and Dogma," states as follows:— 

"When it is said that the doctrine of the Virgin 
Birth is essential, it is meant that it is essential to the 
system of doctrine and the Faith of the Christian 
Church. The Church can no more dispense with that 
doctrine than it can dispense with the incarnation of 
Christ himself. It is not, however, essential to the 
faith or Christian life of individuals. The doctrine 
may for various reasons be so different to them that 
they cannot honestly accept it. They may content 
themselves with the doctrine of the incarnation and 
refuse to accept any doctrine as to its mode. They may 
even go so far as to deny the Virgin Birth, and hold to 
the theory of ordinary generation without accepting the 



legitimate consequences of that doctrine. Theologians 
are not always consequential. Men are responsible for 
what they believe and teach, not for what others think 
that they ought logically to believe and teach. The 
Church may, and in the present situation and circumstances 
of Christian Theology, ought to tolerate opinions 
which it cannot endorse. 

R3942 : page 53 

"Christian dogma is in a process of reconstruction, 
owing to the partial adoption by theologians of the 
principle of development. Science and Philosophy are 
also in a condition of reconstruction and restatement. 
Confusion of thought is inevitable under these circumstances. 
The Church, the most stable of all human 
institutions, can afford to be patient and charitable, 
and to wait until its scholars have removed the difficulties 
that in this age envelop Christian dogma. 
These can only be overcome in the arena of chivalric 
scholarship, not in ecclesiastical courts ruled by ecclesiastics, 
who are usually more concerned about the 
forms of things than about their reality. Christian 
scholars as a body are not at all dubious as to the Virgin 
Birth. It is not at all a question of Biblical criticism, 
but of Christian dogma. They are generously 
inclined towards those who at present are either doubtful 
about it, or even disposed to deny it. Biblical and 
historical scholars are just as decided in its maintenance 
as dogmatic theologians. For it is a dogma 
which is inextricably involved in the Christological 
principle that lies at the basis of Christian dogma and 
Christian institutions. They cannot possibly recognize 
that the birth of Christ was by ordinary human 
generation, for that would be a revival of the Nestorian 
heresy and be a denial of all the Christian philosophy 
of the centuries, with all the serious consequences 
therein involved. It would turn back the dial of Christianity 
nearly two thousand years: it would break with 
historical Christianity and its apostolic foundation, 
and imperil Christianity itself." 

NEWS FROM KINGSTON, JAMAICA 



DEAR BROTHER:- 

You are aware that on January 14th we were visited 
by a disastrous earthquake which has almost completely 
demolished the entire city. We are glad to 
report that no injury has occurred to any of the Lord's 
people, so far as we have heard, save that one interested 
friend, who was a constant attendant here, was 
killed. 

A remarkable thing is that many of the heads of 
business houses were killed, which will cause some 



delay in business restoration. Hundreds are under medical 
treatment, woefully mangled. But what makes me 
sit in wonder continually is that our meeting hall is 
the only place of religious worship in the city that is 
standing and in a condition to be used; and it is all 
brick like the others, save that the two upper rooms 
which we occupy are of heavy frame set on top of the 
lower building, making it more dangerous. Our faith 
has been greatly strengthened by the experience. The 
Lord be praised! Yours faithfully, 

J. A. BROWNE,-Kingston, Jamaica. 



R3943 : page 53 

TAKE HEED TO YOURSELVES 

ST. PAUL'S words, "Take heed to yourselves and 

to all the flock over which the holy Spirit hath 

made you overseers, to shepherd the Church 

of God, which he hath purchased with the blood of his 

own Son" (Acts 20:28), were never more worthy of our 

attention than now. From our vantage point on Zion's 

watch tower we see clearly that, while the Truth is progressing 

grandly in all directions, the "Evil Day" is 

upon us, the time of testing those already blest and 

enlightened. It is not, therefore, merely a question of 

who shall be blest with the ear to hear the message 

of Present Truth, but additionally, "Who shall be able 

to withstand in that evil day, and having done all to 

stand" the final tests (Eph. 6:13), and be acclaimed— 

"More than conqueror through him who loved us" and 

bought us with his precious blood. 

We perceive the attack of the Adversary, referred 
to in our caption, in every direction;— the grievous 

R3943 : page 54 

wolves of error and ambition among "your own selves." 
We must sound the alarm and tell you that "the hour 
of temptation" is come— the one for which we have 
been preparing for the past thirty years. With the 
knowledge granted us let us not slumber at the critical 
moment; but soberly and prayerfully and faithfully 
meet the situation. 

Let us remember that our knowledge means an 
added responsibility, and that it will avail us nothing 
except as it is combined and active with Love, which is 
the bond of perfectness, the fulfilling of the divine law 
or requirement. How many blessings the Lord has 
granted us, and opportunities to put on the whole armor 
of God that we might be able to withstand the very 
trial now upon us! 

Wisely did the Apostle first say, "Take heed to yourselves." 
That is our first responsibility. We should 



each first examine our own hearts to see whether we 
are to any degree moved by jealousies, or ambitions, 
or any selfish motive. To do this effectively we must 
not measure ourselves with others, nor yet by our own 
imperfect standards, but by the Lord's standard— Perfect 
Love. "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all 
thy heart, with all thy mind, with all thy being, with 
all thy strength; and thou shalt love thy neighbor 
[and especially thy brother in the Lord] as thyself." 
Oh! what brotherly-kindness, what tenderness 
of word and act, what sympathy of thought 
for each other's weaknesses, what appreciation of 
each other's better traits, what long-suffering kindness 
and patient forbearance in love, what care 
for each other's welfare, rights and liberties, as for 
our own, this would imply and produce! 

"Examine yourselves whether ye be in the faith!" 
writes the same Apostle. Doctrinal soundness is very 
important, but not enough; we must also be "in the 
faith" in the sense of exercising faith in the Lord— in all 
of life's affairs, and especially in all the affairs of his 
Church. If ever we allow expediency to swerve us from 
the Scriptural program in the affairs of the Church it 
manifests that we are not "in the faith" as God designed. 
For confidence in God and his overruling wisdom 
and power would never permit expediency to say, "Let 
us do evil that good may follow"— Let us take an unscriptural 
course for the best interests of the Lord's 
cause. The faith dictates that to obey God is better 
than sacrifice, and that he is able to make all things 
work for good to all who love and serve him. 

Dearly Beloved, let us, then, remember that this is 
our test and now our testing time; and let love for the 
Lord and his brethren and his Word be constantly in 
command of our lips, of our conduct and, above all, of 
our hearts. "If ye do these things ye shall never fail, 
but so an entrance shall be granted us into the everlasting 
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ." 

What is thus true of all, is specially true of those 
honored with a special stewardship in the Church— the 
Elders— in this the hour of trial that is upon the whole 
world and peculiarly upon "the very elect."— 
Rev. 3:10. 



R3942 : page 54 

HARVEST WORK AMONGST THE BLACKS 

QUITE recently Present Truth reached our dear 
Brother Booth, who for some years has been 
engaged in missionary work in Central Africa 
amongst the blacks. So greatly impressed was he with 
the Scriptural presentation of the DAWN volumes that 
he made a long journey to Allegheny to confer with us 



respecting the possibilities of presenting the harvest 
message to the Christian converts of Africa, with whom 
he has been considerably in contact. Brother Booth 
was the originator, we understand, of the so-called 
"Industrial Missions" of Central Africa. These established 
industries amongst the blacks, instructed them 
in agriculture and other arts of civilization, at the same 
time bringing the Bible, and the Redeemer and redemption 
taught therein to the attention of the natives. 
Several of these missions started by Brother Booth 
have since passed into the hands of others, and some 
have come under denominational control. 

We informed our dear brother that we, too, were 
interested in the colored people— year, in all mankind; 
but that seeing the way of the Lord more particularly 
than we once did, we no longer feel that the salvation 
of the world is a responsibility upon our shoulders, but 
upon the Lord's, where it belongs; and that as we had 
come to understand his Word we found therein that he 
had not neglected his responsibility to his creatures, 
but had made a full provision through Jesus for all the 
sons and daughters of Adam, and that in due time 
under the Millennial Kingdom all are to be brought to 
a knowledge of the Truth. We assured him of our 
sympathy with mission work and with every kind of 
good work for the reformation and uplifting of all the 
members of our race, but that our understanding is 
that the harvest work differs considerably from a sowing 
work, a planting work. We explained that the harvest 
time into which we have entered is in our view 
designed of the Lord for the ripening or perfecting of 
character amongst those who are his; that from 
amongst these the elect number may be completed, and 
that following their glorification they, with the Master, 
as the King and Priests of the coming age, will promote 
the knowledge of the Lord and every good work, and 
restrain Satan and every evil influence, that every creature 
may come to know the Redeemer— that every knee 
may bow and every tongue confess to the glory of God. 

EARNEST CHRISTIAN CONVERTS 

It was then that Brother Booth surprised us by 
telling us that if manifestations of Christian love were 
to be taken as an indication of Christian character (to 
which we agreed) then he could assure us that there 
were some as true Christians amongst the blacks of 
Africa as any he had ever found amongst the whites 

R3942 : page 55 

anywhere. He surprised us greatly by narratives of 
his own experiences amongst this simple people of 
nature and how much of real kindness he had experienced 
at their hands. Trusting in the Lord, he went 
without spear or sword or gun over hundreds of miles 



amongst savage tribes, some of them cannibals. He 

found them savage toward their enemies, yet kindly 

disposed toward those whom they could trust as 

friends. The white people, however, they did not recognize 

as friends, and this was his chief difficulty. 

They threatened his life, and when asked why, they 

said, "We know you white men: first you come with the 

little book and talk peaceful words; then you inform 

others and they come with guns and kill us and take 

our property and force us to labor in the carrying out 

of their plans, so that we become slaves. We do not 

want you; stay in your own country that your God 

gave you. Let us keep our country and live in happiness 

as heretofore." Brother Booth was obliged to tell 

them that he could not answer for his brethren— that 

he regretted to say that there was considerable truth 

in their charges; but that as for himself they could see 

that he brought no gun, no weapon, but merely the little 

book, and it had a message in it that would make 

them happy as it had made him happy. "Kill me if you 

wish to. If God's time has come for me to die I am 

ready and willing— perhaps this is the place where God 

intends I shall die. But let me tell you about the little 

book and what it says." Thus he would get them to 

listen to him and to listen to the Scriptural story of sin 

and how it came, of the death of Christ and its value 

in the sight of God, and how they all could be partakers 

of the blessings from that sacrifice, and by turning 

from sin and giving their hearts to the Lord could have 

divine joy and peace instead of bitterness and anger 

and strife. 

Brother Booth told us that many of the natives 
are zealous for knowledge, and that some of them have 
become very earnest preachers of the Word and quite 
willing to lay down their lives, if the occasion required, 
in the service of the Truth so far as they understand 
it. He told us that in South Africa quite a number of 
educated negroes are owners and editors of newspapers, 
having gotten their education in various colleges. 
He urged that many of these blacks of South Africa 
and also of Central Africa should be of just the right 

R3943 : page 55 

condition of heart and mind to receive the glad message 
of the Millennial morning and the establishment of 
the reign of righteousness in the hands of the great 
King and the glorified Church. He says that he himself 
had felt so depressed by the conditions surrounding 
him there, and by the thought that all who were 
not brought to a knowledge and love of the Savior were 
going to eternal torment— that his mind was greatly 
distressed, and he felt sure that there was something 
radically wrong with his message. He had returned 
from Africa to Scotland in perplexity as to what would 
be his best course. It was at this time that he came 



into contact with some of the friends of the Truth in 
Scotland and had the DAWNS put into his hands. He 
besought us to undertake some missionary work on 
behalf of the poor blacks, amongst whom he has labored 
for now fifteen years. 

Under these conditions it is not surprising that we 
fell in line with Brother Booth's proposition, inferring 
that the Lord had guided him to us, and was now 
directing us respecting another part of the harvest 
work. The Society accordingly has for a time undertaken 
Brother Booth's expenses as its missionary to 
those peoples with whom he is acquainted. He can 
speak several of their languages, while others he can 
reach through interpreters, and some in South Africa 
can read English. He was quite surprised when we 
informed him that the WATCH TOWER has a regular list 
of subscribers in Africa to the number of forty— not 
very many, it is true, but after all quite a good many, 
everything considered. Brother Booth started on his 
mission shortly after the first of the year, and by the 
time our readers get this he will be at work. It will be 
some time before he will have anything to report, and 
then it will require a considerable time to reach us. 
Meantime we have assured our dear brother of the love 
and sympathy of the Lord's dear people who are rejoicing 
in Present Truth, and bid him God speed, 
and pray for the harvest work amongst the savage 
tribes. Who knows but what there are some true 
grains of ripening wheat in that far-off land, to whom 
the Lord would send the present harvest message for 
their further development and perfecting before they 
can reach the garner. 

NEARER FIELDS WHITE FOR HARVEST 

Already quite a little work is under way amongst 
the negroes of Jamaica and Porto Rico, as was exhibited 
in the report recently published in these columns. 
But Brother Booth's zeal for the black brethren has 
had the effect of stimulating our interest in them, and 
the more we reflect on the subject the more deeply interested 
do we feel in the harvest work amongst these 
people right at our doors. Brother Booth emphasized 
the fact that many colored people have great reverence 
for God and considerable honesty of mind, and that as 
a rule they are ready to investigate, especially when 
the presentation is made by the whites, and when they 
can see consistency of life in the would-be teacher. 

We wish to call the attention of the friends in general 
to this quarter of the harvest field, with the suggestion 
that in quite a good many of the little gatherings 
there is more than a sufficiency of talent for the 
service of the Church as leaders of Berean Studies, etc., 
and that some might find time and good opportunities 
for presenting the Divine Plan of the Ages to colored 
Christians of their vicinity. Would it not be worth while 



to visit some of their meetings, and in a wise and kindly 
manner tell them very briefly something about the 
end of the age, the dawn of the Millennium, and the 
Kingdom that then is to be established in the earth, 
etc., and to proffer a lecture on the Chart of the Ages 
if they desire. We believe that invitations of that kind 
would be frequently accepted, and doubt not that some 
amongst the blacks would respond earnestly. Our 

R3943 : page 56 

hopes along this line are supported by the fact that in 
various parts of our country Berean Bible Study classes 
have already been started amongst the colored friends. 
Indeed, of a number of these dear brethren we could 
surely say that, in rightly dividing the Word and clearly 
presenting it to others, very few amongst the whites 
will be found their superiors. We could also say of 
them that, so far as their knowledge goes, their standard 
of integrity and morality seems to be equally high 
with them as with the white brethren. Our suggestion 
is that the white brethren shall seek to carry the message 
to the blacks as opportunity may afford. This 
does not signify that the colored brethren should desist 
from serving those of their own race and color in their 
own localities. We will be glad to cooperate according to 
our judgment of the Lord's will with any, either whites 
or blacks, who desire to engage in this section of the 
harvest field. 



R3944 : page 56 

THE OATH-BOUND COVENANT 

--GENESIS 15:1,5-16.-FEBRUARY 24.- 

Golden Text:— "He believed in the Lord, and 
he counted it to him for righteousness." 

IN our last lesson we noted the unwise choice made by 
Lot, the result of which was his closer association than 
was necessary with the ungodly of Sodom. Additionally 
it exposed him to the same difficulties to which his 
neighbors, who were not under the special providence of God, 
were exposed. It appears that Sodom and the surrounding 
cities of the Jordan valley had for some time been paying 
tribute to Chedorlaomer, whose capital city was several hundred 
miles further north. When they ceased to pay tribute 
Chedorlaomer sent an army— composed in part of recruits 
from various subject kings on the way— to take possession 
of Sodom as instead of the tribute money. Together with 
spoil of gold and silver and other valuables numerous captives 
were taken, of whom to make slaves. Lot, his family, 
his servants and his property were taken, sharing in all the 



burdens of the Sodomites. We can well imagine his discouragement 

and self-condemnation— that he had not only 

experienced vexation in his new home country by reason of 

the unrighteousness of his neighbors and the contaminating 

influence upon his family, but now he was sharing with 

them in the vicissitudes of his present condition, whereas 

had he remained with Abraham, his uncle, matters might 

have been different: evidently God had a special protecting 

care over Abraham— he was not captured nor despoiled. 

Although Abraham was noted as a man of peace, we 
find him very loyal to principle in connection with this 
trouble. Two of the captured ones escaped and brought 
word to Abraham of the capture of the Sodomites, with Lot 
and his family. The man of God was not long in deciding 
respecting his proper course. Summoning all of his servants 
capable of assisting in such an emergency, 3 18 in number, 
he armed them and set out for the deliverance of his nephew. 
We are not to suppose that the army which captured the 
Sodomites was a large one, even though the names of four 
kings are introduced in connection with it. This was 
not a very long time after the flood, and the entire 
population was not as yet very large. The suggestions of 
higher critics about vast armies, great cities, etc., at this 
time, are out of harmony with the facts— first, the shortness 
of time after the flood; and, second, the ability of Abraham, 
with 3 1 8 men, to even make an attack and disconcert 
and confuse the army and deliver Lot and the Sodomites 
and all their goods. These facts all agree that the cities, 
the armies, the kingly powers of that day, were very meager 
in comparison to what we have in mind when we use similar 
terms in our day. In all probability the armies of the 
four kings combined did not exceed a thousand men, and 
the entire population of Sodom probably much less. The 
building of a city in those times would correspond more 
nearly to the building of a fort in our day. Thus, for instance, 
we read that Cain went to the land of Nod and built 
him a city— a house or villa for himself and his family. 

Abraham's heroism in the matter was fully matched by 
his generosity, for not a particle of the spoil would he take 
for himself. The characters which the Lord loves and 
chooses are those which are unselfish, generous as well as 
just. In these respects Abraham showed that he had a considerable 
measure of the original image of God still remaining 
with him, not obliterated by the fallen conditions through 
which himself and his ancestors as members of the race of 
Adam had passed. On the other hand we see in Lot a less 
noble character naturally, a less strong character. This is 
evidenced afresh in the fact that even after this experience 
and deliverance he continued to reside in Sodom, to choose 
the life of luxury and ease, unfavorable to himself and his 
family, morally and religiously. Abraham chose the better 
part: his God was his friend, in whom he delighted; and 
such experiences in life as would best enable him to comply 
with the divine arrangements respecting him were the ones 
that he chose, and to the attainment of which he pressed 
his energies. 



REPETITION OF THE COVENANT 

We have already referred to the fact that God agreed 
to make a covenant with Abraham while he was still living 
in the land of Chaldea, and that the covenant itself was 
consummated and made applicable to Abraham from the 
time that he set his foot upon the land of promise in obedience 
to the divine call. But for his encouraging and the 
strengthening of his already great faith, God repeated this 
promise over and over in different terms. (See Gen. 12:1-3; 
13:14-17; 15:1,5,18; 17:1-10; 18:19; 21:12; 22:16-18.) 
There was in fact but one covenant, but various statements 
of it. 

In our present lesson we have one of these repetitions 
of the covenant with some peculiar features. (V. 1.) In a 
vision the Lord assured him that he should not fear, that his 
God would be his shield and his exceeding great reward. 
Quite probably a fear had come to Abraham, in connection 
with the deliverance of his nephew Lot, that the kings whom 
he had ignominiously defeated would return better prepared, 
better on guard, and wreak their vengeance upon him, and 
that thus he might be interrupting, interfering, with the 

R3944 : page 57 

promise God had made that he and his posterity should inherit 
the land of Canaan. The declaration, "I am thy shield," 
would set at rest any doubts or fears along this line, as we 
elsewhere read, "When he giveth quietness who then can make 
trouble?" If the Lord would shield him how then could 
all the kings of earth do him harm or interrupt the divine 
program for blessing him and his posterity? The other statement 
is also worthy of notice: "I am thy exceeding great 
reward." Already he was the recipient of God's favors, rewards 
for his faith and obedience, and the promises also 
were in the line of rewards. But the statement here made 
went beyond all this and enumerates a still higher, grander 
truth, namely, that as Abraham had given himself fully to 
God, the latter now declares that in a sense he would give 
himself to Abraham, he would be his reward— to have his 
friendship, his fellowship, his love, his care, would be the 
highest and best reward that could possibly be given to Abraham 
for his fidelity. 

And are not these precious promises applicable to the 
spiritual seed of Abraham? Is not this the essence of the 
Apostle's declaration to the Church— "All things are yours, 
for ye are Christ's and Christ is God's"? Again we hear the 
Apostle saying, "It is God that justifieth, who is he that 
condemneth?" (Rom. 8:33.) Again we hear the Master's 
word to the same class, "The Father himself loveth you." 
(John 16:27.) O, what rest and comfort it brings to our 
hearts, amongst the trials and vicissitudes of life, to realize 
in the depths of our hearts that these are not merely words 
but truths. But only as we are able to realize an obedient faith 
are we able to apply these gracious promises to ourselves or 



to rest therein. This same thought is expressed respecting 
Abraham (v. 6), "He believed in the Lord." The word in 
the original signifies more than mere belief; it signifies 
what only believers can fully comprehend, viz., a rest of 
faith in God. 

"HE COUNTED IT FOR RIGHTEOUSNESS" 

At first we are inclined to say, How strange it is that 
God should count our faith for anything— how simple, how 
easy a matter faith is! Why should it be valuable in God's 
sight? But the more we come to know ourselves the more 
we come to value faith, to realize that it is a scarce commodity 
in the world and even amongst Christians, professed 
believers. Under some conditions faith is very easy; indeed 
to disbelieve would be difficult. After this manner we understand 
nearly all the conditions of the Millennial age will 
be framed, so that the world in general will find it difficult 
to disbelieve in God, his power, his justice, his love. Then 
the reward will be merely for the obedient, though some 
faith will doubtless be required as well. Now, on the contrary, 
the reward is merely on account of faith, though what 
obedience is possible is required, too. "According to thy 
faith be it unto thee," was our Master's expression, and it 
represents a general principle of divine dealing now. 

God is now seeking for a faith-full people, and declares 
that those whom he will find will be peculiar in this respect 
from the majority; not many great, not many wise, not 
many learned according to the course of this world have and 
exercise this faith— chiefly the poor, rich in faith, may be 
heirs of the Kingdom. Let us seek to cultivate continually 
faith in the Lord, in his Word, in his providential care. 
This is not trusting in the creeds and the theories of men, 
which might be merely credulity, but trusting in the Word of 
the Lord, which liveth and abideth forever. As God counted 
such faith to Abraham as so much of righteousness, so he 
counts to us of this Gospel age, who are children of Abraham 
by faith. We are not righteous in a full, perfect, complete 
sense of that word. Even with our hearts turned to the 
Lord, and with the best of intentions, we cannot do the 
things that we would; but as to those who can exercise 
faith, and who do exercise it in harmony with divine righteousness 
to the best of their ability, God will count their 
efforts as though they are perfect! How gracious an arrangement! 
How lovingly we should show our appreciation 
by still greater faith and still harder endeavors to walk in 
the path of righteousness which faith dictates. 

THE STARS OF HEAVEN, THE SANDS OF THE SEASHORE 

In other statements of this promise or covenant God 
directed Abraham's mind to the stars and to the sand of the 
seashore and to the dust of the earth as illustrations of the 
numbers of his posterity. As yet Abraham had no child: 
every testimony of this kind was therefore to him a testing 
of his faith, a suggestion that he should inquire first for a 



R3945 : page 57 

beginning of these matters; and as days and years passed 
by the testing of faith was increased, yet to our joy we find 
that Abraham was full of faith in these promises, never 
doubting the power of God in some way to accomplish all 
that he had given him reason to hope for. Here we find a 
lesson for ourselves. Other promises have been made to us, 
some of which seem to be utterly impossible of attainment. 
Shall our faith stagger and shall we begin to doubt? or 
shall we hold fast to the Word of the Lord, nothing wavering, 
nothing doubting? In order to do so we must discriminate 
clearly between the words of man and the Word of 
God, so that we may reject the words of man, resting nothing 
upon their promises, but our entire weight of trust must 
rest upon the Word of the Lord. 

How solicitous this should make us to have before our 
minds clearly and distinctly just what things God has promised 
to them that love him. In accord with this fact we find 
that God's most earnest and loyal children are continually 
desiring to grow in grace and to grow in knowledge of him 
through his Word and through his providences, and that 
more and more they are cutting and drifting away from the 
creeds and theories of men, those which appear to be good 
and those which are manifestly vile, evil, injurious. The 
Scriptural statement is, respecting all such things, "If they 
speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no 
light in them." (Isa. 8:20.) Hence the Scriptures again 
say that those who have nothing but their own dreams and 
fancies to preach may do so, but those who have the 
Word of the Lord should preach it and not themselves nor 
their fancies and dreams.— Jer. 23:28. 

In the light of the New Testament we may see more in 
these various promises than Abraham or others not thus 
enlightened by the holy Spirit. We can see that the spiritual 
seed of Abraham, Christ and the Church, are represented 
in this simile of his seed being as the stars of heaven, and 
we also see that the other part of the statement— that his 
seed shall be as the sand of the seashore— will have a fulfilment 
in Abraham's natural posterity, the Hebrew people, 

R3945 : page 58 

and in that still larger class of all nations referred to in the 
statement, "I have constituted thee a father of many nations." 
(Gen. 17:5.) How this deeper, clearer view of the 
promise enlarges the horizon of our eyes of understanding, 
and enables us to grasp with more and more distinctness 
the lengths and breadths and heights and depths of the love 
of God, which is yet to be manifested to every creature of our 
race, giving all opportunity of becoming children of Abraham 
—of full faith in and obedience to God. For that glorious 
opportunity the Apostle declares the whole creation is 
groaning and travailing, waiting until now— waiting for the 
manifestation of the sons of God, and, more than this, waiting 



until the sons of God are selected, tested, accepted and 
then manifested in glory. 

THE INHERITANCE OF CANAAN 

It is proper to speak of an earthly and a heavenly 
Canaan, but it is a mistake common to too many to apply 
all the promises of God that are yet future to the heavenly. 
There are earthly promises still unfulfilled, and one of these 
is referred to in our lesson (v. 7). The Lord here distinctly 
informed Abraham again that he intended to give that land 
to him and his posterity. That there might be no doubt as to the 
literalness of this, the Lord said to Abraham on another occasion, 
Lift up now thine eyes and look to the north and south 
and east and west, for all the land thou seest to thee will I 
give it and to thy seed after thee for an everlasting possession. 
(Gen. 13:14; 17:8.) How could the land Abraham 
saw be the heavenly city, which neither he nor we have ever 
seen? To make the matter doubly sure we have the word 
of Stephen on the subject (Acts 7), who declares that it was 
the literal land, and yet that Abraham had not received so 
much as to set his foot upon, but that he had faith that he 
would get that land, and Stephen also had faith that it 
would ultimately be given to Abraham and his posterity. 
Our faith is and should be the same. Abraham is to have 
a grand portion, and the land of Palestine is to be an element 
of his blessing and inheritance. True, we read that 
Abraham dwelt in tents and not in a city, with walls, etc., 
for his protection; he was thus a pilgrim and a stranger, 
with no continuing city. He would not, like Lot, live in 
Sodom, for he desired a better country, even a heavenly. 
That is to say, he was waiting for the time that God intended 
that he should inherit this promise, anticipating the establishment 
of God's Kingdom at the second coming of our Lord, 
and preferring the solidity, the establishment, the security of 
that city, thinking the security of any earthly city of small 
account. And we see that in this he judged rightly. He 
was safer where he was, with God for his companion and 
divine promises for the walls of his salvation, than he could 
have been in any earthly city. Surely the heavenly city, 
the New Jerusalem, the Kingdom of God, will be established 
with great power and glory, and nothing shall injure and 
destroy in all the Lord's holy Kingdom. Then Abraham's 
desires and anticipations will have been realized, and the 
earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of God. 

If we would examine the various promises in detail 
they are that the land of Canaan should be the heritage of 
Abraham and of his seed forever; that he should have a 
son who would be his heir and inherit the promises; that 
his seed, descendants, would ultimately be as the sand of 
the sea and the stars of heaven, innumerable; that he 
should be the father of a great nation; that he should be 
the father of many nations, and that through him all the families 
of the earth shall be blessed. 

"WHEREBY SHALL I KNOW?" 



Abraham had already testified his faith in God's promises 
in a general way. He did not doubt them, but when 
now the Lord reiterated the fact that the land was to be 
his, he thought it not improper to ask for some word indicating 
the way in which the blessing should come— "O, 
Lord God, whereby shall I know that I shall inherit it? 
What outward signs and evidences will help my faith to grasp 
these great promises you have made to me and which I thoroughly 
believe?" It was no more a sin for Abraham to ask 
the Lord to confirm and strengthen his faith than it would be 
for us to ask the same for ourselves. And God seems ever ready 
to help the trustful. How many assistances to faith he 
gives us without chiding when we come to him in a trustful 
and faithful attitude of mind. This is illustrated in our 
day by the difference in the Lord's treatment of those who 
look skeptically upon the Scriptures, the Bible, and those 
who look upon it from the standpoint of faith. The first 
mentioned find plenty to establish their skepticism; all the 
higher critics, the educated of the world, are in their company. 
On the other hand, those who are looking at the 
Word from the standpoint of faith and trust are blessed; to 
them it is opened— "He that seeketh findeth." 

God at once gave Abraham his oath in confirmation of 
the promise. By a peculiar method God bound himself 
to Abraham by what is termed the "covenant of 
blood." A full description of it is given in the lesson: a 
heifer of three years, a she-goat of three years, a ram of 
three years, a turtle dove and a young pigeon were sacrificed, 
and the Lord represented himself as passing between 
the parts of these sacrificed animals, and was thus swearing 
by a covenant or sacrifice of life-blood to the promise he 
had given. The Lord was represented by a lamp of fire. 

Then came the answer to Abraham's question, "Whereby 
shall I know? Give me some of the particulars relating 
to the matter of how my posterity shall inherit. Give 
me a view of the future." The Lord did give Abraham a 
glance into the future of his people, saying, "Know of a 
surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is 
not theirs, and shall serve them: and they shall afflict 
them four hundred years." This need not be understood to 
mean that Israel would be in bondage for four hundred 
years more that they would be afflicted all the years they 
would be in a strange land. Rather the thought seems to 
be that not until four hundred years would his posterity return 
to that land to inherit it according to the promise; 
that in the meantime they would suffer rigors, hardships, be 
in servitude, suffer affliction. The punishment upon the 
nation holding them in servitude is also mentioned— the 
Lord would judge them, and after four hundred years the seed 
of Abraham would come out of bondage with great substance 
and very rich. It would be in the fourth generation, we are 
told, that his descendants would return to Canaan, and an explanation 
of why the long delay is given in part in the statement, 
"The iniquity of the Amorite is not yet full": as though 



R3945 : page 59 

the Lord had said to Abraham, The Amorite has a prior hold 
upon this land, but I know the outcome with them, that they 
will get worse and worse and that eventually it will be the 
course of justice toward them to expel them— but not yet; 
the time for the change is not ripe. So long as they follow 
a reasonable course they will be permitted to remain, but 
when their cup of iniquity is full the land shall then be 
turned over to your posterity forever. 

Abraham was not told how long it would be before his 
posterity would go into that captivity which would end in 
four hundred years at the fourth generation; he was merely 
told that it would not occur during his lifetime— "Thou 
shalt go to thy fathers in peace, thou shalt be buried in a 
good old age"; none of these calamities can come upon your 
posterity while you still live. We remember the fulfilment 
of this prediction; that for a time Abraham's posterity 

R3946 : page 59 

dwelt in Canaan as he himself had done, in tents, without 
seeking an earthly city or government. We remember that 
the famine drove them out of Canaan and they went down 
into Egypt as the guests of Pharaoh and Joseph, Abraham's 
grandson, who was then governor of Egypt through a divine 
arrangement. We remember that while matters went peaceably 
for a time, by and by Joseph died and Pharaoh died, 
and then began one hundred and ninety-eight years of 
servitude and affliction, which continued until the Lord 
sent Moses and delivered Israel at the close of the 400 years 
mentioned in our lesson. 

LESSONS FOR THE SPIRITUAL SEED 

We may be sure that the horror of great darkness and 
the coming down of the fires to devour the sacrificed carcases 
represented more than merely the dark picture of the 
servitude of Abraham's natural seed before they should 
go back to Palestine. We may be sure that the Lord, who 
made this covenant, had more in mind the spiritual seed 
than the natural. The Apostle Paul tells us so, for referring 
to this Oath-Bound Covenant he declares, "God, willing 
more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise the unchangeableness 
of his promise, confirmed it by an oath, that 
by two immutable [unchangeable] things, in which it was 
impossible for God to lie, we might have strong consolation 
who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before 
us: which hope we have as an anchor to our souls both 
sure and stedfast, and which entereth into that which is 
within the vail." (Heb. 6:17-19.) The holy Spirit here, 
through the Apostle's pen, informs us that this oath was 
given to Abraham, not solely on his own account, as might 
appear, but specially on account of us, the spiritual heirs, 
the heirs of promise. The Apostle points out that Christ is 
the great inheritor, and that we who are Christ's are joint-heirs 



with him in this covenant promise, and that thus 
through Christ and the Church the entire promise will be 
made effective to Abraham and his natural seed as well as 
to all the families of the earth. 

The darkness of that hour suggests to us the sufferings 
of this present time, the fiery furnace of affliction, the "better 
sacrifices" established in and upon the merit of our dear 
Redeemer's death and the ultimate great blessing that is to 
follow. Now what we have is still a hope. Abraham is dead; 
his natural posterity have failed to attain the blessing; the 
higher favor secured by our Lord Jesus through his own obedience 
unto death has been extended to the faithful of the 
Jews and the faithful of every nation, whom the Father has 
drawn through his grace and truth, and yet we have this 
promise as a hope, but it is anchored to Christ, who is within 
the vail, a spirit being. By faith we realize a relationship 
to him, and that the darkness and suffering of this present 
time will soon be ended; by faith we realize that the glorious 
things which God hath in reservation for them that love 
him far more than overbalance the trials and difficulties of 
the pilgrim journey; by faith we see that as soon as the 
entire body of the Anointed One shall be completed and 
glorified, then a great blessing is due to begin with Israel 
after the flesh, and to extend through them also to every 
creature. Ah, how gracious is our Lord's provision! How 
kind for him to give us such a strong consolation through 
not only his repeated testimony of the truthfulness of this 
great matter, but also of his oath which confirms, secures, 
makes positive every element of the promise! What manner 
of persons ought we to be in all manner of holy conversation 
and godliness! What more could the Lord say to us 
than he has said? 



R3946 : page 59 

ABRAHAM'S PRAYERS FOR SODOM 

--GENESIS 18:16-33.~MARCH3.~ 

Golden Text:— "Men ought always to 
pray and not to faint."— Luke 18:1. 

THERE are several very interesting matters connected 
with this lesson. Abraham had been living in 
Canaan and Lot in Sodom for a considerable time, 
when, at the noon hour, three men one day appeared to 
Abraham— strangers. He was prompt to show them hospitality, 
and Sarah his wife joined. The Apostle evidently referred 
to this incident in the words, "Be not forgetful to 
entertain strangers, for some thereby have entertained angels 
unawares." (Heb. 13:2.) Present-day conditions render such 
hospitality less necessary, especially in cities where public 
boarding-houses and hotels are expected to care for the 
strangers. There is danger, however, that the blessing which 



goes with hospitality is to a large extent missed by a considerable 
number of people. While the modern methods have 
some advantages, the general tendency of all of them is 
toward greater selfishness— neglect of our neighbor, whom 
the Lord would have us love as ourselves— not neglecting to 
do good unto all men as we have opportunity, especially to 
the household of faith.— Gal. 6:10. 

To whatever extent these divine injunctions are disregarded 
we are in danger of losing a blessing, of failing to 
cultivate generosity, and, on the contrary, cultivating selfishness. 
God is the great Giver "from whom cometh every 
good and perfect gift"; and in proportion as his children 
would return to his image they must cultivate his spirit of 
benevolence, generosity, kindness, helpfulness— especially 
to the poor and the needy and the strangers. We are 
not wishing to suggest the receiving of any and every person 

R3946 : page 60 

into the home, which might be a very dangerous practice; 

but we do urge that the changed conditions of our time be 

not allowed to make our hearts hard, selfish and unthoughtful 

as respects the interests of our friends or neighbors, and 

the stranger. We cannot afford to do so, for "If any man 

have not the spirit of Christ he is none of his," and this 

would mean the loss of those things which God hath in reservation 

for them that love him. 

THE LORD AND TWO ANGELS 

The three strange men, Abraham afterwards learned, 
were angels, one of them the special messenger of Jehovah. 
We feel confident that this one was the Logos, the Only 
Begotten One, through whom the Father's power was exercised, 
so that by him all things were made that were made. 
(John 1:1.) We are clearly to distinguish between our Lord's 
appearance here as a man and the appearance of his two 
companions, the angels, as men, and our Lord's subsequent 
appearance in the world as the man Christ Jesus. The 
two were totally different. In the first case the spirit nature 
was retained, and a human body was merely created and 
used temporarily for a special purpose, just as our Lord after 
his resurrection as a spirit being appeared in various forms 
as a man, but was not really a man. When the due time 
came for the redemption of Adam and his race it was necessary 
that our Lord should become a man— perfect, complete 
as was father Adam in his original creation— "holy, harmless, 
undefiled, separate from sinners." When he thus became a 
man, or as another Scripture expresses it, "was made flesh" 
(John 1:14), it meant the complete laying aside of the spirit 
nature before enjoyed— a change or transmutation to another 
nature, the human. 

This was necessary, because it was a man who had 
sinned, and because the divine law required a man's life for 
a man's life as the ransom price. But no such transmutation 
was necessary for the work mentioned in our lesson. 



The Lord and his two angelic companions could have appeared 
to Abraham as to Moses as a flame of fire in a burning 
bush, or as the bright angel appeared to Daniel, or as an 
angelic form with less glory and brightness; but God was 
dealing with Abraham according to faith— he wished him to 
learn to walk by faith and not by sight. Hence the angels 
appeared as strange men and were entertained as such, and 
Abraham's hospitality was demonstrated and became a lesson 
to all the children of God. Furthermore, the faith of both 
Abraham and Sarah was tested on this occasion by the 
Lord's predicting the birth of Isaac shortly, to the amusement 
of Sarah, who was then old and who doubted, and to 
the confirmation of Abraham's faith in the promise already 
given him and trusted in for twenty-five years without sign 
of accomplishment. 

THE CRY OF SODOM 

Still hospitable, Abraham accompanied his visitors, 
whom he had now discerned to be celestial beings appearing 
in human form. As they moved in the direction of 
Sodom the Lord is represented as holding a colloquy with 
himself as to the propriety of intimating to Abraham what 
might be expected as a judgment upon Sodom, of whose 
wickedness Abraham certainly was aware. We are given to 
understand that the fact that Abraham thus far had proven 
faithful, and that to him belonged the ultimate promise of 
the blessing of all the families of the earth, was one reason 
why he was informed respecting the fate of Sodom, "For I 
have known him [become intimate with him, made a covenant 
with him, revealed myself to him], to the end that he 
may command his children and his household after him, that 
they may keep the way of the Lord to do justice and judgment; 

R3947 : page 60 

that the Lord may bring upon him that which he has 
spoken of him." Thus we see by this indirect teaching that 
there is method in the Lord's revelation. Matters are made 
known to his people not merely to satisfy curiosity, but 
especially because they are in relationship to the Lord and 
because they are to learn certain lessons in connection with 
their experiences of life that may be helpful to them in the 
ultimate work to which they have been called. 

In this case, we remember that Abraham had the promise 
that in his seed all the families of the earth should be 
blessed, and this included the Sodomites as well, as we shall 
see later. Abraham then, believing the Word of the Lord, 
had a right to expect that in some way or other, either then 
or in the future, he and his posterity would have to do with 
righteous judgment upon the Sodomites. Besides, the Lord 
is pleased to have those who are in harmony with him know 
the equity, the justice of all his dealings. "Come, let us 
reason together," shows us this principle. (Isa. 1:18.) But 
the Lord never reasons with any except those who have faith 
in him and trust in his promises. These are the truly wise, 



of whom it is written, "The wise shall understand [matters 
as they become due], but none of the wicked shall understand" 
(Dan. 12:10); and again, "The secret of the Lord is 
with them that reverence him, and he will show them his 
covenant."— Psa. 25:14. 

Explaining his mission the Lord declared that a great 
cry had come up to heaven from Sodom and that he was 
about to investigate, which implied that forbearance had 
ceased to be of avail and that the time for Sodom's punishment 
was at hand, and so Abraham understood the matter. 
We are not to suppose that merely rumors of matters reached 
the Lord, and then special investigating committees were 
sent, but rather that this affair was stated in simple language, 
so that Abraham and all who have read the record since 
might know that the Lord takes full cognizance of the affairs 
of earth, that he does not ignore our conditions, and that 
while he is plenteous in mercy, and long-suffering and 
patient, he nevertheless "will not always chide, neither hold 
back his anger forever": a time of retribution shall come. 

This is the same thought to which the Apostle Peter 
draws our attention in connection with the end of this Gospel 
age and the trouble which will then be precipitated 
upon the world of mankind. He represents God as having 
great mercy, long suffering and willingness, that all might 
turn unto him and live. Nevertheless he shows that a change 
of dispensation will come, that justice will be laid to the 
line and righteousness to the plummet, and that all who will 
not obey that great Prophet shall be ultimately destroyed. 
(Acts 3:23). In this connection the New Testament refers to 
Sodom and its sister cities as illustrations of the fact that 
God will not always chide. We read that the calamity 
which came upon the cities of the plain were set forth as an 
example, "suffering the vengeance of eternal fire"— [utter 
destruction, not eternal torment]. (Jude 7.) Thus 
eventually God will destroy all evil doers with an "everlasting 
destruction [not preservation in torment or otherwise] 

R3947 : page 61 

from the presence of the Lord and the glory of his power." 
-2Thess. 1:9. 

LOVE IN ABRAHAM'S CHARACTER 

This one little incident in Abraham's life shows us 
something of the loving benevolence of his heart, and causes 
us to love and appreciate him more than ever. The intimation 
that judgment upon Sodom was near would upon a 
cruel and loveless heart have suggested a very different 
course from that pursued by Abraham. Such would have 
said, "Well, that is an awfully wicked community; they certainly 
deserve all you could give them; they could not be 
worse. I told my nephew Lot that he was making a mistake 
in going to live with such a deplorable set, and having his 
family intermingle with them; it will serve them all just 
right whatever kind of punishment you mete out to them." 



But Abraham was not at all of this disposition: his 
heart at once went out in sympathy, and benevolently he 
surmised that although the plain was notoriously wicked 
there might at least be fifty righteous persons there— not 
righteous in the absolute sense of being perfect, but in a 
relative or accommodated sense of doing right to the best of 
their ability. (Rom. 8:4.) Abraham had the spirit of a mediator: 
he said to himself, God has been wonderfully gracious 
to me everyway, and now that he has opened this subject to 
me I will make bold to tell him of my heart-sympathy for 
the people, and to express a hope that he will be generous 
to them. Then he adds, "Wilt thou consume the righteous 
with the wicked? Peradventure there be fifty righteous in 
the city, wilt thou consume and not spare the place for the 
fifty righteous that are therein? That be far from thee to 
do after this manner, to slay the righteous with the wicked, 
that so the righteous should be as the wicked; that be far 
from thee. Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?" 

If these words surprise us— to think that Abraham 
would dare to call in question the righteousness of the Lord 
—we should remember that he did not have the blessed 
advantage that we possess, namely, of the guidance of the 
Word of God and the enlightenment of the holy Spirit, 
whereby the Lord's people since Pentecost have been begotten 
again and granted insight into the deep things of God. 
We may indeed esteem that this was Abraham's way of putting 
a question to the Lord rather than criticising him— "If 
you would destroy the righteous with the wicked, show no 
difference, would it be just? Lord, show me how this would 
be just? surely you would do right. I would like to see 
how justice would be compatible with the course I understand 
you to have in mind." 

PARALLELS IN OUR EXPERIENCES 

Similar questions come to us now. Financial disasters 
come, and probably as often affect the righteous as well as 
the wicked; storms and tempests do injury to their interests; 
indeed, sometimes the Lord seems not only not to show favor 
to the righteous, but, if anything, permits, as in Job's case, 
more peculiar disasters to fall to their lot. Under the instructions 
of the great Teacher and his various assistants, 
the apostles, we have learned that our interests as New 
Creatures are sometimes best served by difficulties in the 
flesh, and that God's promise that all things shall work 
together for good to them that love him and are called 
according to his purpose, is true. The Lord supervises the 
experiences of his faithful, so that these afflictions shall 
seem but light, and shall work out for them a far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory as New Creatures, in the 
life to come. 

Abraham's love of righteousness and sympathy for 
all who desired to do right was manifested in this petition. 
It suggests to us that God, in choosing him as one through 
whom some of his blessings should flow to the world of mankind 
in due time, made a good choice. We may be sure also 



that all who will be associated with Christ in his Millennial 
Kingdom, either as members of the Bride class on the Spirit 
plane, or as members of the great company, or of the ancient 
worthy class of princes (Psa. 45:16), must all have such a 
broad benevolence and desire to do good and to favor the 
righteous in every way, else they would not be fit for the 
great work to be entrusted to them. 

And as we have noted the character which God chose 
in Abraham, we may feel sure that the calling and drawing 
of the Father are chiefly if not exclusively to the same class 
of benevolent hearts. We cannot say that God has not 
drawn some very selfish persons into close fellowship with 
himself, and that none of this class will ever attain to a 
share in the Kingdom itself or in its work; but we may 
surmise that this would be very nearly the truth, "The liberal 
soul shall be made fat." The stingy, the selfish, the 
ungenerous, we incline to think, will not be drawn, not be 
called to a participation in the Kingdom. Not that any of 
us have anything whereof to boast in the way of generosity 
—not that the grace of God is not able to effect a wonderful 
transformation from selfishness to generosity— but because 
those who are most selfish have proportionately less of an 
eye to see and less of an ear to hear of the message of God's 
mercy and grace and boundless goodness, and therefore will 
be less in sympathy with the various features of the divine 
plan as respects the present and the coming age and its 
work. So that as a measure of love would seem to be indispensable 
to our drawing, we see most assuredly that a 
full development of love is absolutely necessary to our attaining 
the prize of our high calling. 

GROWING IN GRACE, IN MERCY, IN LOVE 

The Lord answered Abraham that if there were fifty 
righteous, well-intentioned people in Sodom it would not be 
destroyed, and Abraham perceived that he was not more 
just nor more generous than the Lord. But as he thought 
over the matter it occurred to him that there might perhaps 
be one or two less than fifty, and so he asked if the city 
might be spared if there were only forty-five. The reply 
was, Yes: the Lord was still as benevolent or more benevolent 
than Abraham: he was merely finding out the goodness 
of the Lord. His own courage increased, the spirit of 
love and benevolence having begun to operate, and he 
queried of the Lord whether now forty would secure mercy 
upon the city. The answer was, Yes. Abraham had not yet 
touched the bottom in seeking to measure the Lord's goodness. 
Step by step he increased his request. Would it be 
spared for thirty? Then would it be spared for twenty? 
until finally he asked the Lord if he would spare the city 
for ten. In every case the answer was, Yes. In every case 
the Lord was proven to be no less just, no less generous, 
than his servant. He had not yet been blessed as we have 

R3948 : page 62 



been with the anointing of the eyes of his understanding to 
an appreciation of the lengths and breadths and heights and 
depths of the love of God, which passeth all understanding. 

There is a lesson for us in all of this— a lesson that we 
should be more and more like our Father which is in heaven, 
whose message is, "Blessed are the merciful, for they shall 
obtain mercy"; and again, "If ye do not from the heart forgive 
those who trespass against you, neither will your heavenly 
Father forgive your trespasses."— Matt. 5:7; Mark 11:26. 

THE DEPTHS OF GOD'S MERCY 

Abraham's solicitude was not for the wicked but for the 
righteous, and so our sympathies should be with all who in 
every place love righteousness and hate iniquity— to do them 
good, to serve their interests, to render them assistance, doing 
good to all men, especially to the household of faith. Abraham's 
prayers were not for the wicked but for the righteous. 
"Shall the righteous suffer as the wicked?" was his plea. It 
is to be remembered, however, that some who now pray for 
the wicked do so under the misconceptions handed down 
from the "dark ages," that the wicked are not destroyed, but 
preserved either in a purgatory of suffering or an eternity 
of torture. This ungodly, unscriptural, unreasonable thought 
had not yet been introduced to the world; the plain word 
death still meant death, and the hope for a future was that 
of a resurrection of the dead in God's due time, and under 
more favorable conditions than in the present— when God's 
Kingdom would be in power, in control. 

When Abraham subsequently heard the result of the 
disaster— that only his nephew Lot was found a righteous 
man, and that the Lord delivered the one from destruction, 
and delivered on his account some who were not as worthy 
of his favor, members of his family, it must have brought a 
blush to his cheek— to think that he had questioned the 
justice of God in supposing that he was about to destroy, 
with the wicked in the city, as many as fifty righteous when 
here he beheld God's loving mercy even to the extent of 
delivering the one righteous person and some of his dear 
ones. Thus it is with us all: we are finding continually that 
the "heart of the Eternal is most wonderfully kind";— that 
in our poor, imperfect, fallen condition we have no measures 
that will reach to those lengths and breadths and heights 
and depths of the love of God, which passeth all understanding. 
Truly, as the Word declares, "As the heavens are 
higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your 
ways and my plans loftier than your plans." 

STILL NEW BEAUTIES SEEN 

While our minds are contemplating the glories of God 
in connection with this incident of the destruction of Sodom, 
let us remember that now he has shown us a still deeper 
degree of sympathy and love in his provision for the whole 
world of mankind through the great Redeemer, Abraham's 
son, our Lord. What more do we see? Ask the Lord himself 



and hearken to his answer, "It shall be more tolerable 
for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment than for 
you"— of Bethsaida and Chorazin and Capernaum. What is 
this? A day of judgment? Is not the judgment of Sodom 
past? Yes, truly they were declared of the Lord unworthy 
of life and were cut short. To quote the words of inspiration, 
They were haughty, they neglected the poor and the 
needy and committed abomination, and the Lord took them 
away from life in the great catastrophe which came upon 
their city "as he saw good." (Ezek. 16:49,50.) That our 
Lord had these very people of Sodom in his mind is evidenced 
by his own words, "fire came down from God out of 
heaven and destroyed them all." They had a day of judgment 
and now met their doom and were made an example 
of, illustrating God's indignation against all unrighteousness, 
and his will that all evil-doers shall be destroyed. What 
then did our Lord mean by referring to a day of judgment 
future? Will they be judged again? 

We answer, Yes. They will be judged again, not in the 
sense of punishing them a second time for their evil deeds— 
they have already suffered for those. The promised day of 
judgment means a fresh time of trial pending. But how can 
this be? Is God not satisfied with his previous judgment 
respecting this people? Is he not satisfied respecting his 
decision concerning Adam and the entire race— that none 
are fit for eternal life because of the impairment of sin, because 
under the sentence of death? 

"A RANSOM FOR ALL, TO BE TESTIFIED" 

Ah! the key to this promise of a judgment day in the 
future for the world of mankind, including the Sodomites, 
lies in the fact that by divine arrangement "Jesus Christ by 
the grace of God tasted death for every man"— "gave himself 
a ransom for all, to be testified in due time." Thus we 
see that he paid the penalty for the Sodomites and for all 
the rest of us— the death penalty. Hence God's original 
sentence or judgment, which would have meant the everlasting 
destruction of us all, has been met, has been satisfied. 
It was from this standpoint that God spoke to Abraham 
in advance about the coming day of judgment, and 
predicted that then Abraham's seed, Christ, would bless all 
the families of the earth. It was not explained to Abraham 
how divine justice would be met and the sinner released 
through a ransom. This we see because it is in the past, 
and, more clearly than he, we may understand, guided by 
the Apostle's words, that "God hath appointed a day [the 
Millennial age] in the which he will judge the world in 
righteousness [grant the world a fair trial that will take 
cognizance of these weaknesses and frailties through the 
fall] by that man whom God hath ordained"— Jesus and 
his Church, his Bride.— Acts 17:31. 

From this standpoint of present truth, unfolding of the 
divine plan, how we perceive the riches of God's grace and 
loving kindness, not only toward us who have accepted of 
his favor through Christ and received of his holy Spirit 



as his servants and handmaidens, but his proposed blessing 
in due time upon the world of mankind in general, the majority 
of whom are in the great prison-house of death, of 
which Jesus has the key (Rev. 1:18), that in due time the 
holy Spirit shall be poured out upon all flesh— that all the 
blind eyes may be opened and all the deaf ears unstopped, 
to the glory of God and for the assistance of all mankind, 
who, under those favorable conditions, will turn wholly and 
completely to the Lord to serve him with full purpose of 
heart— and as for the remainder who will not so do, after 
all this opportunity, they shall be utterly destroyed from 
amongst the people.— Acts 3:23. 



R3948 : page 63 

SOME INTERESTING QUESTIONS 
TRADING WITH OUR "POUNDS" 



Question.— In a recent article in the WATCH TOWER 
you interpret the Parable of the Pounds and say that 
the "pound" that is given to each of the servants is 
Justification. How then can the pound be taken away 
from the unfaithful servant and be given to the most 
faithful one? Is it possible to thus transfer 
Justification? 

Answer.— Possibly we should have been more explicit 
in the article you refer to. We probably left too 
much for inference. We should have explained in detail 
that while what the Lord gives to each servant is 
Justification, the effect of that gift is the possession by 
the servant of special opportunities as a justified person 
that he would not have had without. Suppose the ten 
persons of the parable presented themselves for service 
—desiring to be the servants of the nobleman- 
desiring him to grant them some opportunity for rendering 
him service. Suppose that in order to be recognized 
as his servants and to be able to trade at all it 
was necessary for them to receive and wear a livery or 
costume provided by the nobleman. The gift of the costume 
would be the acceptance of them as servants and 
constitute their opportunity for serving him. 

So it is with us: However much we may desire to 
be the Lord's servants we are imperfect, weak through 
the blemishes of the flesh, through our fallen nature. 
We are incapable of doing anything in the Lord's service 
that would be acceptable until first of all he justifies 
us. This all-important justification places every 
servant of God on the same footing in relationship to him 
and his service— each one justified reckoned as being a 
perfect man from the divine standpoint— all his blemishes 
are fully covered by the precious merit of our 



Redeemer, the Nobleman. So long as we wear 
this livery (Justification) we have opportunity in 
God's sight of rendering acceptable service; and 
since he will count to us not according to the flesh but 
according to the spirit, mind or heart's desires, therefore 
the one who has least as respects his natural talents 
has the same standing before God as the one who 
has the most, because both are justified or made equal 
and right as perfect men, reckonedly. This, then, is 
the "pound" that is thus given to each one who enters 

R3949 : page 63 

the Lord's service. It is the same in every case. Nothing 
else that we have is common and equal— talents, 
opportunities, educational advantages, etc., are all 
variant, as well as physical and mental capabilities. 
Only from this standpoint of God's reckoning us perfect 
through Christ have we in any sense of the word a 
"pound" apiece to use in the divine service. 

Each one during his life time is to use his pound, 
his opportunity secured through his justification. Each 
must trade with his "pound," must exchange it, if he 
would make increase. We do lay down or exchange 
justified earthly rights, earthly interests, for heavenly 
ones,— and in proportion as we have zeal and energy in 
so doing will be our standing at the inspection when 
the nobleman returns. He who sacrifices most zealously 
his justified human nature, not only by consecrating 
it, but by daily sacrificing it, will be the one who 
will have the ten pounds at the conclusion of the test, 
and to such the Lord would say, Have thou dominion 
over ten cities. 

If, then, our reward at our Lord's hands is to be in 
proportion as we shall be diligent in using this "pound," 
opportunity received through our justification, let us 
lay aside every weight and every besetting sin, and 
strive with patience to do with our might all that our 
hands find to do. The faithful ones seeking opportunities 
will find them; the less faithful, the less zealous, 
will find fewer, while others will pass them by, and 
ultimately miss the reward, and the opportunities previously 
theirs through justification will be given to those 
more zealous. 

LOVE THE FULFILLING OF THE LAW 



Question.— In the Berean Bible Study on Love 
Question V. is, "What is the difference between duty 
love (filio) and disinterested or divine love (agapee)? 
I am somewhat perplexed regarding this difference, and 
would thank you for a little more light on the subject. 

Answer.— Three different words in our Greek New 
Testament are translated love. The principal word, 



which well corresponds to our word love in English, is 

agapee. This word is used whenever the highest type 

of love is described; hence we have designated it disinterested 

or divine love, as representing the highest 

type of love when used respecting the Lord and his 

people. Nevertheless, just like our English word love, 

agapee is also used in an inferior sense, as for instance 

when describing love for the world in the text, "If any 

man love [agapee] the world, the love [agapee] of the 

Father is not in him."— I John 2:15. 

The Greek word Philadelphia signifies brotherly 
love, and of course is always used in a good sense, 
because the brethren of the Lord are all "holy brethren." 
We are exhorted to develop this love for the 
brethren (Philadelphia), and it is given as a mark or indication 
that we are New Creatures in Christ. Nevertheless 
the Apostle exhorts that we go on beyond this 
degree of love (Philadelphia) and attain to the broader 
or divine love, the disinterested love (agapee). Note 
an instance of this: "Add to your faith patience, 
and to patience godliness, and to godliness brotherly 
kindness [philadelphia], and to brotherly kindness, 
charity— Love [agapee]." (2 Pet. 1:7.) The Apostle thus 
uses the word agapee to indicate the broader and more 
comprehensive love as the highest attainment of Christian 
character. Similarly, when describing the greatest 
thing in the world, in I Corinthians 13:2,3,4,8,13, 
the Apostle uses the Greek word agapee, love— in our 
common version translated charity. The culmination 
of his argument is, "Now abideth faith, hope, charity 
[love— agapee], and the greatest of these is charity [love 
—agapee]." Agapee is also used in I John 3:1, where 
the Apostle says, "Behold what manner of love [agapee]"; 
and "He that dwelleth in love [agapee] dwelleth 
in God." In the next verse also we read, "Herein is our 
love [agapee] made perfect." Again we find agapee 
used by the Apostle in the statement, "God commendeth 
his love [agapee] toward us"; and again, "Love 
[agapee] worketh no ill to his neighbor; therefore love 
[agapee] is the fulfilling of the law."— Rom. 5:8,13. 

The Greek word filio, rendered love, we have designated 
"duty love," but we fear that this does not give 
a sufficiently clear understanding of its meaning. The 
noun which is the basis for the verb is frequently translated 
kiss in the New Testament, and by implication 
the kiss belongs to the family and implies a love that 
is more or less respect, or we might say exclusive or 
selfish— not general— not for everybody. It represents 
more of an individual or family love, and is used 
either in a good or an evil sense, as, for instance, we 
read, "The Father loveth the Son" (John 5:20); and 
again, "The world will love its own."— John 15:19. 



page 65 



SEMI-MONTHLY 