Kingdom Proclaimers Report
“A Monument to the Spirit of Cooperation”
NEAR the southernmost tip of Spain towers a huge limestone monolith known as the Rock of Gibraltar. For hundreds of years, this rock has been a silent witness to political controversy and international disagreement. In contrast, the Rock of Gibraltar was recently the backdrop for a manifestation of cooperation and unity rarely seen in the world today.
Just two miles [3 km] from the Rock lies the town of La Línea, Spain. There the construction of a Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses brought together hundreds of volunteer workers eager to contribute their time and energy. As they labored to erect a suitable place for worship of the Creator, Jehovah God, even the majestic backdrop of the Rock of Gibraltar faded in importance compared with the task at hand.
The Kingdom proclaimers in that part of the world send the following report:
“Nine hundred enthusiastic volunteers worked around the clock, starting Friday afternoon, September 24, 1993. By seven o’clock on Sunday evening, a new sign identifying the building as a Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses had been erected, and the attractive new structure was being used for its very first public meeting.
“Many Witnesses from nearby Gibraltar crossed the border to help their Spanish brothers. ‘Political divisions do not put a damper on our international brotherhood,’ explained one of the volunteer workers, a native of Gibraltar. He added: ‘Several years ago, friends from La Línea came to help us build our Kingdom Hall in Gibraltar, so now we are happy to return the favor.’
“To supplement the unstinting efforts of the two congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses and hundreds of skilled helpers from the Andalusian region, the city of La Línea decided to donate the necessary plot of land. ‘Traditionally, Spanish local authorities have always provided land for the building of Catholic churches,’ explained the mayor of La Línea during a visit to the construction site. ‘Why not do the same for other religious denominations? I am very impressed by the unselfishness of the volunteers, and I feel they deserve our support. We need more of this sort of spirit in today’s divided world.’
“He referred to the Kingdom Hall as ‘a monument to the spirit of cooperation.’ Indeed, the most impressive aspect was neither the architectural design nor the size of the building. Rather, what impressed many in the community was the fact that it was built entirely by volunteers and was erected in only 48 hours!”
It is evident that Jehovah’s Witnesses in La Línea and its surrounding areas are proving faithful to the words of Galatians 6:10. There the apostle Paul admonished fellow believers: “Really, then, as long as we have time favorable for it, let us work what is good toward all, but especially toward those related to us in the faith.”

