Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Bible Truth Frees From Spiritism
JEHOVAH’S view of spiritism was well expressed to Israel in these words: “You must not look for omens, and you must not practice magic.” (Leviticus 19:26) But how can one who is involved in magic and spiritism be liberated from the power of the demons? Jesus said: “You will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.” (John 8:32) This was proved true, as seen in the following experience of a Witness in France.
“When I moved to my new home, I had just settled in when a friendly neighbor came around and offered to cast my horoscope. I immediately decided to have nothing more to do with her, which was no small undertaking, for she really was of a very sociable nature.
“In November 1980 I fell sick, and around she came to offer help. I came to appreciate her kindheartedness. I was all the more drawn to her when she confided that she would often wake up choking from anguish. I then realized that she was not as happy as I had imagined. But how could this problem of spiritism be tackled? Feeling that I could wait no longer, I resolved to talk to her about the truth.
“We started out discussing the financial problems peculiar to us single women. She then said: ‘I have a solution. I make money reading tarot cards.’ So I took out my Bible and showed her how dangerous it was to get involved with powerful evil forces.
“This set off a serious discussion on spiritism. She explained that everything she foretold came to pass. I tried to help her reason things out. I went on to show her Moses’ words at Deuteronomy 18:10, 11: ‘There should not be found in you anyone who . . . employs divination, a practicer of magic or anyone who looks for omens . . . or anyone who consults a spirit medium or a professional foreteller of events or anyone who inquires of the dead.’ As I was leaving, she said: ‘To think I believed I’d found the solution to my problems.’ How these words encouraged me, for here she was, after just one discussion, talking about spiritism in the past tense! To me it meant that deep down she had really grasped the point.
“Having an insatiable appetite for spiritual food, she would read the Bible until three or four o’clock in the morning. To start with, we had two studies a week. She attended meetings and made rapid progress. Of course, we thoroughly delved into the subject of spiritism, using the Bible and the Watch Tower publications, and she made a personal decision to burn everything she possessed pertaining to demonism.
“The lady persevered and was soon out preaching the ‘good news’ to others. From time to time she received telephone calls from ex-customers, and after explaining that she had given up her spiritistic activities, she invited them over to hear about something much more interesting. She was baptized and now is our sister.”

