R559 : page 1 

VOL. V. PITTSBURGH, PA., DECEMBER, 1883. NO. 5. 



page 1 

ZIONS 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRISTS PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY AT 

101 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, Pa. 



C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



The Editor recognizes a responsibility to the Master, 
relative to what shall appear in these columns, 
which he cannot and does not cast aside; yet he 
should not be understood as endorsing every expression 
of correspondents, or of articles selected 
from other periodicals. 

TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION. 

TERMS :- -Fifty cents a year, postage prepaid. 
You may send paper money to the amount of two 
dollars, by mail, at our risk. Larger amounts may 
be sent by Drafts, P.O. Money Order, or Registered 
Letter, payable to C. T. RUSSELL. 

FOREIGN TERMS. 

Foreign Postage being higher, our terms to foreign 
subscribers will be 65 cents a year. Please 



send us no foreign money or postage stamps, as we 
can make no use of them. Remittances may be 
made by Foreign Postal Money Orders. 

TAKE NOTICE. 

This paper will be sent free to any of the Lords 
poor who will send a card yearly requesting it. 
Freely we have received and freely we would give 
the truth. "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye 
to the waters; and he that hath no money, come ye, 
buy and eat-yea, come, buy wine and milk without 
money and without price." And you that have it— 
"Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is 
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth 
not? Hearken diligently-and eat ye that which is 
good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness. "- 
ISAIAH 55 :1,2\ 



page 1 

SEND us the addresses of all the moral 
and religious Swedes and Norwegians 
you can gather; for samples of the 
Swedish paper. 



THE safest way to send money is by 
"POSTAL MONEY ORDER." The rates 
have recently been reduced. "POSTAL 
NOTES" are no safer than money. 



R559 : page 1 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER. 

We wish it distinctly understood that 
no arrow from this TOWER is aimed at 
the Lords children; neither at the weak, 
nor at the strong. God forbid that we 
should at all wrestle with flesh and 



blood-especially that we should fight 
against our own kindred, the family of 
God. 

Our arrows, are aimed at errors not 
men; at systems, not individuals. We 
wrestle against princedoms and powers 
in exalted positions of influence ("Eph. 6:12"), 
chief over which is Satan. 

We write thus because a letter from 
one of the readers recently, suggests the 
thought that our words have been 
somewhat misunderstood. This brother 
points us to the success, influence, 
charities, and missions as now witnesses 
of Gods favor to the various sects, and 
warns us against saying anything against 
Gods children therein. 

To this we reply as above, that against 
Gods children we have said nothing, 
but against the errors which have divided 
them and which keep them divided 
into sects contrary to the word 
and Spirit of the Lord. We have said 
something and by the grace of God 
assisting, we will say more, and say on, 
until the last of Gods children shall be 
freed from her enchantments and bondage, 
and regain the liberty wherewith 
Christ hath made them free. 

A casual glance, or even a steady 
gaze if from a worldly standpoint of 
view, would show the various daughters 
of the harlot as creatures of grace and 
beauty; would grasp only the outward 
marks of prosperity, and not notice the 
inward dearth of the true Spirit of Christ. 
Outwardly whited and garnished, inwardly 
full of pride and corruption. 

We have already seen that the Jewish 
Church at the first advent is a likeness 
of the Gospel Church at the second 
advent. Then, the scribes and Pharisees 
represented "orthodoxy" so-called, 
as Jesus testified: "The scribes and 
Pharisees sit in Moses seat. ("Matt. 23:2".) 
That was a time of great prosperity 



in the Jewish Church. Never 
before had it been more prosperous 
outwardly. The Temple was more grand 
than the one Solomon built; their 
charity was noted of the Lord; they 
gave a tenth of all their possessions, 
even to the smallest items of their harvest. 
CMatt. 23:23\) They gave much 
alms in a way to be seen of men; they 
prayed much and long and were not 
ashamed to do it publicly; they sent 
missionaries throughout all the civilized 
world, and had missions in all the principal 
cities of the earth. Jesus testified 
to this also, saying, "Ye compass sea and 
land to make one proselyte"--convert. 
CMatt. 23: 15\) 

Had our Lord joined the Pharisees 
and been "orthodox" (?), we cannot 
doubt that his life would have been 
quite different from what it was. That 
path would have led to honor and praise 
of men, but not to Calvary, and the 
praise of God. To have done so, would 
have been hypocritical as he testifies 
that they were. He shows that their 
hypocrisy consisted in pretending to do 
for Gods glory what was really for their 
own honor among men. (Doubtless in 
some measure self-deceived while deceiving 
others). Is not this much the case 
with the nominally "orthodox" sects of 
to-day? That their donations and labors 
and sacrifices are more for their sect 
than for Gods Church, few will deny. 
Each sect worships, serves, honors and 
advances itself, hence it is hypocrisy of 
the worst form-an attempt to deceive 
God as well as men. 

We honor the spirit of sacrifice 
wherever we find it, whether among 
Protestants, Roman Catholics, Mohammedans 
or Infidels; but when it is remembered 
that the hospitals, schools, 
churches, etc., are still retained as the 
exclusive properties of the sects, we 



wonder whether the name charity is applicable 
to a gift made to ones self. 

We are much pleased at the spirit 
which publishes Bibles by the million 
and scatters the surplus profits in cheap 
copies among the very poor, even 
though it is more zealous in printing 
than in believing or teaching its 
doctrines. 

We are in close sympathy with the 
missionary spirit, but not with missionary 
effort as at present operated by 
the nominal church. Ours is in the 
fullest sense a missionary work. We 
admire the sacrifice, especially of early 
missionaries, who went abroad without 
guarantee of every comfort and luxury 
and of good salaries. We should esteem 
it a great privilege to co-operate 
with such now, if we knew of any who 
as they went preached the "GLAD 
TIDINGS of great joy, which shall be 
unto all people." But we cannot countenance 
present missionary labor, for 
the same reason that our Master could 
not approve of that of the Pharisees. 
The poor heathen will be better off 
to hear nothing in this age and wait 
for the age to come to spread true 
knowledge of God, than to be confused 
and prejudiced against God by 
the usual misrepresentations of his character 
and plans. 

Neither should numbers deceive us- 
"Two or three assembled in Christs 
name in a small room are as much a 
church as a cathedral with as many 
thousands, and they are more likely to 
have their table furnished with living 
bread. If numbers are an evidence of 
Gods blessing, then Jesus had not 
much success as a preacher. If numbers 
prove anything in this age when 
the prince of darkness reigns, it usually 
means his favor and smile, for error 
and errorists abound and predominate 



as shown in the October diagram. 
Think not of numbers, better is the 
communion of two or three saints, than 
the emptiness and formality of a gathering 
of the worldly minded. 

We want to suggest that those who 
feel hurt at such a statement as this, are 
we fear closely related to some of the 
systems denounced; perhaps partakers 
of her sins and therefore sharers in her 
pain. The seven thousand in Israel in 
Elijahs day, who had not bowed the 
knee to Baal, did not-could not feel hurt 
at the prophets words against Baal. 
Israelites indeed, in Jesus day did not 
or should not have been hurt by his 
sharp reproof of those blind leaders 
who were leading the blind people. It 
is as much the duty of the body of 
Christ now, to point out present hindrances 
to growth in grace and knowledge 
--the teaching and theories and mighty 
influences of the nominal church-as it 
was the duty of our head to point out 

R560 : page 1 

that the Church in his day would neither 
enter, nor permit others to enter the 
kingdom. fMatt. 23: 13\) The Lord 
help us each to see clearly the truth on 
this subject and to do his will fearlessly. 
But may we be preserved from any 
spirit of bitterness and malice so that 
"Speaking the truth in love, we may 
grow up into Him in all things which is 
the head-even Christ. fEph. 4:15\) 

page 1 

We subjoin extracts from some 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Reed City, Mich. 
DEAR SIR:-Last week ZIONS 



WATCH TOWER was sent to me, and I 

find itjust the paper I want. Brought 

up in the strictest sect of United Presbyterians, 

I find this new message is 

like cold water to my thirsty soul, and 

I wish to learn more of the glad tidings. 

Enclosed find one dollar for one years 

subscription and for the rest send me 

as many copies of the October number 

as you can, I want to send them to my 

friends to whom it will prove glorious 

news. 

I am studying my Bible with new 
interest and it is wonderful that I have 
been so blinded to Gods glorious promises 
all these years. I shall trust to 
clergymen no longer for I find them 
small help in time of need. 

I am truly grateful to the unknown 
one who sent me your paper. It is just 
what I have gone mourning for, for 
years, not knowing God was preparing 
"deliverance to the captives." May he 
bless you in the good work. . 

Kahoka, Mo. 

DEAR BROTHER:-Your highly esteemed 
and welcome letter of the 8th 
inst. was received and read with much 
pleasure. It gave me so much strength 
that opposition and persecution seem 
but trifles. I have received and used 
the copies and samples of "Food" and 
"TOWERS" you sent me. My wife and 
I are working in a private way just now, 
deeming it better than public work under 
the present circumstances. 

Only a few out of the many seem 
willing to receive any new light on 
revealed things, so thick is the veil of 
prejudice drawn over their mental 
vision. But as I suggested, there are 
some who are willing to read and compare 
spiritual things with spiritual. 

I lend the papers rather than give 
them, and to such as seem to be sincere, 



those consecrated ones of the household 
of faith. The papers and books 
are falling into the hands of even the 
unregenerated and by them are highly 
commended. It seems strange to me 
that such marvelous light should spring 
up in this our day, presenting truths 
that I had never dreamed of before. 
Because they are so startling is one 
reason why people do not receive them. 
May the Lord of heaven bless you in 
the glorious work. We will help all we 
can directly and indirectly. We herewith 
send enclosed four names with 
subscriptions for the TOWER. You shall 
hear from us and our work as often as 
we have anything special to write. 
Yours fraternally, . 

New Haven, Conn. 

DEAR SIR:— I see by looking over 
my papers that my subscription has 
nearly expired, so I hasten to renew it. 
I do not want to be without it. I watch 
for it eagerly and enjoy it. I had never 
heard much of this subject until about 
a year ago, but as soon as your book, 
"Food for Thinking Christians" fell into 
my hands I knew it was just what I 
wanted. It seemed to me that I only 
needed to tell my friends who believed, 
to have them rejoice with me. But I 
have been chilled and disappointed. A 
few have seemed to have some light but 
some of my friends think I am going to 
extremes. 

I have wanted to write and let you 
know what a comfort your books and 
papers have been to me, but hesitated 
knowing that you received so many 
letters. But during the years I have 
been trying to serve Christ, I have been 
led in such a way that it seemed impossible 
for me to open my heart to any one 
about me, and for years I struggled 
through a thick darkness of doubts and 



fears. I wanted to serve God and to 
please him, but he seemed so far off. 
Then I heard the Advent Doctrine, and 
then came the first ray of light, but for 
many years after that the light was very 
dim, but still the Lord led me, and my 
heart cried out for him constantly, until 
finally about five years ago he gave me 
rest. Then I said: "Though he slay 
me, yet will I trust him." Since that 
time I have not once doubted him. 
Every day I have grown nearer to him, 
until to-day I can look back over my 
life and thank God for every step of 
the way he has led me. 

The past year has been the richest, 
most blessed year of my life, although 
it has been a time of sharp trial. I 
think it has taken all the faith I had to 
enable me to endure, but I feel stronger 
than ever, and I thank God that the 
light is shining so clearly now; and I 
thank him that it is shining on me. 

I hope I have not written too long a 
letter, but my heart is full and I longed 
to open it. . 

Corunna, Mich. 
MY BROTHER: --Twice you have responded 
and sent me of your literature, 
which I have read; at first with some 
fears of becoming entangled, but now 
with a confidence of being led in the 
right direction: and having a craving 
desire to study with you Gods Word, I 

page 2 

subscribe for the ZIONS WATCH TOWER 

one year. 

Your reading matter has made my 
Bible many times clearer and dearer, 
even in a short time, and I thank God 
for seeing even through a glass darkly. 
Very Truly yours, . 



Eglington, Canada. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The late 
number of ZIONS WATCH TOWER containing 
the Diagram illustrating the population 
of the earth, in the religious 
divisions, I saw first in a paper 
from Mr. Guinness, of Harley House, 
London, where young men are trained 
for the mission field. It is one of the 
most striking evidences of the failure of 
human power with all its enlightenment, 
to convert the world, and to increase 
the desire and prayer of the believer in 
Jesus, that he may "come quickly" to 
"make all things new." The signs of 
the times are ominous that a great crisis 
is not remote. The persecution of the 
Jews in Europe seems like an evidence 
of the truth taught by the Saviour in the 
parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus. 
"Dead" and "buried" as a nation, they 
are suffering now, more than ordinary, 
the "torments" predicted by the Saviour. 

In a late letter received from 
England, I see that the Society 
of which Earl Shaftesbury is President 
--the "Syrian Colonization Fund," 
designed to aid the Jews desiring 
to settle in Palestine to escape the 
cruelty of their persecutors, has met 
with difficulties, arising from political 
causes. A number of Jews intending 
to settle in Palestine or Syria were not 
allowed by the Turkish government to 
enter the promised land, but obtained 
permission from the British government 
to settle in the island Cyprus. In the 
letter, to which I allude, the writer 
says: "Our Jewish colonists find that 
the land which the governments has 
granted is of excellent quality and in a 
healthy situation. They are clearing 
the ground and digging their wells; 
also doing needful work in road making. 
We have not yet raised enough to 
establish them, but the funds are coming 



in, and we are encouraged to hope 
that the effort will prove successful. As 
to Syria and Palestine the case stands 
thus: Until lately the Sultan and his 
government were friendly to Jews, and 
would have encouraged their settlement 
in Syria, but political intrigues on the 
part of foreigners has been exerted. The 
Sultan has been led to think that England 
is endeavoring to get hold of Syria 
by means of the Jews; and thus, at the 
beginning of this year, the Turkish authorities 
discouraged Jewish immigration 
or settlement. Jewish pilgrims 
coming to die in Jerusalem were allowed 
to land. But then even these were 
for a while prohibited. This state of 
things can scarcely last. There are 
numbers of Jews in the Holy Land, and 
the most of them are in extreme poverty," 
(as Lazarus had been in the parable.) 
To these relief is being sent according 
to the means that are received. 

The foregoing information cannot fail 
to be of interest to believers: The Diagram 
of the six classes of religionists in 
the world which appeared in the last 
number of the WATCH TOWER, is one 
of the best means of exhibiting the hopelessness 
of the worlds conversion to 
God, [by human agency] when up to 
the latter part of the 19th century only 
116 millions of nominal Protestants 
stand up out of the 1424 millions of the 
population. 

I am desirous to use the Diagram to 
awaken interest in the coming of the 
Lord among professing Christians. In 
Toronto the ministers of religion generally 
stand opposed to this doctrine. In 
"McMaster Hall," the theological hall 
of the Baptists, not one of the Faculty 
believed in the Lords coming to reign 
upon the earth. This was evolved by a 
student who believed the doctrine, at a 
meeting specially called to consider it. 



May the Lord greatly bless your labor 
of love. 

I am Yours fraternally, . 

Tangerine, Orange Co., Fla. 
MY DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 
Nearly a year ago I happened upon a 
copy of ZIONS WATCH TOWER. How 
it came to be in this out-of-the-way 
place I know not, but I saw in it light on 
many things on which I had pondered 
much and had inquired much about, 
among the leaders of all sects, without 
being satisfied. Many of those things I 
wished to know more about. I was poor 
and afflicted and I was and am hard 
pushed to feed my family; but seeing 
your offer to send it to any of the Lords 
poor who would write for it, I wrote and 
requested it, hoping to be able some day 
to pay for it. I have since passed 
through much sickness and write this 
upon a bed of sickness. Whether I will 
now be restored to health or not I cannot 
tell, but God knoweth best what is 
good for me. I know I am unworthy 
of the least of His favors and whether 
He decrees that I shall or shall not live 
to receive more of the light that he is 
bestowing upon His children I can but 
say, His will be done. And how I wish 
I could be assured in this dark day of 
all others, while I lie here and watch 
the dark clouds that reach from the 
ocean to the gulf, and while time passeth 
so heavily, that I have an interest in 
your prayers. I feel it would do my 
soul good to know or learn personally 
that those who have caused me so much 
comfort in affliction had indeed made 
an afflicted and unknown brother a special 
subject of prayer. I have written 
now more than I thought to write, but 
not the half of what I could write if my 
strength permitted. Would I be intruding 
upon your kindness to ask of 



you to send me a few more copies of 
the October number of the TOWER? 
Will you please continue to send it to 
me? Perhaps it will not be long till I 
can do something for the cause, and if 
so, I will, surely. 

Yours in deep affliction, 



Buffalo, N.Y. 

DEAR BRO:-I herewith enclose 
my subscription for the dear Watch 
Tower. I cannot tell you how I appreciate 
its monthly visits with its deep living 
truth from Gods word. How it 
warms and cheers the heart and strengthens 
and encourages us in our pilgrimage, 
unfolding Gods plan of salvation and 
the presence of Jesus. I feel thankful to 
my Heavenly Father for the privilege 
of feasting on these glorious truths for it 
is by his favor that I am what I am. 
May our Fathers richest blessings rest 
on all those loved ones who are feeding 
the household of faith. 

I know your time is limited and therefore 
I do not expect you to correspond, 
but I never forget you at the throne of 
grace, and may the blessing of the Lord 
rest on you all, is the sincere prayer of 
your sister in Christ. . 



R560 : page 2 

WAS IT DOCTORED? 



We desire to ask the attention of the 
readers of ZIONS WATCH TOWER to 
some considerations bearing on the authenticity 
of the New Testament Scriptures. 
It is claimed that the Roman 
Catholic Church, the "Mother of Harlots," 
having had in her possession exclusively, 
for a length of time, the original 



manuscripts, corrupted those manuscripts 

by interpolations and additions, 

in order to give an appearance of divine 

sanction to her corrupt doctrines and 

teachings. It is admitted, of course, 

that there are several passages in the 

New Testament which are marked as 

doubtful, and some, known to be spurious, 

have been rejected altogether; but 

it is not shown that those passages originated 

with a design to corrupt the original 

text. The explanation is offered 

(and there is nothing better, so far as we 

are aware), that those passages first appeared 

probably in the shape of marginal 

notes, and that ultimately, in the 

process of copying, either through carelessness, 

ignorance, or possible dishonesty, 

they were finally embodied in the 

text. But, be that as it may, we propose 

to show, by various considerations, how 

incredible, almost impossible, it is that 

any such attempts as claimed could have 

been made to corrupt the original text. 

You are aware that the Roman Church 
teaches that Mary is "ever a virgin." It 
is one of her "infallible" dogmas that 
Jesus was her "only son." And, yet, 
with surprising carelessness, the manuscript 
doctors have allowed the text to 
read: "She brought forth her first-born 
son," implying, of course, that she 
brought forth other sons afterward. And, 
as if that were not enough, and to put 
caviling at rest forever, they permit the 
original text to tell about "his mother 
and brothers, and sisters." (See v Matt. 1:25"; 
"Luke 2:7V Mark 3:3 1V6:3\) 
All this, rendered into plain English, 
goes before the world, while the infallible 
dogma of the Church is never so 
much as hinted in any part of the Book. 

Again, the "infallible" Church teaches 
the doctrine of the Trinity. A recent 
writer said in his paper, endeavoring to 
show how she had corrupted the Word 



of God, "Where else than in the New 

Testament did she get her doctrine of 

the Trinity?" That writer ought to 

have known (for he has sufficient intelligence) 

that the doctrine of the Trinity 

is not to be found in the New Testament, 

that spurious passage in " 1 John 5:7" 

not even directly affirming it, and 

that is the only text which has the faintest 

semblance of teaching the doctrine. 

But in view of the fact that those crafty 

manuscript corrupters took in hand to 

make the original text teach their dogma, 

what inconceivable blindness, on 

their part, to have allowed Jesus to say: 

"The Son is not able of himself to do 

anything!" ("John 5:19"), and "My 

Father is greater than I." ("14:28".) 

And how could they have suffered an 

Apostle to testify that "he is the first-born 

of all creation," ("Col. 1:15"), and 

the Revelator to say, "he is the beginning, 

or chief, of the creation of God." 

Not to have stated their own dogma 

with any degree of clearness, and at the 

same time to allow such positive testimony 

in condemnation of their dogma 

to go out from under their hands was, 

certainly, bad work for the "doctors," 

wasnt it? 

The Roman Church teaches the doctrine 
of "purgatory," but when they 
were tinkering the manuscripts they 
must have forgotten to put that in-the 
passage in "1 Pet. 3:18,19", read in the 
light of common sense, not giving the 
least countenance to such a notion. 

Then, again, the old Mother teaches 
"eternal torment." But is it not wonderfully 
strange that when she was "corrupting 
the manuscripts" she should 
have left out so completely the very 
foundation doctrines of her system? For 
while she teaches eternal torment (not 
from the Scriptures of truth, but from 
tradition, and by unwarrantable interpretation 



of certain texts,) these very 

manuscripts which she is said to have 

corrupted, are allowed to testify in the 

most unqualified terms that "death is the 

wages of sin;" and that the final punishment 

will be "everlasting destruction." 

OMatt. 10:28^; "Rom. 6:23"; "2 Thess. 1:9\) 

So, also, her dogma of the immortality 

of the soul. Why did she not put that 

in manuscripts when she was "doctoring" 

them to suit her false teachings? 

You know as well as I know-and I 

know to an absolute certainty-that that 

pet doctrine of Romanism is not so 

much as named in the Scriptures, neither 

in Hebrew, Greek nor English: and yet 

we are asked to believe that that corrupt 

Church has so extensively tampered 

with the original manuscripts, in order 

to sustain her abominable system of 

falsehood, that it is usually unsafe to 

trust them; that they cannot be relied 

on at all to tell the truth! However, 

while she teaches that immortality is inherent 

in all men, they teach that immortality 

is a glorious prize to be sought 

for, and to be obtained only by the elect 

of God through Jesus our Lord. ("Rom. 2:7"; 

"6:23"; "1 John 5:11, 12"; 

"John 10:27,28'.) 

"The Church" prays to saints, while 
the manuscripts testify against her-"I, 
Jesus, am the way-no man cometh to 
the Father but by me;" ("John 14:6") and 
"there is one Mediator between God and 
men, the man Christ Jesus." ("1 Tim. 2:5\) 
So, also, in her teaching of the 
merit of works, the testimony of those 
manuscripts is directly against her. She 
teaches that the faithful, by their good 
works, may merit the favor of God, 
while they teach that works are entirely 
excluded, and men are "justified by 
faith." fRom. 3:27,28"; "4:1-8"; 
"Eph. 2:9".) 

Illustrations might be multiplied. But 



from those already noted, it seems fair 
to conclude that, inasmuch as the "doctors" 
did not corrupt the text in those 
places which teach doctrines exactly 
contrary to their own teachings, the 
passages which are known to be spurious 
must be accounted for on some 
other hypothesis than a deliberate design 
to corrupt the original text. 

It is certainly true that the teachings 
of the Scriptures in what are usually regarded 
as "fundamental" truths are in 
direct contradiction of the dogmas of 
the Roman Church, as well, also, as 
those of the Protestant sects. And it is 
no less certain that the teachings of the 
Scriptures are in full harmony with 
themselves throughout, from first to last. 
Take, for example, the story of the miraculous 
conception and birth of Jesus, 
which some in these days find so hard 
to believe. Compare the case of Sarah, 
CGen. 18:9-14^) [Is anything too hard? 
-wonderful-for Jehovah?] of Hannah, 
fl Sam. 1:5-27",) of the Shunamite, 
02 Kings 4:14-17\) of Elizabeth, ("Luke 1:18,20,24".) 
In all of these cases 
there is the miraculous interposition of 
divine power, quickening the natural 
forces, where they had been dormant 
and inoperative, or entirely suspended; 
and it seems to us the miracle is not less 
notable in these cases than in that of 
Mary, where the same divine power attains 
its object, by its own energy directly 
applied, regardless of the usual 
operation of natural law. For, surely, 
He who established natures laws, is able 
to act in any given case by other means, 
if he should see fit so to do. And 
that He did do so, is, as we have said, 
the testimony of the Book, in harmony 
with itself. R. WAKEFIELD. 

Newark, N.J. 



R560 : page 2 

CONVERTED BY A TELEGRAM. 

A young telegraph operator in a provincial 
town was anxious about his soul. 
But he could not have guessed that a 
message would reach him as it did. He 
had been sleepless all night, thinking of 
his need of a Saviour, and in the morning 
he went to his work with his heart 
uttering the publicans prayer. The 
sunny weather and beauty of summer 
scenery did not engage him, for he was 
longing for that peace of God which the 
Christian feels. 

Absorbed with his desire, he continued 
to pray, "God be merciful to me a 
sinner," and was constantly repeating 
the words, when the click of the signal 
told him that his office was called. He 
took his place at the instrument, and 
quickly and with unusual emotion 
spelled his message, from "Herbert," at 
Windermore, to "J.B.," at Warworth: 

"Behold the Lamb of God, which 
taketh away the sins of the world." "In 
whom we have redemption through His 
blood, the forgiveness of sins, according 
to the riches of His grace." 

Such a telegram as that the young 
man had never known to pass the wires 
before. It was sent to a servant girl 
who, in her distress of mind, had written 
a letter to her brother, "Herbert," 
but it proved a double blessing, for it 
came to the operator as a direct reply 
from heaven to his prayer. He accepted 
it as such, and his faith saw and 
rested in the Lamb of God. --Selected. 



page 2 



Some one has said that the fruit of 
the Spirit is all in one word-"love." 
It speaks in Galatians about love, the 
fruit of the Spirit being love, joy, peace, 
gentleness, long-suffering, meekness and 
temperance. The way this writer has 
put it-and I think it is very beautiful 
--is, that joy is love exultant, peace is 
love in repose, and long-suffering is love 
enduring. It is all love, you see, and 
gentleness is love in society, and goodness 
is love in action, and faith is love 
on the battle-field, and meekness is love 
at school, and temperance is love in 
training. -Moody. 



In our last issue we stated that DAY 
DAWN [the work mentioned in "Food"] 
was out of print, since which we find 
that there are still some copies remaining. 
Though we advise waiting on 
"Millennial Day Dawn," we would say 
that if you desire the former we can 
still supply a few copies. Price 50 cents. 



page 3 

I AM THINE. 

Though a cloud of pain and sorrow 

Sometimes hide thy face from me; 
Though my steps are slow and weary, 

Father, still I trust in thee. 
If my way is dark and lonely, 

And no stars above me shine, 
Through the darkness that surrounds me 

Still I whisper, I am thine. 

When in hours of grief and trouble 
Tears have almost dimmed my sight, 

When the tempter tries his weapon 
Sometimes in a robe of light- 



If I lift my eyes to heaven 

Yet I see thy love divine, 
Like a sunbeam through the shadows, 

And I feel that I am thine. 

So my Father, earthly sufferings 

Cannot veil thy love from me, 
And if worldly joy and pleasures 

Try to win my heart from thee, 
Then I look beyond the shadows 

To the crown that shall be mine, 
And I see the day is dawning, 

When 111 be forever thine. 
— K. Lundin. 



R561 : page 3 

WHEN WAS JESUS BORN? 

The subject of ancient chronology is 
confessedly a very difficult one. Of 
many early and important events there 
are no reliable dates; of others, different 
authors assign widely different periods. 
As we search backward, the further we 
go the less reliable is the history, until 
--outside of the Scriptures-we finally 
reach the fabulous age, where all is myth 
and imagination. 

There are a number of reasons for 
this condition of things. 

1. Chronology was, apparently, very 
little used in the earlier ages. 

2. Different eras in starting points 
were used by different authors, and by 
the same author at different times. 

3. Several ways of reckoning time 
were used. 

4. Printing being unknown, and original 
documents unattainable, much was 
written from tradition and conjecture. 

5. We do not in many cases have the 
first or actual record, but only second 
or third-handed and often conflicting 



statements. 

6. Where the original records exist, 
as in Egyptian hieroglyphics or Babylonian 
bricks, we are still dependent on 
meagre and conjectural translations. 

The Bible, so far as it gives chronology, 
seems to be the only reliable 
source, but of course it is reliable, in the 
fullest sense, only to those who have 
faith in it. 

Between one and two hundred different 
systems of chronology have been 
formed; most of them, too, by men of 
learning and research; so that it is not 
wise to become dogmatic over the date 
of ancient events which rest on profane, 
and therefore possibly unreliable history. 
Much less does it become a professed 
Christian to attempt to undermine the 
Scriptures by combatting them with 
data which are acknowledged to be only 
approximate. 

The date of the birth of Christ is one 
which has been in dispute. In the 6th 
century it was proposed that Christians 
should use that date as an epoch from 
which to reckon time. As it was still 
less than 500 years from the days of the 
apostles, the date should have been 
placed with tolerable accuracy. 

In the beginning of the seventh century 
an event occurred which led to 
doubt concerning the accepted date. 
In December, 1603, a conjunction of the 
planets Saturn and Jupiter took place, 
and, about a year after, a new and 
bright star appeared, which shone above 
a year and then disappeared. The conjunction 
was not strange, as it occurs 
regularly every few years, but the new 
and evanescent star was rather unusual. 
To a famous astronomer then living, it 
occurred that if such an event had happened 
just before the birth of Jesus, it 
would have been noticed by a people 
that believed in astrology, and that IF 



the men who came from the East, seeking 
for the King of the Jews, had been 
of this class they might have thought 
something unusual was going to occur, 
and IF a new star happened to appear 
at that time also (a very unlikely thing) 
they might have supposed it to be-etc, 
etc. 

How such a star could travel before 
them from Jerusalem to Bethlehem, and 
then stand still over the place where the 
babe was, does not appear; nor why 
such a star should appear at each and 
every recurrence of the meeting of the 
two planets; but it so happened that 
one of the conjunctions was found to 
have taken place in B.C. 4, and the conclusion 
was jumped at that PERHAPS a 
new star also appeared at that time 
and acted in the very unstarlike manner 
suggested. Believers have been and still 
are anxious to have the events noted in 
Scripture verified by external evidence, 
but an attempt to prove more than is 
warranted may do more harm than good. 

Canon Farrar, in his "Life of Christ," 
has the following to say on the subject, 
after explaining the argument: "The appearance 
and disappearance of new stars 
is a phenomenon by no means so rare 
as to admit of any possible doubt. The 
fact that St. Matthew speaks of such a 
star within two or three years [note the 
indefiniteness] at the utmost of a time 
when we know that there was this remarkable 
planetary conjunction, and the 
fact that there was such a star 1,600 
years afterwards, at the time of a similar 
conjunction can only be regarded as a 
curious coincidence... We are, 
in fact, driven to the conclusion, that the 
astronomical researches which have 
proved the reality of this remarkable 
conjunction are only valuable as showing 
the possibility that it may have prepared 
the Magi for the early occurrence 



of some great event. And this confident 
expectation may have led to their journey 
to Palestine on the subsequent appearance 
of an evanescent star." 

We accept the conclusion so far, but 
must believe that the star was purely 
supernatural, prepared for the occasion 
and circumstances; and, therefore, not 
dependent on the planetary conjunction. 
If so, it might have occurred the same 
year or a dozen years afterward, and 
astronomy could not help us place it. 

That the conjunction did more than 
Farrar suggests is, we believe, accepted 
by no scholar, excepting, perhaps, 
those who, professing Christianity, deny 
the supernatural. 

Some, who could not accept the star 
theory supposed that the movements of 
the planets themselves might have led 
the Magi, but this theory requires more 
faith [?] than to accept the miraculous 
appearance of a star, or, what the Magi 
supposed was a star. 

While these notions prevailed, and 
the early date (B.C. 4) was accepted, 
historical events and dates were bent to 
harmonize, and other events were hunted 
up in support of the theory. Among 
the latter was an eclipse of the moon, 
said by Josephus to have occurred a 
short time before the death of Herod 
the Great-the monster who, as a drop 
in the ocean of his atrocities, slew the 
babes at Bethlehem. 

All we know of the eclipse is as follows: 
Herod had placed a large golden 
eagle over the gate of the temple. Two 
illustrious Jews, named Matthias and 
Judas, persuaded the young men to pull 
it down. They did so, and some were 
arrested and executed. To make the 
matter clear, Josephus relates that there 
was another Matthias who was at that 
time high priest, but was not directly 
concerned in the sedition. He then 



says: "But Herod deprived this Matthias 
of the high priesthood, and burnt 
the other Matthias, who had raised the 
sedition, with his companions, alive, and 
that very night there was an eclipse of 
the moon." 

Now as there occur from one to four 
eclipses of the moon every year, it is 
evident that except, under peculiar circumstances, 
the record of an occurrence 
proves nothing. Where the time of the 
year, the time of night, and the amount 
of obscurity are all given, as has been 
done in several instances, the record is 
of the greatest value in fixing dates. In 
the case under consideration there is 
nothing of the kind, therefore the record 
proves absolutely nothing as far as 
chronology is concerned. Josephus does 
speak of a fast as having been kept before 
the event, but what fast or how long 
before, is not stated. 

As it happens there was only one 
eclipse of the moon in B.C. 4, while in 
B.C. 1, there were three. The eclipse 
of B.C. 4 was only partial (six digits, 
or only half of the moon being hidden) 
while it is rather remarkable that all 
three in B.C. 1 were total eclipses, that 
is, the entire moon was obscured, and 
of course for a longer time; causing the 
event to be much more likely to be 
noticed. 

If the eclipse theory, then, has any 
weight, it is in favor of B.C. 1. 

Of those who follow the early date, 
some suppose an eclipse that occurred 
in the fall of B.C. 5 to be the one recorded; 
others give B.C. 3 and 2 and 
still later, according to their understanding 
of Josephus and other historians. 

Josephus gives the age of Herod at 
some important periods in his history, 
and the date of some of the events but 
they are not considered trustworthy. 
Some of them certainly seem to teach 



that Herod died as early as B.C. 4, but 
others cannot be reconciled with that 
date. 

For instance, he is said by Josephus 
to have died at the age of 70. He was 
made governor of Galilee in B.C. 47. 
Josephus says (Ant. 14.9:2) that at 
that time he was 25 years of age. This 
would place his birth in B.C. 72. (47 + 
25). His death at 70 would then be in 
B.C. 2. 

It is well to note that Fausset, in his 
Bible Cyclopaedia, gives his age when 
made governor at about 20 years. Chambers 
Cyclopaedian and Smiths Bible 
Dictionary (See article Herod,) give his 
age at 15, which is certainly too young. 
The first would bring his death in A.D. 2, 
and the latter two would thus place his 
death in A.D. 6. 

As to the reliability of Josephus, we 
quote from Appletons Cyclopaedia-article 
Chronology: "Josephus also gives 
dates, but he is altogether too careless 
to be taken into account." 

We think the most reliable date is obtained 
in another way, even, if slightly 
roundabout. The greater the person or 
the event the more likely are historic 
facts in regard to them known and 
recorded. 

Herod was but the usurper of the 
kingdom of Judea, a comparatively insignificant 
province of Rome. We have 
a chronology that is based on a greater 
man and event. The death of Augustus 
Caesar, the Emperor of Rome, and who 
made Rome the glory of the world, is 
what might be called established as occurring 
in A.D. 14. His successor was 
Tiberias Caesar. Now "Luke tells us, chap. 3\ 
that in the fifteenth year of his 
reign John the Baptist began to preach. 
John evidently baptized for six months 
before Jesus met him at the Jordan. 
Jesus then was about 30 years of age- 



the age also of John when he began- 

R562 : page 3 

according to Jewish law and custom. 

fNum. 4:3\) Fifteen years, added to 

A.D. 14, bring us to A.D. 29, in the 

spring of which, evidently, John began 

his ministry. His work is recorded in 

"Mark 1:5\ In the autumn Jesus was baptized; 

and he had gathered some disciples 

about him before the Passover of 

the following spring, as recorded in "John V 

and "2\ After that, Jesus preached 

three years; or three and a half years 

from his baptism; and was crucified on 

the Passover in A.D. 33, "in the midst 

of the week," fDan. 9:27",) aged about 

thirty-three years and six months. 

Look now in the margins of your Bibles 
at the last chapters of each of the 
evangelists, and you will find A.D. 33 
the correct time, yet if you look at the 
time of Jesus baptism you will find them 
dated two years too early, and at his 
birth four years too early. The reason is 
this: The B.C. theory compelled the 
editors of our translation to assume that 
Jesus preached for six or seven years- 
a theory without support, and now entirely 
discarded. 

The marginal dates at the two 
ends of the first three Gospels 
do not agree. The B.C. 4 theory 
has made all the confusion-discard 
it, and we have harmony. The birth, 
then, should be placed B.C. 1, the baptism 
A.D. 29, and the crucifixion where 
it is, A.D. 33. W. I. M. 



[We hold that the reckoning of time 
commonly used is substantially correct, 
as shown above. The difference which 
we claim as between it and the true date 



calculated from Jesus birth is about 
three months. "Christmas day," which 
is reckoned the anniversary of Jesus 
birth (January 1 representing the date 
of his circumcision eight days after) is 
mid- winter, and evidently does not comport 
well with the account of the shepherds 
being out with their flocks fLuke 2:8\) 
It is supposed by some to have 
been placed December 25 in order to 
the better take the place of and transform 
an old heathen festival at that date, 
into a Christ-commemorating one-at 
about the time so-called Christianity 
becoming popular with emperors, was 
embraced by thousands of the heathen 
people. 

Our method of reckoning the day of 
Jesus birth is based upon Scripture, 
and is as follows: According to the law 
and custom Jesus could not begin his 
public ministry until the age of thirty; 
and we may reasonably suppose that 
his desire to be about his "Fathers 
business" would induce him to commence 
his work as soon as he was thirty 
years old; hence we shall suppose that he 
was baptized on his birthday. The period 
of seven years onward from his 
baptism is distinctly marked in prophecy 
-the seventieth week, in the midst or 
middle of which he should die or "be 
cut off" from life. CDanl. 9:27\) 

His death, then, on the fifteenth day 
of the Jewish month Ab, was on a day 
just six months from his birthday, which 
consequently would be about October 
2d-about the beginning of the Jewish 
year-or about three months earlier than 
A.D. 1 is usually reckoned.-EDITOR.] 



R562 : page 3 

PROPHETIC PEN PICTURES 



OF OUR DAY. 

Nowhere do we find more striking 
and forcible figures and similes than in 
Jehovahs words through the prophets. 
We here consider some statements of 
"Isaiah 28 v th and v 29'th chapters relating 
to the church nominal. It is described 
under various figures-Ariel, Jerusalem, 
Babylon, Ephraim, Zion, etc. -each representing 
some special feature. 

DRUNKARDS OF EPHRAIM. 

Olsa. 28:l-8\) 

Here the Prophets illustration is Ephraim, 
probably because like Ephraim 
the Nominal Gospel Church was to increase 
in number and influence, and become 
proud and corrupt. The name 
Ephraim came to be applied to the ten 
tribes who revolted against the kingdom 
of the Lord and established a different 
mode of worship. So the prophet 
very aptly uses it here as an illustration. 
He recognizes the fact that it has what 
is considered a glory and beauty, and 
fruitfulness, but shows that their glory 
is really their shame, and that their 
proud and haughty spirit must have a fall. 

The nominal church is represented as 
crowned with pride and overcome with 
wine-intoxicated with the spirit of the 
world and its pleasures. They are not 
on the mountain or hill top enjoying 
their privilege of communion with God, 
but they are down reveling in the fatness 
of the valley, the pleasures of the world. 
And Jeremiah says: "Wherefore gloriest 
thou in the valleys, thy flowing valley, 
O backsliding daughter? that trusted 
in her treasures. fJer. 49:4\) But says 
the Lord, Woe to the crown of pride, 
to the drunkards of Ephraim. The 
crown of pride the drunkards of Ephraim 



shall be trodden under feet. v vs. 1,3\ 
"And the glorious beauty which is 
on the head of the fat valley, shall be a 
fading flower, and as the hasty fruit 
before the summer; which when he 
that looketh upon it seeth, while it is 
yet in his hand he eateth it up. v vs. 4\ 

The glory of the nominal church is in 
numbers, wealth and worldly prosperity. 
She has been more anxious to 
have a show of growth, prosperity and 
fruitfulness before the world, than to 
have fruit acceptable and well pleasing 
to God. Gods plans work out slowly, 
and come to maturity not by sudden 
spasmodic efforts, but by slow and 
steady development, 

"The bud may have a bitter taste, 
But sweet will be the flower." 
But the nominal church was not satisfied 
with Gods plans, and in her haste 
she has discarded his and adopted 
plans and theories of her own. The result 

R562 : page 4 

has been great fruitfulness of a 
certain kind. Moral and philanthropic 
enterprises have been undertaken on a 
gigantic scale and the church has 
rapidly grown to immense proportions, 
and has gained a most prominent and 
influential position and name among 
men. Seeing this hasty fruit and regarding 
it good, the world with its 
spirit of pride has greedily swallowed 
it. The spirit of the world has swallowed 
up all the benevolent enterprises 
and stamped them all with pride and 
boastfulness. And so also its fruit in 
numbers, is swallowed up by the spirit 
of the world. 

Again he says fvs. 7\) "The priest 
and the prophet have erred through 
strong drink; they also have erred 
through wine, and through strong drink 



are out of the way, they are swallowed 
up of wine, they are out of the way 
through strong drink, they err in vision, 
they stumble in judgment." 

What a picture of the present condition 
of things: Not only are the people 
of the Church intoxicated with the 
spirit of the world, but the priests, the 
clergy also. And because of this intoxication 
they err in vision and are 
unable to discern the truth; and they 
stumble over the plain statements and 
marked fulfillments of Gods Word. 

This condition of things is true of the 
whole nominal church of every denomination, 
so that "All tables are full of vomit 
and filthiness so that there is no place 
clean." >. 8\ The tables, which should be 
laden with the bread of truth, are instead, 
covered with a repulsive mass of 
mingled traditions and abominable 
errors. 

The Lord has permitted the unfaithful 
stewards for a long time to pursue 
their own plans and accomplish their 
own desires, but it shall not always be 
so, for the Prophet declares: "Behold 
the Lord hath a mighty and strong one 
which as a tempest of hail and a destroying 
storm, as a flood of mighty 
waters overflowing, shall cast down to 
the earth with the hand. The crown of 
pride, the drunkards of Ephraim, shall 
be trodden under foot." Cvs. 2,3\) 

The Lord has mighty agencies preparing 
for and already beginning this 
very work, as we have seen, for the 
nominal church is already being cast 
down. But while calamity and destruction 
awaits the great nominal church; 
and while their pride is to be humbled 
in the dust, it is not to be so with the 
little flock of faithful ones to whom the 
Lord has called, "Come out of her my 
people, that ye be not partakers of her 
sins and that ye receive not of her 



plagues." 

Of these he says: In that day-the 
very day of Babylons fall-shall the 
Lord of hosts be for a crown of glory, 
and for a diadem of beauty to the 
RESIDUE of his people, ("verse 5\) 
And not only so, but the Lord will be 
"for a spirit of judgment to him that 
sitteth in judgment, and for strength to 
them that turn the battle to the gate." 
He will give judgment, discretion, to 
those of his children who are endeavoring 
to judge, to discern between the 
right and the wrong, the truth and the 
error, and who bring all things new and 
old to the test of his Word. His 
strength also will be furnished to all who 
battle against the forces of error. 

"WHOM SHALL HE TEACH?" 

If such is the condition into which the 
Church has fallen; if the priest and the 
prophet and the people are all thus intoxicated 
and out of the way, Isaiah 
raises the question, "Whom shall he 
[God] teach knowledge? and whom 
shall he make to understand doctrine?" 
and answers, them that are weaned from 
the milk and drawn from the breast." 
>. 9\ 

Here the illustration of an infant is 
used, which Paul so forcibly applied to 
newly consecrated saints, whom he 
terms babes in Christ. ("1 Cor. 3:1\) 
And Peter also says that such should as 
new born babes, desire the sincere milk 
of the word that they may grow thereby. 
"lPet. 2:2\ 

These testimonies agree then, that 
while the doctrines or revelations of 
God are for his children, yet until they 
have passed the infant stage, and appropriated 

R563 : page 4 



the milk of first principles, 
they cannot be taught of him the deeper 
things. Alas! how few to-day make 
such use of the first principles as to 
grow thereby; and how applicable to 
many are the Apostles words-"When 
for the time ye ought to be teachers, ye 
have need that one teach you again 
which be the first principles of the 
oracles [doctrines] of God; and are become 
such as have need of milk and 
not of strong meat. For every one that 
useth milk is unskillful in the word of 
righteousness, for he is a babe. But 
strong meat belongeth to them that are 
of full age, even those who by reason of 
use, have their senses exercised to discern 
both good and evil." 

We find that for this very reason, because 
they do not grow but continue 
babes, many are so weak and helpless 
that in the day of the Lord they will 
have great distress in their inability to 
understand the Lords dealings. 

"For precept must be upon precept, 
precept upon precept, line upon line, 
line upon line, here a little and there a 
little." fv. 10\) 

Because God deals with us as a wise 
parent, with his children knowing that we 
need our food little by little, and the lighter 
diet before the strong meat, therefore 
his truth is so arranged as to meet our 
necessities: A little of the truth on any 
subject is placed here and a little more 
there; and as we take these littles and 
put them together we gain strength 
and are able to appreciate the whole of 
it. As we deal with children, so God 
deals with us, giving us line upon line, 
and precept upon precept-the same 
truths repeated over and over from 
different standpoints, thus enforcing his 
teachings. 

"For with stammering [despised or 
scorned] lips and another tongue will 



he speak to this people-to whom he 
said, This is the rest wherewith ye 
shall cause the weary to rest, and this 
is the refreshing; yet they would not 
hear. But the word of the Lord was 
unto them precept upon precept, precept 
upon precept, line upon line, line upon 
line, here a little and there a little— so 
that they go and have stumbled backward, 
and been broken and snared and 
captured." "vs. 11-13". [Young.] 

Though the word of the Lord has 
been thus plain and sufficient for the instruction 
and growth of his children, 
they have disregarded it and gone backward, 
substituting their own theories in 
its place, and in their attempt to substantiate 
their own theories by a reckless 
and often deceitful handling of the 
Word of God, they have wrested the 
Scriptures, and so stumble over its plain 
and harmonious teaching. The Lord 
had said, This plan for the redemption, 
restitution, and blessing of mankind, as 
revealed in my Word, is the comfort 
wherewith ye may cause the weary to 
rest. But the nominal church has refused 
to hear, and priest and people are 
alike deaf. Therefore the whole church 
nominal has gone backward, is taken in 
the snare of the adversary and must fall 
and be broken. 

But though the great system of religious 
organization must fall, we rejoice 
to know that the saints who are 
blinded and deceived by it, shall be delivered 
by its fall. Though the false 
teachers whom they have heaped to 
themselves, having itching ears for 
worldly praise ("2 Tim. 4:3") saying 
peace, peace, when there is no peace, 
("Jer. 6:14") have misused their office, 
the Lord will raise up other servants 
who will faithfully proclaim his truth. 
They will not seek to please the ear 
with soft words, nor to lull the drowsy, 



but will proclaim the unvarnished truth 
exposing hypocrisy and deception. 
With stammering [despised or scorned] 
lips and another tongue will he speak 
to this people. He will not choose the 
most approved and pleasing instruments 
to human fancy, but the scorned 
instruments in his hand shall be mighty 
in exposing the error and proclaiming 
the truth. 

The great rock of truth on which 
both the houses of Israel fall, is Christ 
as the worlds Redeemer. This was the 
rock over which the typical Jewish 
house did fall, and true to the type, we 
find the Gospel house (nominal) ready 
to stumble over the very same rock. 
No small number of the influential in 
the church nominal have already declared, 
and boldly teach that Christ 
was not our ransom or substitute, bearing 
our death penalty for us, in our 
room and stead. But notwithstanding 
all the deceptive sophistry that men 
may use to establish their theories, the 
plain simple statement of Gods Word 
is that "The wages of sin is death"- 
not everlasting dying but everlasting 
deprivation of life-and that "God sent 
his Son to be the propitiation [satisfaction] 
for our sins... and not for 
ours only, but also for the sins of the 
whole world" fl John 2:T and V 4:1(T); 
that by his paying our penalty we 
might be released from death-have a 
right to life-to a resurrection. 

This is the only foundation of the rest 
wherewith we may cause the weary to 
rest, and whosoever accepts of the ransom 
through the precious blood of 
Christ, may securely rest in full assurance 
of hope: Jesus said, "Come unto 
me all ye that labor and are heavy 
laden and I will give you rest." 

But as with the Jew, so now, men object 
to Gods way and desire a way of 



their own; and the plainest statements 

of Scripture and experiences of life are 

twisted and mystified, and the church is 

found bolstering up Satans lie--"Thou 

shalt not surely die." Their belief concerning 

the future condition of the 

righteous and wicked is expressed in 

the following verses and many others 

of similar import: 

"It is not death to bear 

The wrench that sets us free, 

From dungeon chain to breath the air 
Of boundless liberty." 

And again: 
"What to be banished from the Lord 

And yet forbid to die, 
To linger in eternal pain, 

And death forever fly." 

If eternal pain and deep despair are 
the wages of sin, they do not believe 
that Jesus became their ransom, substitute, 
assuming that penalty and thus 
liberating them. 

The cross of Christ loses its power 
and value in their sight as soon as they 
begin to reason and mix the truth with 
their false traditions. The ransom was 
to the Jew a stumbling block, and to 
the worldly wise of to-day it is foolishness; 
but to us who believe, it is 
precious, and in its merits we rest. 
With such a belief they are unprepared 
to see that Jesus death as a man was 
the settlement of the indebtedness of 
mankind incurred by Adams sin; and 
error on this point blinds to every 
other doctrine of Scripture built upon it. 
This is the very first principle of the 
Gospel and to those who are unskillful 
in this, how can God teach his doctrines 
or plans based on this? It is because 
they fail to use his lines and precepts 
that they fail to grow, and are weak 
against the besetments of the adversary 



in this day of the Lord. Who shall be 

able to stand? fMal. 3:2\) We find 

the great mass of our beloved fellow-Christians 

in just the position described 

where they shall be ensnared and captivated 

by error; hence we cry aloud 

and spare not. 

It is not Gods fault that such stumble 
and are ensnared by the adversary. 
The Scriptures abound with testimony 
as to the reality of death and the necessity 
and value of our ransom. The 
blood marks may be traced from Genesis 
to Revelation. By Apostles, Prophets, 
and types, the Lord has shown that, 
"without the shedding of blood there is 
no remission of sins"; and those who 
stumble on this subject are without 
excuse. 

The nominal church, as a whole, has 
not yet reached this climax of unbelief, 
but their course lies in that direction, 
and such will be the inevitable result. 

As soon as the spirit of inquiry which 
is abroad, forces them to think, they will 
see the dilemma in which they are placed 
between the doctrine of ransom and the 
theory of eternal torment. And so tenaciously 
do they hold to the latter, that 
they will prefer to deny the former when 
pressed for a reason for their belief. 

To the unfaithful teachers of to-day, 
Isaiah calls, "Wherefore hear the Word 
of the Lord ye scornful men that rule 
this people which is in Jerusalem, [another 
symbol of the church] because ye 
have said, We have made a covenant 
with death and with hell [sheol-the 
tomb] we are at agreement, when the 
overflowing scourge shall pass through, 
it shall not come unto us; for we have 
made lies our refuge, and under falsehood 
have we hid ourselves." "Verse 15\ 

This is rather to be understood as the 
Lords opinion. He terms their theory 
that "Death is the angel God has sent," 



an agreement with death, and their 
system of false theories, a refuge of lies. 

"Therefore, thus saith the Lord God, 
Behold I lay in Zion for a foundation a 
stone, a tried stone, a precious corner-stone, 
a sure foundation: he that belie veth 
shall not make haste." V V. 16\ Other 
foundation can no man lay than that 
which God laid- Jesus Christ, who died 
for our sins-the just for the unjust. 
There is no other real foundation, and 
faith built upon any other is not recognized 
nor owned of God. They who 
build upon their own works, and they 
who build their faith on the changeableness 
of the unchangeable God and suppose 
that he who once condemned man 
as unfit to live, will reverse his decision 
and bring him to life again, build upon 
the sand and have no foundation; for 
God lays but the one foundation-Christ, 

R564 : page 4 

who by the favor of God tasted death 
for every man. 

Some in their "haste" pass by the 
ransom and its legitimate fruit the resurrection 
-restitution. This is too slow 
a process for them. They have a speedier 
way by which that which God terms 
"the last enemy"-DEATH-becomes a 
near and hasty road to glory. But he 
that belie veth Gods testimony "shall 
not make haste;" such, taking Gods 
plan instead of hastily constructing theories 
of their own, are resting on the 
sure foundation. They await in hope 
and trust the time when the value of 
the ransom will be shown in the release 
from death of all for whom Christ died 
-every man. Such find it as the Lord 
promised: "This is the rest wherewith 
ye shall cause the weary to rest and this 
is the refreshing." 

"Judgment also will I lay to the line 



and righteousness to the plummet; and 
the hail shall sweep away the refuge of 
lies, and the waters shall overflow the 
hiding place." For centuries God has 
permitted the God of this world, Satan, 
to blind men and to mystify and obscure 
the truth. He has permitted good to 
be called evil, and evil good. He has 
permitted his own character and plans 
to be misrepresented. But now comes 
the time when woe will be unto them 
which call evil good and good evil and 
pervert the way and word of the Lord. 
He will mark out clearly and definitely 
with line and plummet, the right and 
wrong, the crooked and the straight. 
Everything wrong must be overthrown 
and the crooked made straight. The 
more firmly error is rooted the greater 
will be the shock. This will apply to 
truth and error on every subject and 
especially in the greatest of all-religion. 
Already the shock begins to be 
felt both by the church and the world, 
but more especially by the former. 

Water symbolizes truth and hail 
represents hard, cold forcible truths, or 
truths put in a forcible way, as judgments. 
Thus we are shown that when 
Gods time comes, all error and deceit, 
every refuge of lies will be swept away 
and destroyed, for God will have all 
men to come to the knowledge of the 
truth, that they may avail themselves of 
its advantages. 

The burning up of all the hay, wood 
and stubble, errors of those building on 
the rock of Jesus the ransom, is shown 
by Paul, fl Cor. 3:12\) and the overthrow 
of all systems which reject the 
only foundation is well illustrated by 
Jesus in his simile. fLuke 6:48\) The 
difference between building on the rock, 
and building in the sand alongside the 
rock is very great when the floods come 
and beat upon such a faith. 



"And your covenant with death shall 
be disannulled and your agreement with 
hell [sheol, the tomb] shall not stand; 
when the overflowing scourge [whip, 
rod-chastisement] shall pass through 
[in the Day of the Lord], then ye shall 
be trodden down [oppressed] by it. 

R564 : page 5 

From the time that it goeth forth [in its 
very commencement] it shall take you; 
for morning by morning shall it pass 
over by day and by night; and it shall 
be a vexation [distress, perplexity] only 
until he shall make you to understand 
doctrine." [See margin.] "Verses 18,19". 

Because the church is so largely composed 
of babes uninstructed in the word 
of the Lord, and therefore unable to 
understand his dealings, therefore in 
this time of judgment- testing and sifting 
such will be discouraged, vexed, 
and much troubled as they shall witness 
the overthrow of many things which 
they had deemed essential to the progress 
of Gods cause in the world. They 
do not see that the separation of wheat 
and tares, and of the ripe and unripe 
wheat is now due. They do not see 
that those building on the sand must be 
manifested and distinguished from those 
who build upon the foundation which 
God hath laid, hence their distress as 
their wood, hay and stubble faith is 
consumed, and when they see the "refuge 
of lies" which they mistook for truth, 
entirely swept away. But this overthrow 
and destruction of venerated 
theories shall be a vexation to them 
until they are made to understand the 
true doctrine revealed in Gods word. 
When thus liberated they will rejoice in 
the overthrow of every form of error 
and its replacement with truth. 

"For the bed is shorter than that a 



man can stretch himself on it." A bed 
is a place for rest and refreshment and 
symbolizes a faith-a creed. God provides 
the good and suitable resting 
place or faith in his word; saying, "This 
is the rest wherewith ye shall cause the 
weary to rest and this is the refreshing." 
Rejecting his, they have made beds to 
suit themselves- sectarian creeds-but 
God condemns them; they are so short 
and contracted that only babes can 
stretch themselves therein-those who 
are more developed-men ("In understanding 
be ye men." v l Cor. 14:2(0 
being cramped and uncomfortable, can 
find no rest in such, and are getting out 
of them. 

"And the covering is narrower than 
that he can wrap himself in it." The 
assurances offered by the nominal 
Church are so vague and unsatisfactory 
that those in such beds find it difficult 
to cover or assure themselves. Their 
knowledge of God is so narrow and 
meager that they know not the meaning 
of "full [wide; ample] assurance of 
faith." fHeb. 10:22\) The uncovered, 
shivering and doubting condition of the 
great majority is expressed in some of 
the familiar hymns from which we give 
some extracts: 

"Tis a point I long to know, 
Oft it causes anxious thought; 

Do I love the Lord or no, 
Am I his, or am I not." 

"When thou my righteous Judge shall come, 
To take thy ransomed people home, 
Shall I among them stand?" 

"But can I bear the piercing thought 
What if my name should be left out, 
When thou for them shalt call?" 

"Thy pardoning voice O let me hear, 



To still my unbelieving fear, 
Nor let me fall I pray." 

God declares-- "Their fear toward 
me is taught by the precepts of men." 
flsa. 29:13\) The nominal church in 
its "haste" to convert the world has 
exaggerated and wrested parables and 
symbols in using them to threaten the 
world, and to frighten them into their 
beds for promised rest; but their unlawful 
"haste" has worked to their own 
unrest, for they have so convinced 
themselves of Gods injustice that they 
find it difficult to satisfy themselves of 
their own security, fearing lest by some 
thoughtless word or act they should 
endure eternal torture. Hence saints 
who have grown so as to discover the 
shortness of the bed and the narrowness 
of the covering cry out: 

"A point of time a moments space 
Removes me to that heavenly place, 
Or shuts me up in hell." 

"A half-awakened child of man 
An heir of bliss or pain, 
A worm of earth, I cry"— 

"Eternal things impress! 
Give me to feel their solemn weight 
And tremble on the brink of fate." 

"What after death for me remains? 
Celestial joys or hellish pains 
To all eternity! 

"How then ought I to live on earth?" 
"My sole concern, my single care, 
To watch, to tremble and prepare 
Against that fatal day." 

Our hearts are full of pity for these 
whose fear and distress is caused by 
their short beds and narrow covering, 



and we urge them to come out into the 
broad place, and to rest with us in the 
testimonies of God alone. 

Those who rest in Gods word are 
described in "Psalm 149\ While the 
others are in anguish and fear, these 
"Sing aloud upon their beds." The 
high praises of Jehovah are in their 
mouths-the new song; and their security, 
his word is in their hands-the 
sword of the spirit. 

"For the Lord shall rise up as in 
Mount Perazim, he shall be wroth as in 
the valley of Gibeon, that he may do 
his work, his strange work, and bring 
to pass his act, his strange act." fv. 21\) 
The cases mentioned as illustrations of 
the destruction of this day are remarkable. 
At Perazim the idol- worshipers 
who came against Gods newly anointed 
king, David, to oppose the establishment 
of his kingdom, met the power of 
Jehovah whom he represented. f2 Sam. 5:20,21\) 
At Gibeah there was a 
great slaughter by the Lord with hailstones 
from heaven of those who attempted 
to interfere with Joshua and 
Israel in taking possession of the promised 
land. fJosh. 10:10,11\) 

The Lord warns that those who oppose 
the establishment of his anointed 
in the real Canaan, shall similarly bring 
upon themselves destruction. "Now, 
therefore, be ye not mockers lest your 
bands be made strong; for I have 
heard from the Lord of hosts a consumption 

R565 : page 5 

even determined upon the 
whole earth." fv. 22\) 

Some seem inclined to treat lightly 
the predictions of overthrow or consumption 
of the present order of things 
and the introduction of the new order. 
Such feel so confident as they look at 



the perfection of Babylons ramparts of 

defence, and as they look at the formidable 

armament of nations, that they 

need the caution of the Lords words, 

"Be ye not mockers." To take a position 

of opposition is to make the fall so 

much the more severe when it comes. 

Those who reject and mock at the 

truth are more tightly bound by Babylons 

cord of influence and prejudice- 

their bands are made strong. The consumption 

or destruction of hoary and 

venerated systems of error both civil 

and religious, is "the act-the strange 

act," which the Lord will shortly bring 

to pass. It is a strange act to all those 

not instructed from his word, and who 

so highly esteem these false systems 

which are doomed to destruction. 

(TO BE CONTINUED.) 



R565 : page 5 

GO TO THE FOUNTAIN. 

Water is water, wherever it is found; 
but there is a great difference between 
water which is drawn from the fountain, 
and water dipped from a stagnant pool. 
The one refreshes, the other nauseates; 
the one is life giving, the other brings 
poison and death. 

The Word of God is a fountain of 
living water, but how often this water 
becomes stale, adulterated, and defiled, 
in passing through the various channels 
of fallen humanity. There are sermons 
which have many of the thoughts of 
man, and few of the thoughts of God. 
Multitudes of men content themselves 
with a second-hand gospel, which is 
stale, flat and unprofitable. They do 
not search the Scriptures, they do not 



study the living Word, but they depend 
on commentaries, sermons, interpretations 
and misquotations, and thus are 
led into gross errors, and are deprived 
of the freshness and vitality which resides 
in that Word which liveth and 
abideth forever. The Word of God is 
living and powerful. We are to be 
cleansed "by the washing of water by 
the Word;" but that water must be living 
water. No stagnant pool of human 
tradition, no turbid current of doctrinal 
controversy, can refresh and cleanse the 
souls that thirst and pant for the living 
streams which flow from the throne. 

Those who would have living water 
must learn the way to the living fountain 
--the Word of God itself. A writer 
tells of two wells of the Doge of 
Venice: the water of one of them is 
brought in barges from a distance, and 
few care to taste the insipid draught; 
the other is a delicious natural well, 
cool and refreshing, and the people 
strive to obtain water from this fountain. 

Ministers of the gospel, who long to 
be of use in this world, must not content 
themselves with being mere sponges to 
absorb and then give out the thoughts 
and ideas of others; they must, on the 
contrary, draw water for themselves out 
of the wells of salvation, and know the 
virtue of those streams that make glad 
the city of our God. Let us turn away 
from the turbid waters which men have 
fouled and defiled, and let us learn to 
drink from the living fountain, that 
which shall be in us a well of water 
springing up into everlasting life.-Sel. 



R565 : page 5 
FULL OF SELF. 



Of all the empty people, there are 
few more pitiable than those who are 
filled with self. Who has not seen persons 
who seemed to know nothing but 
self, and whose first ambition on meeting 
strangers, seems to be to inform 
them where they had been and what 
they had done, and how much they 
knew. Good old John Bunyan tells us 
of a man named Ignorance who came 
"from the country of conceit;" and 
surely this country has furnished a very 
large emigration of self -filled egotists. 

We never shall amount to much in 
this world or the next so long as we are 
filled with self. If we think that we are 
the central figures in the universe, and 
that everybody is interested in hearing 
our talk and of our exploits, we shall 
win the pity of the judicious, and the 
contempt of the less considerate. Who 
has not seen grave, godly, intelligent 
men and women sit in painful silence 
and listen to the empty rattle of some 
conceited person, who could only talk 
of himself and of things which personally 
concerned him. He who has only 
himself to talk about, may very properly 
question whether he had best talk at all, 
and may find that, much as he values 
the privilege of speech, his reputation 
would be enhanced by judicious bursts 
of silence; which would allow people 
to collect their thoughts, and listen to 
those who might have something to say 
worth hearing. --Christian. 



R565 : page 5 

A MUCH READ TRACT. 

There is a tract that all men read- 
that tract, dear Christian reader, is yourself 
-you are an epistle "KNOWN AND 



READ OF ALL MEN." If you are washed 
in the blood of Jesus, and sealed with 
the Holy Spirit, the life of Christ becomes 
your life; you have to go forth 
into the world, bearing witness to the 
truth, by your word and by your life. 
You have, by Gods grace, so to reflect 
the image of Jesus, that those who 
refuse to receive your word, may, by 
beholding your heavenly life, be led to 
glorify your Father which is in heaven. 

What harm is done with inconsistencies 
in a Christians life, by thoughtless conduct, 
foolish conversation, levity of 
manner! We know how the sun goes 
on shining, and the world goes hurrying 
on around it. Daily it exerts an influence 
for good, by its light and 
warmth, and few take any notice of it. 
But only let a spot appear upon the 
sun, at once every eye and finger is 
towards it, and people are writing to 
the newspapers to say there is a spot 
on the sun. It is just so with the Christian; 
the world is hurrying on about 
him, and as it passes, though few take 
any notice of him, he can exert his influence 
for good. But only let him 
stumble-let him show any inconsistency 
of conduct, and then the world 
will point and scoff at him, and his influence 
for good is hindered. Think of 
this, my dear Christian brother or sister. 

You can do something for your Saviours 
glory. Do what you can by 
word, but above all, live as those who 
are washed in the blood of Jesus, and 
keep yourselves unspotted from the 
world. So shall men see that the life 
which you now live in the flesh you 
live by the faith of the Son of God, who 
loved you and gave Himself for you. 
R. HILL. 



R565 : page 5 

OVERCHARGED. 

"Take heed to yourselves, lest at any time 
your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, and 
drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that 
day come upon you unawares. For as a snare 
shall it come upon all them that dwell on the 
face of the whole earth. Watch ye, therefore, 
and pray always, that ye may be accounted 
worthy to escape all these things that shall come 
to pass, and to stand before the Son of man." 

These are the words of Jesus as recorded 
by v Luke21:34,35,36\ 

One would suppose that words so full 
of warning, and of such deep significance, 
spoken by Jesus to his disciples, 
for the benefit of those who should be 
living in the trying time of which he 
speaks, would be kept constantly in 
mind and not for a moment forgotten 
by those who are running for the "prize 
of the high calling." 

One of the strongest evidences which 
we have of the truth of the prophecies 
spoken in connection with these words is, 
that at the very time when they are 
being fulfilled by rapidly succeeding 
events, at the very time when his people 
should be lifting up their heads knowing 
that their "redemption draweth 
nigh," at the very point where expectation 
should be on tip-toe, we find many 
who have been enlightened, so busied 
with a multitude of other things that 
they cannot attend to preparation for 
the coming kingdom. 

They are so overcharged (there is no 
more fitting word to use) that they have 
not time to heed the caution and derive 
benefit from the injunction given in the 
scripture to which we have referred. 

To the lover of Jesus, and who expects 
to be everlastingly and intimately 



associated with and united to him, there 

is, perhaps, no more deeply interesting 

scriptures than the "twenty-fourth chapter of Matthew" 

the "thirteenth of Mark", 

and the "twenty-first of Luke". The 

more deeply interesting because they 

define more particularly, the events 

which are to immediately precede the 

coming of him in whom their "soul 

R566 : page 5 

delighteth," and so mark more clearly 
the time when the bridegroom and 
bride shall be united, and introduce the 
glorious reign of righteousness and 
truth. 

The fact that a deeply trying time is 
to immediately precede the coming of 
the bridegroom, should put every expectant 
soul on the alert. But what are 
the principle dangers of the hour? 

We find they are the liability of being 
deceived. Four times in the "thirteenth of Mark" 
we find Jesus saying, "TAKE 
HEED!" His first caution is, take heed 
lest any one deceive you, "5th ver."; next, 
take heed to yourselves, be careful what 
you do and say, be circumspect, "9th ver."; 
again, take heed to what I have 
told you, "23d ver."; and last, take heed, 
watch and pray, "33d ver." 

While there is a similarity in the 
general narration, as given in these 
three chapters, yet each narrator gives 
some points more prominence than the 
others; and so we find here, in the text 
quoted, more explicit directions given 
regarding ourselves. Take heed lest 
your hearts be overcharged." 

There are three things here mentioned 
with which the heart is especially liable 
to become overcharged- surfeiting, 
drunkenness, and cares of this life. 
Perhaps some who read these pages 
may think they are not troubled with 



the first two. If there are any let them 
take heed and see if they are among the 
number spoken of by "Isaiah 29:9- 14\ 
But many, no doubt, feel the force of the 
last, and are exerting themselves to 
overcome; while still many more, who 
are really "overcharged," are not fully 
conscious of it; but the words of Jesus 
are very peculiar if we will notice them. 
He does not simply say you will have 
a great deal of worldly care, but says, 
"Take heed that your HEARTS be not 
overcharged with the cares of this life." 
Now, it is possible for a man to have a 
great deal of worldly care requiring his 
attention, and yet not have his heart 
much affected or influenced by it. He 
may have just all he can attend to, and 
yet his heart be quite free from the 

R566 : page 6 

burden. Why? Because his heart is 
not in it as much as his head. If he is 
doing all as unto the Lord, there will 
not be much danger of his heart being 
overcharged. We need right here to 
"take heed" and not delude ourselves with 
the idea that our hearts are with the 
Lord, and that we are in full sympathy 
with him and his work, if we do not 
find, or make, or take time to commune 
with him and feast upon his word, and 
partake of his Spirit. So it is the heart 
that is in danger. This being the case, 
what are the methods most likely to be 
made use of by the enemy to load 
down our hearts to the extent of being 
"overcharged"? We may be sure that 
he will not for a moment think of inducing 
us to be recreant to our trust. 
O no, not at all; he would be the last 
one to suggest anything like unfaithfulness; 
he would have us "diligent in 
business, fervent in spirit, serving (?) 
the Lord." If we were likely to forget 



that passage he would quote it to us, 
but not with as much stress upon the 
last part as up on the first. 

O yes, we must be diligent in business 
so that we can provide for our own 
families, for he who provides not for his 
own house has denied the faith and is 
worse than an infidel, fl Tim. 5:8\) 

O yes, provide for your own house, 
certainly, and see that your family have 
a good house, and a large one; see that 
it is full as good as your neighbors; no 
matter if it is a little better, let no one 
get the idea that you are not providing 
well for your own house. 

Now, if we were to picture the whole 
truth to the life, and show to what an 
extent the enemy is leading many who 
mean to be the Lords children, it 
would look absurd enough. In accord 
with our desire to be faithful, the adversary 
is crowding overmuch work upon 
us, all of which is claimed to be duty, 
though the demands are so numerous 
that we have insufficient time for the 
accomplishment of them all. This 
crowding upon us more than we can 
possibly do, is evidently the enemy, and 
is intended to keep us from the most 
important of all work, the study of 
Gods word, through which we are 
enabled to grow in grace and in the 
knowledge of the truth, and by which 
we are thoroughly furnished unto every 
good word and work. Are we not, in 
our over-burdened condition, forgetting 
to "seek first the kingdom of God and 
his righteousness"? There is manifestly 
no work so important as to keep the 
love of God burning brightly upon the 
altar of our hearts, and no means so 
likely to accomplish this as the study 
of the word of God, and prayer. Of 
course we do not mean that these shall 
be done to the exclusion of good works, 
but we do mean that good works 



should not be allowed to exclude these. 

We verily believe that just now the 
enemy is more than usually active in 
his efforts to keep all classes of Christians 
so busy that they shall not have 
time to look after the truth and watch 
for the sign of the presence of the Son 
of man. (See v Matt. 24:3 v -Diaglott.) 

Some who could not be induced nor 
pressed into worldliness, he will keep 
busy looking after the welfare of others, 
to the exclusion of their own growth in 
the knowledge of the truth. Some 
casting out devils; some relieving the 
distressed, and all engaged more or less 
in doing "many wonderful works"; but 
while doing wonderful works they are 
leaving undone that which is of greater 
importance, i.e., fitting themselves for 
union with Christ, and for efficient service 
in the worlds great seed time and 
harvest in the age to come. 

Work done in the Lords vineyard 
now and not done according to his plan 
will be superficial and need doing over 
again. 

So-called revival work has to be repeated. 
Not that we are opposed to 
revivals, in the true import of the term, 
but the work done in the way it is done, 
has to be done over and over; devils 
cast out do not stay out; souls converted 
have to be re-converted, "reclaimed" 
as it is called, until the wonderful 
part of the "wonderful works" 
is, that there is as much demand for the 
"shoddy" as there is, though the demand 
for it is less in proportion as people 
come to understand Gods word. 

We do not question the sincerity of 
those engaged in such work to the 
neglect of the Lords work in their own 
souls, for in their sincerity they will say 
to the judge, "Have we not prophesied 
in thy name and in thy name cast out 
devils, and in thy name done many 



wonderful works?" But they will find 

that such works will be no more appreciated 

then than they are getting to be 

now. 

They will find that their wonders 
were performed under the influence of 
a zeal without knowledge. Love of the 
truth would lead to the exposure and 
rejection of every religious sham, and 
there would be no demand for the 
superficial. Love of the truth would 
lead us more and more into the truth, 
would make business cares and anxieties 
give place and stand aside while we 
take a sufficient amount of time to study 
Gods word and worship him in spirit 
and in truth. 

When we are in any doubt about the 
amount of time we should take for the 
purpose of feeding upon the bread of 
life, let us put into one scale all our 
worldly cares and worldly demands 
upon our time, and into the other these 
words: "Seek ye first the kingdom of 
God and his righteousness." "How 
shall we escape if we neglect so great 
salvation?" J. C. SUNDERLIN. 

Fort Edward, N.Y. 



R566 : page 6 
FAITH AND WORKS. 



But, beloved, we are persuaded better things of 
you, and things that accompany salvation, though 
we thus speak. For God is not unrighteous to forget 
your work and labor of love, which ye have 
showed toward his name, in that ye have ministered 
to the saints, and do minister.— 
"Heb. 6:9,10\ 

This expression refers us back to the 
"preceding verses of this chapter" and the 
Tatter part of the fifth". Paul was disappointed 



in those he addressed, in finding 
less growth in grace and knowledge 
than he had reason to expect. They 
were still merely at the "first principles" 
of the doctrine of Christ, and not even 
very firmly rooted in them. And with 
his characteristic plainness of speech, 
Paul told them that for the time they 
had spent, as pupils in the school of 
Christ, they ought now to be teachers, 
but instead they needed some one to 
teach them again which be the first principles 
of the doctrine. They were still 
babes, having need of milk, and unable 
to receive the strong meat. For strong 
meat (advanced truth) belongs not to 
babes, but it is necessary to those more 
matured. 

Paul then exhorts them to leave the 
first principles and go on unto perfection, 
and not to be forever laying the 
foundation of Christian character by repentance 
and faith in the plan of God 
for their redemption, and renewing their 
consecration; this they had done long 
ago, and now their faith should rest in 
the ransom-the foundation (provided) 
of God which standeth sure. f2 Tim. 2:19\) 
And they should diligently proceed 
in the work of building up a symmetrical 
Christian faith and character on 
this sure foundation. He proceeds to 
show the hopeless condition of those 
who FALL AWAY after having once been 
enlightened on these first principles- 
having tasted of the heavenly gift (justification 
through the precious blood of 
Christ) and being made partakers of the 
Holy Spirit of adoption as spiritual sons 
of God, and as such brought to a knowledge 
(an understanding) of the good 
word of God, and the powers of the 
world to come, or Gods plan and power 

R567 : page 6 



in the coming age. "If they fall away- 
reject the truth from its very foundation 
--"it is impossible to renew them again 
unto repentance, seeing they crucify unto 
themselves the Son of God afresh, and 
put him to an open shame; having thus, 
by open profession, been marked as sons 
of God and representatives of Christ in 
the world. 

In v chap. 10:29\ Paul terms this esteeming 
the blood of the covenant, by which 
we are sanctified, a common or unsacred 
thing-an insult to the Spirit of favor. 
And who could otherwise regard it? 
Much as we might desire to reclaim 
such, Paul says: It is impossible to renew 
them again; and we are of those who 
believe that Paul was inspired to write, 
and made no mistake in this matter. 
And since he says "it is impossible," the 
stubborn facts may be expected to corroborate 
this statement. All sin has its 
hardening effect, and we cannot tamper 
with it with impunity. No sin is so 
hardening as that which is wilfully committed 
in the face of clear knowledge. 
The favor of God in Christ, our propitiation, 
once received, its necessity seen, 
its justification and other benefits accepted 
and partially enjoyed, seems to 
make an after rejection of these first 
principles inexcusable. 

These having had such a clear experience 
as well as plain instruction on the 
subject, are reckoned guilty of ignoring 
the Lamb of God which taketh away the 
sin of the world. And having once professed 
him, this is rightly called putting 
him to an open shame. Thus they cast 
from them the favor of God, even 
their part in the redemption which is in 
Christ Jesus. 

Pride and ambition harden the heart 
and darken reason, and leave no room 
for a wedge of truth to effect an entrance. 
Where pride and ambition have progressed 



to the extent here mentioned, 
in the very nature of the case recovery 
would seem "impossible," and when a 
reasonable amount of time, and patient, 
studious effort has been expended to recover 
out of the snare of the adversary 
those who seem to be stumbling 
into this sin; if they still wilfully 
pursue their course, we can but leave 
them where they place themselves-in 
the hands of a just God, unsheltered by 
the precious blood of Christ, in whom 
alone is redemption. (See 
v Ex. 12:13,22,23\) 

Thank God we have no fear of an 
eternity of torture for such, nor for any. 
No, to be eternally deprived of life and 
its blessed privileges is the final punishment 
of the disobedient. But O that all 
would esteem this favor of God, in the 
gift of his Son, and live. Paul says it is 
a fearful thing, thus out of Christ, to fall 
into the hands of the living God. The 
punishment of those who violated Moses 
law was death, but from that death there 
was deliverance through the ransom; 
but of how much sorer punishment shall 
he be thought worthy who hath trodden 
under foot the Son of God and esteemed 
as a common thing the blood of the covenant, 
and insulted the Spirit of favor. 
This sorer punishment is the second 
death, from which there is no resurrection; 
for there remaineth no more a sacrifice 
for sins. v Heb. 10:26,29\ 

With reference to this sin unto death, 
we think that many make a great mistake. 
It is supposed by very many, 
that open, bold infidels, who blaspheme, 
and reject, and ridicule the Word 
of God entire, have come about the 
nearest of any to committing the sin unto 
death; but, by reading carefully Pauls 
description, we see that it does not at all 
apply to such, nor does it apply to what 
are often termed backsliding Christians. 



Very few Christians, even, have ever 

tasted much of the good word of 

God; they have had considerable of the 

perverted word of God, but Paul does 

not mention that. Very few know anything 

about the powers of the world 

(age) to come-Gods plan in that age. 

No, it is not the weak and erring ones, 

partially overcome by the world, the 

flesh and the devil, and many of whom 

sin contrary to their will, that it is impossible 

to reclaim. God still loves and 

pities such, and will discipline them in 

the furnace of affliction, or however he 

thinks best. These have not knowingly 

and wilfully insulted the Spirit of favor, 

and for these there is good hope of 

recovery. 

But while showing the necessity of a 
firm establishment on first principles, and 
the impossibility of reclaiming such as 
had left them entirely, the Apostle assured 
the church that he believed they had 
not rejected the favor of God, for he says: 
"We are persuaded better things of you, 
though we thus speak." 

These words were to guard them on a 
dangerous point, and to show them the 
uselessness of constantly disputing with 
rejecters of first principles. It is useless 
to spend valuable time and effort in the 
fruitless attempt to reclaim such. Therefore, 
having these things once established, 
settled, made plain, they should go on 
unto perfection: Not that we should 
fail to give first principles or milk to 
babes, or to help a weak or stumbling 
brother by re-enforcing him with the 
power of truth, which he may have let 
slip, for that should be our constant aim 
and effort: but that is quite different from 
wasting valuable time and effort in fruitless 
attempts to reclaim wilful rejecters 
mentioned by Paul, which it is "impossible" 
to reclaim. 

All should make sure that the first 



principles are correct, and firmly established 

by the word of God; but if we go 

no further, we will never reach perfection. 

If a man, after laying a foundation 

for a building, should always be digging 

it up and turning it over and trying to 

fit the stones in some other way, how 

soon would the building be completed? 

There must come a time, and that before 

we begin to build, when we feel sure that 

the foundation is good and properly 

laid; and, in full confidence in that foundation, 

we may proceed with our building 

--go on unto perfection. 

In the few v verses folio wing\ Paul shows 
that the hope of the High Calling depends 
on our works-built, of course, on 
the finished work of Christ, the sure 
foundation. For God is not unrighteous 
to forget your work and labor of love." 
Is it possible, we sometimes say, that 
God will thus esteem our poor, imperfect 
works? And what are they? They 
seem so small that we feel ashamed to 
mention them; and yet it is our little all; 
rendered with carefulness according to 
our covenant, and though imperfect, it is 
rendered acceptable through him whose 
imputed righteousness makes up all the 
deficiency. 

Our small influence is all cast on the 
side of truth, both by word and example; 
our little reputation we gladly part 
with in our effort to advance the truth and 
obey it; our few talents for preaching the 
truth, we use to the best advantage, according 
to our best judgment; perhaps 
some of us have no ability to tell the 
blessed story straight ourselves, but 
such can read it to others, or give it to 
them to read; and all can show its 
moulding and transforming effects in 
daily walk and conversation; we may 
have very little money, possibly no 
more than what will meet the bare necessities 
of life for ourselves and those dependent 



on us, and leave but a mite for 

the spread of the truth; yet if our all is 

consecrated to the Lord, and used with 

an eye single to his glory, it is acceptable 

and well-pleasing to him-- "in the 

beloved." 

Paul here mentions specially their labors 
of love in ministering to the saints. 
Many Christians seemingly fail to appreciate 
their privilege in this direction, 
and spend their principal effort for the 
world, forgetting the injunction: "Do 
good unto all men as you have opportunity, 
especially to the household of 
faith." The time is coming, and is not 
far distant, when there will be abundant 
opportunity to do good to the world; 
but the opportunity to do good to the 
saints, the body, the bride of Christ, will 
not long continue. Soon they will be 
glorified and no longer need your 
ministrations. 

Remember the Masters words: A 
poor woman had brought a box of very 
precious ointment and poured it on his 
head as he sat at meat; and when his 
disciples saw it they said, "To what purpose 
is this waste? For this ointment 
might have been sold for much, and given 
to the poor." But Jesus answered, 
"The poor ye have always with you, but 
me ye have not always; she hath 
wrought a good work upon me." 
OMatt. 26:7-13\) 

So, the body of Christ will not always 
be here to be ministered unto. Whatever 
we can do now for our fellow members 
of the body of Christ, the Head 
will reckon as done unto him. And our 
Father will not forget our labor of love 
in ministering to the saints. It is needless 
for us to suggest that as God is not 
unjust to forget labors of love for the 
saints, neither is he unjust to credit us 
with them, if we have done no labors for 
such-if we have not ministered. Paul 



urges that we continue to be very diligent 
in this labor of love, and suggests 

R567 : page 7 

that continued diligence will give the 
full assurance of hope. 

O, how great is the inheritance which 
our little insignificant labor of love secures, 
when supplemented by the all-sufficient 
merit of our Lord! Let us appreciate 
our privilege of ministering to 
the saints in whatever way we find it 
possible, whether in temporal or spiritual 
things. In the language of our beloved 
brother Paul: "We desire that 
every one of you do show the same diligence 
to the full assurance of hope unto 
the end." Since our covenant is to sacrifice 
and spend ourselves completely, 
full assurance of receiving the reward 
can only come by diligence in self-sacrifice 
-ministering. 

Let us see to it that we have a right 
faith, rooted and grounded in the infallible 
word of God; and being thus assured, 
let us leave the firmly established 
first principles of the doctrine of Christ, 
and go on to perfection- work out our 
salvation as new creatures-rendering 
the justified human in exchange for the 
promised divine nature. 



R568 : page 7 

RELIEF OF PERSECUTED JEWS. 

Violent persecution of Jews in Christian 
countries has again broken out. 
The newspapers daily report fresh outrages 
-here the burning down of a Jewish 
village-there the destruction by a 
furious mob of the Jewish quarter of a 
large town; in another place, a mere 



village, an attack made by twenty peasants 
armed with hatchets, cudgels, and 
scythes, upon an old man, very poor, 
whom they murdered, driving the women 
of the family into the fields. Well 
is it said that "nothing short of madness 
seems to have seized upon the people 
of Hungary and of South Russia," 
the ignorant peasantry who not only 
rob and murder, but destroy, wholesale, 
the property of villages, towns and 
districts. 

It was estimated by Russian Government 
authorities that during the anti- Jewish 
riots of 1881-1882, above twenty-two 
million pounds worth of property 
had been destroyed, and now the same 
insane work is being revived in Russia, 
and carried on in Hungary. Millions 
worth of property is annihilated; life is 
sacrificed in a thousand ways by the 
mob, and in Russia the State-the 
Government itself-is helping forward 
the work of destruction by closing to 
the Jews industry after industry; here 
ruining by one stroke of the pen 20,000 
Jewish agriculturists by abolishing their 
leases; there driving thousands of manufacturers 
into bankruptcy by a sudden 
edict commanding them to dismiss all 
their Christian employees. Because "the 
employment of Christians by Jews 
proved, on the one hand, to be opposed 
to the national spirit of the Russians; 
and on the other hand, a lengthy intercourse 
between Christian employees and 
Jewish employers is found to be subversive 
of the religious feelings of the 
workmen, who become indifferent to 
religious ceremonials, and are even 
found to absent themselves from church 
on Saints days and festivals!" This 
is a quotation from the official Russian 
document. 

During the whole of last year, riot 
and plunder, massacre and expulsion, 



were brought to bear upon sixteen out 
of eighty- six districts in Russia, where 
alone Jews may dwell. In one town 
6,000 persons were driven out during 
an outbreak lasting only a few days; in 
another large city 20,000 Jews were 
systematically expelled, and so on, until 
it became wearisome to read the repetition 
of similar occurrences in hundreds 
of places, large and small. The last 
twelve months have been remarkable 
for the promulgation of new and grinding 
edicts, which multiply tenfold the 
disabilities under which Jews have 
hitherto existed. And now the acute 
symptoms of persecution with violence 
have reappeared. There is one most 
grave feature now to be observed in 
South Russia and in Hungary. Special 
agitators are going about stirring up 
the ignorant people and leading the 
mob against the Jews. In Hungary 
bands of peasants, from 100 to 1,000 
strong, have appeared in various parts 
of the country, usually led by some one 
who, though dressed as a peasant and 
wearing a mask, betrays himself by his 
style of language and deportment as 
belonging to the better classes. There 
is good reason to believe that the money 
and the emissaries who act thus are 
provided by the German Anti-Semitic 
Party, who have long been preaching 
an active crusade against the Jews. 
Shall we say, as some do, that the Jews 
have brought all this upon themselves 
by their usury, their greed, and their 
fraud, goading to madness those whom 
they have oppressed? 

Long acquaintance with the Jewish 
people, and acquaintance with their 
habits, convinces me that in these matters 
they have been unjustly accused. 
It is well to remember that neither race-hatred, 
religious fanaticism, brutish ignorance 
of the masses, nor all of these 



combined, can account for what is now 
going on. Not only in barbarous 
Russia and uncivilized Hungary, but in 
enlightened Protestant Germany, are to 
be found thousands who hate Jews with 
a blind, unreasoning hatred, and combine 
to do them harm. 

We feel that the causes lie deeper 
than those alleged in the newspapers of 
the day. The hand of Divine Providence 
can be traced in the convulsions 
which are shaking the Jews out of the 
lands of their dispersion, and preparing 
them, even by the sufferings which they 
are enduring, for return to their own 
land. 

To succor those ready to perish is a 
Christian duty. "Relief of persecuted 
Jews in token of Christian sympathy," 
is felt to be one means of softening the 
hearts of the sufferers towards Christianity. 
Amid all the distressing accounts 
of cruelties inflicted by Christians 
it is comforting to turn to the 
record of Christian effort to relieve, to 
hear of the refugees placed in safety 
in Cyprus, even though but a few 
families; and that a beginning has been 
made, and that under British protection 
Jewish hands are at this moment at 
work upon the land granted to them at 
the instance of Lord Shaftesbury, that 
they have begun to dig their wells, and 
to prepare for sowing their seed in that 
island-known to us chiefly by its 
New Testament history.-Watch Tower. 



R568 : page 7 

WILLING AND WILLING. 

It is one thing to be willing to have 
the will of God be done and quite another 
TO WILL to have it done. 



Christians everywhere pray "Thy 
will be done." All Christians must acquiesce 
in his will and yield a ready 
and full submission to the will of God. 
But it is quite an advance from that 
passive submission TO WILL, with all the 
strength and power of our souls and 
the energy of our lives to do his will 
and see to it as much as in us lies, by 
all the effort of which we are capable 
that others also do his will. It is his 
will that all men come to the knowledge 
of the truth. It must also be our will, 
not only passively but we should by 
every means in our power, be constantly 
WILLING to bring about this glorious 
consummation. MRS. E. H. DAY. 



R568 : page 7 

THE JUDGMENT DAY. 



DISCOURSE NO. 3. 

Prosecuting our study of the teaching 
of Scripture regarding the second coming 
of Christ and its object; we call attention 
to the harmonious statements of 
David and Paul: David says, "He cometh 
to judge the earth," fPsa. 96:13\) 
And Paul says, that "God. ..hath appointed 
a day in which he will judge the 
world in righteousness by that man 
whom he hath ordained"-Jesus Christ. 
CActs 17:30,31\) And again, "The 
Lord Jesus Christ, shall judge the quick 
(living) and dead at his appearing and 
kingdom." C2 Tim. 4: T.) 

The view generally entertained regarding 
the day of judgment has been, that 
Christ will come seated upon a great 
white throne, and will summon before 



him saint and sinner to be judged, while 
all nature is convulsed with earthquakes, 
opening graves, rending rocks, and 
falling mountains. The trembling sinner 
will be brought from the depths of 
everlasting woe to hear his sins rehearsed, 
and be again remanded to his eternal 
and merciless doom; and the saints are 
brought from heaven to witness the misery 
and despair of the condemned, and 
to hear again the decision of their own 
case. All according to the prevailing 
theory, received their sentence and reward 
at death, and the general judgment 
is merely a repetition of it, but for no 
conceivable purpose. The whole time 
occupied for this work is thought to be 
a literal twenty-four hour day.* 

These views we believe to be at variance 
with the general teaching of Scripture, 
and we will, therefore, present what 
we believe to be the Scriptural view of 
the subject. 

The term day in the Bible, as elsewhere, 
is frequently used to cover a long but, 
definite period of time, as we would say 
this or that event occurred in Martin 
Luthers day. Thus, we read of "the 
day" in which "Jehovah God made the 
earth and the heavens" fGen. 2:4 V ): 
and the forty year day of temptation in 
the wilderness. fHeb. 3:8\) No one 
familiar with the number and variety of 
events which the Scriptures teach are to 
transpire in the day of the Lord, or judgment 
day, could possibly believe it to be 
a twenty-four hour day. Much more 
reasonable is Peters explanation that a 
day with the Lord is as a thousand 
years with men, and a thousand years 
with men as one day with the Lord. f2 Pet. 3:8\) 
This agrees also with Jesus 
statement to John fRev. 20:4 V ) that his 
day or reign is a thousand years-at the 
end of which day Paul says he will deliver 
up the kingdom to God the Father. 



CI Cor. 15:24,25\) 

Quite as vague and indefinite an idea 
also prevails in regard to the term judgment. 
The word judgment signifies 
more than simply sentencing, or the execution 
of a sentence: It includes the 
idea of trial, and a righteous decision 
based on that trial. Thus Moses judged 
the people, fEx. 18:13"); Samuel 
judged Israel forty years, fl Sam. 7:6 V ); 
and Paul appealed to Caesars judgment 



*A recent discourse of Mr. Talmage, delivered 
in the Brooklyn Tabernacle, and published in 
some of the daily papers, gives quite a detailed account 
of this common view of the general judgment 
scene begun and completed within the 
limits of a single literal day. 

R569 : page 7 

seat to have his case tried before Caesar. 
fActs 25:10".) Just so all both quick 
and dead will have their case tried before 
Christ, the great Judge, in due time. 
ORom. 14:10\) 

A righteous judge is something greatly 
to be desired by all, since the mission of 
such a one is to deliver from wrong and 
oppression and to bring liberty, peace 
and happiness to the oppressed. All 
mankind have been oppressed by sin 
and the great deceiver, Satan, but we 
read that Christ comes to give liberty to 
Satans captives, to let the oppressed go 
free, and to destroy Satan, flsa. 61: V; 
v Heb. 2:14\) He is the righteous judge 
before whom all will have a fair and impartial 
trial. He shall not fail nor be 
discouraged till he have set judgment 
(justice) in the earth, flsa. 42:4\) 
The world and the church, (nominal) 
deceived by unscriptural theories, think 
of the day of Christs presence and 



judgment as something to be dreaded; 
but we get a very different idea from 
the expressions of the inspired Psalmist. 
He says: 

"Let the Heavens be glad 

And let the earth rejoice: 

And let men say among the nations, 
The Lord reigneth. 
Let the sea roar and the fulness thereof: 
Let the fields rejoice, and all that are therein; 
Then shall the trees of the wood sing aloud 

At the presence of the Lord, 
Because he cometh 
To judge the earth. 

O give thanks unto the Lord, 
For he is good; 

For his mercy endureth forever." 
For this blessed day of righteous 
judgment Paul says the whole creation 
groaneth fRom. 8:22 v ); yet ignorantly, 
for as yet they know not the righteous 
and merciful Judge who redeemed them 
with his own precious blood, and is, 
therefore, soon to claim his purchased 
possession. 

Since this coming judgment day is 
the day of the worlds trial for everlasting 
life, it is evident that the mass of 
the world are not now on trial. But 
while the Scriptures plainly teach that 
the thousand year day of Christs reign, 
will be the worlds great judgment day, 
they also teach that the judgment or 
trial of the Church is now in progress, 
and will be completed during this Gospel 
Age, before the worlds trial begins. 
Judgment began with the church 
eighteen hundred years ago, as Peter 
said: "The time is come that judgment 
must begin at the house of God"- 
church- "whose house are we?" 
fl Pet. 4:1T; v Heb. 3:6\) During the 
Gospel Age the churchs trial progresses, 
and at its end the overcomers receive 
the reward offered during this age. The 
judgment, trial, began with the Head of 



this "house of God"-Christ Jesus- 
who was tempted (tried) in all points 
like as we are. So Paul, Peter, and all 
the church have been tried and some 
have not yet finished their course. This 
is why the Lords children suffer now, 
while evil doers prosper. During this 
age Satan is permitted to be the Prince 
of the world-to rule as he will; therefore 
it is the ungodly that now prosper 
in the world, and increase in riches. 
CPsa. 73:12\) But "all that will live 
godly shall suffer persecution." 
C2Tim. 3:12\) 

O, how often have the Lords children 
wondered why this was so: but all 
is made plain when we learn that the 
trial of our faith and patient endurance 
now, is to result in "praise and honor 
and glory at the appearing of Jesus 
Christ" fl Pet. 1:T); that it is now our 
Judgment Day, and that we are being 
judged now, in order that we may not 
be judged with the world in the next 
age. fl Cor. 11:32".) The great reward 
of those who finish their course 
successfully during this age is, that they, 
joined with Jesus their head, are to be 
the kings and priests who are to reign 
during the next age. And to be thus 
joined in dominion and heirship with 
Jesus, we are to partake of his divine, 
immortal nature, being raised spiritual 
bodies like unto Christs glorious body. 
v 2Pet. l:4VFhil. 3:21\ 

Peter urges, then, that we think not 
strange concerning the fiery trial that is 
to try us as though some strange thing 
had happened unto us fl Pet. 4:12 v ); 
and Paul says, "Whom the Lord loveth 
he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son 
whom he receiveth. fHeb. 12:6\) It 
is a wonderful privilege which the 
church now enjoys, to have their trial 
in this age that they may enjoy the exceeding 
great and precious reward in 



store for the faithful overcomers "at the 
appearing of our Lord and Saviour, 
Jesus Christ." We do not believe, according 
to the prevailing theory of the 
nominal church, that each member of 
the body or church of Christ receives 
his reward at death, else Paul should 
certainly have received his there, but 
with him we believe, that from the time 
that each one successfully finished his 
course in death, from that time, there 
was "laid up" for such, a crown which 
the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall 
give them at that day-the day of his 
appearing. f2 Tim. 4:6-8\) Trial, then, 
is what the church should expect now, 
and for their strengthening they should 
continually bear in mind that the trials 
of this present time are not worthy to 
be compared with the glory which shall 
be revealed in us-at his appearing. 

ORom. 8:18V 1 Pet. 1:7\) 

But while the present Gospel Age is 
the churchs judgment day, Jesus declared 
that 

THE WORLDS JUDGMENT DAY 

is not during this age, when he said: 

"I came not to judge the world, but to 

save the world." At his first coming 

Jesus redeemed or purchased the world 

from death; but the second time he 

comes to judge the world-to liberate 

his purchased possessions from the 

prison of death and to give them their 

trial for everlasting life. "With righteousness 

shall he judge the world, and 

the people with equity." fPsa. 98:9\) 

In this judgment of the world, the 

saints, those whose judgment is successfully 

completed in this age, take part, 

for "Do ye not know that the saints 

shall judge the world?" fl Cor. 6:2\) 

They live and reign with Christ during 



R569 : page 8 

the thousand years-the worlds judgment 
day. CRev. 20:4\) 

It is the mistaken idea of some that 
great calamities, such as earthquakes, 
famine, pestilence, etc., are judgments 
of God visited upon the world. We do 
not so regard them; Jesus corrected 
this false impression among the Jews 
when they told him of some of the 
Gallileans whose blood Pilate had mingled 
with their sacrifices; "and Jesus 
answering, said unto them, suppose ye 
that these Gallileans were sinners above 
all the Gallileans because they suffered 
such things? I tell you nay... 
or those eighteen upon whom the tower 
of Siloam fell and slew them, think ye 
that they were sinners above all men 
that dwelt in Jerusalem? I tell you 
nay." fLuke 13:l-5\) 

It is very seldom, indeed, that God 
visits punishment upon the world in the 
present time. It is still true, and will 
be so long as Satan is the prince of this 
world, that the wicked spreadeth himself 
like a green bay tree. Their eyes 
stand out with fatness, they have more 
than heart could wish. Widows and 
orphans cry, but oppressors flourish. 
But "The Lord knoweth how to reserve 
the unjust unto the day of judgment 
to be punished." fPsa. 37:35 v ; 
^13:T; v 2 Pet. 2:9\) And Paul says: 
"Therefore, judge nothing before the 
time, until the Lord come, who will 
bring to light the hidden things of 
darkness and will make manifest the 
counsels of the hearts." fl Cor. 4:5\) 
Yes, God hath appointed a day in 
which he will judge the world by Jesus 
Christ. 

Our next inquiry naturally is, Will 
there be forgiveness of sins in that 
judgment age? Jesus answers, "All 



manner of sin and blasphemy shall be 
forgiven unto men; but the blasphemy 
against the Holy Spirit shall not be forgiven 
unto men. And whosoever speaketh 
a word against the Son of man it 
shall be forgiven him; but whosoever 
speaketh against the Holy Spirit, it 
shall not be forgiven him, neither in 
this world, (Gr. aion age) neither in 
the world (age) to come. CMatt. 12:32\) 
Jesus teaching was, that "unto 
whomsoever much is given, of him 
shall be much required." fLuke 12:48\) 
And the opposite is also true- 
that where little is given, little is required. 
During this age the world does 
not possess the full knowledge of the 
truth; and only a small proportion of 
the world have as yet received any of 
the light; therefore they are not on 
trial, and the sins which they now commit 
through ignorance and inherited 
weakness, shall be forgiven, because of 
the ransom through the precious blood 
of Christ. And during the next age, 
as knowledge will be acquired and 
strength developed gradually, all imperfections 
and shortcomings will still 
be forgiven because of the redemption 
through Christ, until men reach 
perfection. 

The world when on trial will be 
affected by their present life just to the 
extent that they had light, and used, 
neglected or misused that light. Jesus 
said: "I am come a light into the 
world," and since then "Ye (the 
church) are the light of the world." 
Men are responsible in proportion as 
they have knowledge-as they see the 
light; but "This is the condemnation, 
that light is come into the world, and 
men love darkness rather than light." 
The punishment will be-"They that 
sin with much light will receive many 
stripes," with little light, "few stripes"- 



"a just recompense." 

The greater the light rejected, the 
more will be the stripes received. In 
harmony with this statement is that 
saying of Jesus, that it would be more 
tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in 
the day of judgment than for those who 
would not receive the Lords disciples 
--the bearers of greater light than 
Sodom and Gomorrah enjoyed. CMatt. 10:15".) 
And again, "It shall be more 
tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the day 
of judgment than for you (Capernaum) 
...for if the mighty works, 

R570 : page 8 

which were done in you, had been done 
in Tyre and Sidon, they would have 
repented long ago in sackcloth and 
ashes. But I say unto you, that it shall 
be more tolerable for the land of Sodom 
in the day of judgment than for thee." 
CMatt. ll:22-24\)..."The 
men of Nineveh shall rise up in judgment 
with the Jews and condemn them, 
for they repented at the preaching of 
Jonah, and a greater than Jonah is here 
-more light, more stripes; the Queen 
of Sheba will be there, and, by her anxiety 
to obtain wisdom, put to shame the 
Jews who attended not to the wisdom 
and words of a greater than Solomon. 
The Jew with more light has greater 
sin and sorer punishment. 

But not only will every evil deed, 
committed against light, receive its just 
punishment- stripes-but every good 
deed will also be correspondingly rewarded. 
Every one is to receive stripes 
or favor "according to that he hath 
done, whether good or bad." f2 Cor. 5:10\) 
Many worldly men believe 
little of Gods word and make no profession 
of being his children; yet have 
large hearts full of pity for the weak, 



poor, and helpless, and take delight in 

giving a cup of cold water or more to 

a disciple of Christ. He is as sure of a 

reward for these good deeds as of punishment 

for the evil ones. Jesus particularly 

states and illustrates this, saying: 

"When thou makest a dinner call not 

thy friends and rich neighbors, but the 

poor, maimed, blind, etc.; they cannot 

recompense thee. Thou shalt be recompensed 

at the resurrection of the just." 

CLuke 14:14\) Not that those works will 

justify any, but being then justified by 

faith in the ransom, then made so clearly 

manifest, these shall be rewarded for 

those good deeds done before the light 

of truth was made so clear-for the improvement 

they made according to the 

measure of light they had. 

Though in the next age full faith 
in and reliance upon the redemption 
through the precious blood of Christ 
will be required of all, yet works according 
to ability will be the ground of 
reward. Under the favorable circumstances 
of that age, it will be possible 
for mankind to do Gods will more perfectly 
than we now can, in our present 
imperfect and oppressed condition, 
therefore more perfect works will be required 
and duly rewarded; whereas 
now, with our limited ability to do 
Gods will, our faith in the ransom and 
our effort and purpose to do that will is 
counted to us for righteousness, and accordingly 
rewarded. 

But Jesus states that there is one sin 
that shall not be forgiven, viz., the sin 
against the Holy Spirit. The Holy 
Spirit, whether manifested in the acts of 
Jesus or his followers, is the great enlightener 
--of the church now, and of 
the world in the age to come. 

In v Luke 12:47\ Jesus explains that 
willful sinners against a measure of light, 
shall be punished, not forgiven. "That 



servant which knew his Lords will and 
prepared not himself, neither did according 
to his will, shall be beaten with 
many stripes." This punishment is not 
destruction, and all other punishment, 
is designed to be corrective. But 
if this sin against the enlightenment of 
the Holy Spirit be continued, to the extent 
of willfully rejecting the redemption 
provided through Christs sacrifice, when 
the Spirit has made that truth plain, 
this willful sin is unto death-the second 
death-for having rejected the one 
Saviour in whom alone there is redemption, 
"there remaineth no more a 
sacrifice for sin." fHeb. 6:4-6\ and 
v 10:26-29\) 

But this sin, which is unto death, cannot 
be committed without full and sufficient 
enlightenment of the Spirit, which 
neither the world nor many Christians 
have yet received. Therefore, though 
many of the worldly have committed 
sins which cannot be forgiven, and 
which are therefore unto stripes, yet we 
know that none of them have committed 
the sin which is unto death, because 
none of the world are yet fully 
enlightened by the Spirit. 

Thus will the world be tried, and 
judged in the age to come-their judgment 
day. And the same principle 
applies to the Church in this, our judgment 
day. To whomsoever much is 
given, of them is much required. A 
faithful following in the light of the 
Spirits leading will bring us to perfection 
as new creatures, and in the resurrection 
we shall be in the likeness of 
our Lord, "fashioned like unto his 
glorious body." If, because of inherited 
weakness, we fail to do perfectly what, 
as new creatures, we desire to do-the 
will of God- -we are forgiven through 
the redemption provided in Christ Jesus. 
And if we become measurably willful, 



not fully submitting ourselves to the 
Lords will according to our covenant, 
as his children, we are now chastened 
with few or many stripes as may be 
found necessary to reclaim us. 

But if we, the Church, being enlightened 
by and made partakers of the 
Holy Spirit, and having tasted of the 
good word of God, and the powers of 
the world to come, should now willfully 
reject the truth thus received, even 
to the ignoring of the ransom through 
the precious blood of Christ, counting 
the blood of the covenant wherewith 
we are sanctified a common or unsacred 
thing, fHeb. 10:29 v ), we should thus 
become subject to the second death- - 
since "Without the shedding of blood 
there is no remission of sins," and there 
remaineth no more a sacrifice for those 
who reject that once provided. This sin 
is not simply a falling back into a condition 
of lukewarmness, though that is 
a dangerous condition, nor is it a sudden 
relapse under great temptation, but it is 
open and deliberate apostacy-a willful 
rejection of the only foundation of hope. 

The churchs judgment day is now 
almost ended, and the trial of faith and 
endurance shall soon bring its rich reward 
to the faithful, and the beginning 
of the worlds judgment day will immediately 
follow the reward and exultation 
of the saints. 

While looking at the judgment of 
the world, let us not forget that ours is 
still progressing, and let us remember 
that though we are now part of the 
Church, we may never "sit with him in 
his throne"-but that high position is 
open to any of us, and we may make 
our calling and election sure. That 
which is most apt to clog and interfere 
with us in this race, is mentioned by 
our Master as a warning to us: "Take 
heed lest your hearts be overcharged 



with the cares of this life." Let us 
then "lay aside every weight and the 
sin which doth so easily beset us, and 
run with patience the race set before us." 
"Neer think the victory won, 
Nor once at ease sit down, 
Thine arduous work will not be done 
Till thou hast gained thy crown." 
Blessed and holy is he that hath part 
in the first resurrection; on such the 
second death hath no power; but they 
shall be priests of God and of Christ, 
and shall reign with him a thousand 
years. fRev. 20:6\) 



R570 : page 8 

PREACHING TO DOCTORS. 

The Rev. Dr. Gatty recently preached 
at Sheffield, England, to the members 
of the British Medical Association, during 
the annual meeting. We give the 
following suggestive extract from his 
discourse upon the appropriate text: 
"They that are whole need not a physician, 
but they that are sick." 

"Some of the smaller philosophers of 
our own time regard the Bible as the 
sacred book common to all forms of religion, 
and so far to be respected, but 
only to be trusted when it does not clash 
with their own deductions. That man 
should have come perfectly formed, by 
an act of creation, from the hand of his 
Maker, is to them less credible than that 
he should be the slow result of a process 
of evolution, no satisfactory traces of 
which can be shown, while all palpable 
experience contradicts the doctrine. I 
do not know where science gives a 
more reliable history of the generation 
of man than is to be found in the 
*1 39th Psalm. 



So far as the records of the bygone 
world extend, they exhibit man, 
both intellectually and physically, as 
quite equal to his descendants at the 
present day. Moses was at least as 
great a law-giver as the first Napoleon. 
The biography of Joseph and his family, 
written more than three thousand years 
ago, has literary merit, surpassing in its 
own style of simplicity and pathos any 
authorship of any other age or country. 
David has shown us in his Psalms that 
he knew human thoughts and feelings 
quite as profoundly as Shakespeare 
himself; and if the sermon on the 
mount and the parables of Christ are 
not unique and supreme in sublimity 
of expression as well as doctrine, 
I want to know why all 
the religious teachers of the world 
have failed to produce what we can 
listen to with the same life-long attention? 
Is there, nevertheless, a fossil 
still deeply hidden, but not beyond the 
final reach of discovery, which will 
prove that grapes once grew on thorns, 
and figs on thistles; or, in other words, 
that man, by some internal effort, protracted 
through ages, released himself 
from the form and nature of a lower 
brute, and has since advanced to the 
position of being able to tell the history 
of their own origin? There is, however, 
one degrading vice peculiar to 
man, and at the present time a national 
disgrace, which is certainly no inheritance 
from any lower animal. The 
drunkard is only to be found in the 
ranks of humanity, and this terrible 
moral stain brings to the candid mind 
an assurance that what revelation 
tells us must be true-that God made 
men upright, but they sought out many 
inventions, by which the noblest handiwork 
of the Creator has become damaged 
and debased." 



page 8 

BIBLE STUDENTS HELPS. 



We have discontinued the sale of "Crudens 
Concordance" in consequence of being able to 
furnish "Youngs Analytical Concordance" at so 
low a price. There is no comparison in values. 
To the discerning student, who wishes to know 
the original word and its English meaning (by 
one of the ablest scholars), there is no 
other such work published. 

In answer to numerous questions, we would 
say: The one we furnished recently is not the 
"Book Exchange" edition, which contains many 
inaccuracies and is on poorer paper. A great 
conflict has existed for some months between the 
American and English publishers of "Youngs 
Concordance," on account of which we were 
enabled to offer one of them (the American) at 
the low price heretofore mentioned, $1.75; but 
now the English firm has bought the electro 
plates of the American edition and destroyed 
them, thus giving the control of the trade to the 
English edition called The Authors Edition, because 
this edition is the only one sanctioned by 
the author, Prof. Young, D.D. 

The plan now is understood to be to put this 
valuable and large work at its proper value, $5— 
this will doubtless be done soon. As a precaution 
we have procured a lot of the Authors 
Edition, which we can furnish you at $2.00 by 
express, or 51 cts. extra, for postage, if by mail. 

We still have some copies of the Variorum 
Testament, giving various readings and renderings 
in foot-notes. Price 50 cts. post-paid: less 
than half the usual price. 

We have no more of the $1.30 "Oxford Bibles." 

We procured a few copies of the "Variorum 
Bible," at a special sale, much below the regular 
price. For description and price see our June issue. 



We cannot take postage stamps in pay, as we 
must pay cash. 



THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT. 

We again have a full supply of this very valuable 
work. For the benefit of new readers we 
would state that it is a Greek Testament, having 
under each Greek word the corresponding English 
word, and is thus the most literal translation 
of the New Testament. Besides this, it has in 
another column alongside a very clear and emphatic 
translation, showing the emphasis of the 
Greek, which is generally lost to the English 
reader. 

As we have said before, we repeat now: we 
know of no more valuable help than this in the 
study of the Scriptures. If we could not get another, 
we would not take fifty dollars for the copy 
we use. 

The regular price for the work in cloth is four 
dollars-which, everything considered, is not too 
high; but by special arrangement we are enabled 
to offer it at $1.50 per copy to our subscribers. 



YOUNGS GREEK, HEBREW AND ENGLISH 
CONCORDANCE. 

We very much wish that all our readers possessed 
this very valuable work, for we consider it 
next in value to the DIAGLOTT. 

The regular price was for a time depressed by 
competition, but now the English publishers have 
obtained full control and put the price at $5, 
which they claim is but half its value. 

Knowing beforehand of the advance, we have 
made such preparation as enables us to offer about 
100 copies to our subscribers at $2.25 each. If 
sent my mail, the postage should be added, viz.: 
54c, and 10c. additional if you wish it "registered." 
This is the latest revision. -"THE AUTHORS 
EDITION." 



We cannot send these to our European subscribers, 
because too heavy for the mail, and too 
expensive by express. 

This work is at once a Greek and Hebrew Lexicon 
giving the meaning of the original terms in 
English, and also a Concordance giving each 
word of Scripture and the words which they 
translate. The value of the work is becoming 
more apparent daily, as theorists attempt to palm 
off a private interpretation under a guise of "a 
better definition of the original." 

In this superb volume every word is arranged 
under its own Hebrew and Greek original, exhibiting 
311,000 references and 30,000 various 
readings. Its size is large quarto, 1094 pages. 

A similar work, "Englishmans Greek and Hebrew 
Concordance" (3 vols.) sold at $22, in cloth 
binding, only seven years ago, and usually reached 
only the hands of scholars; but the present work, 
by one of the ripest scholars of the age (Prof. 
Young, of Edinburgh, Scotland), has been printed 
in immense quantities, and its present price brings 
it within the reach of almost all self-sacrificing 
students. Indeed, it seems providential that it 
should be provided so cheaply at a time when it 
can be of so great service to truth- seekers. No 
Bible student can afford to be without a copy. It 
is of more value than two years study of the 
Greek and Hebrew languages. 



PITTSBURGH CHURCH MEETINGS. 

The place of meeting has been changed and is 
no longer at "Curry Institute Hall," but has removed 
to the "Grand Army Hall," No. 101 Federal 
street, Allegheny City, just across the river. 
Readers and friends will be warmly welcomed at 
our new and more comfortable hall. Preaching 
every Lords day afternoon at 3.30 oclock, and 
Bible Class at 2 oclock of the same day. 


