Jesus’ Life and Ministry
Escape From a Tyrant
WHY does Joseph wake Mary up in the middle of the night? ‘Jehovah’s angel just appeared to me,’ Joseph tells her. ‘And he said to take you and the child and to flee into Egypt, for Herod is about to hunt for Jesus to kill him.’
The three of them make their escape. And it is just in time because Herod has learned that the astrologers have tricked him and have left the country. Remember, they were supposed to report back to him when they found Jesus. Herod is furious. So in an attempt to kill Jesus, he gives orders to put to death all the boys in Bethlehem and its districts who are two years of age and younger. He bases this age calculation on the information that he obtained earlier from the astrologers.
The slaughter of all the baby boys is something horrible to see! Herod’s soldiers break into one home after another. And when they find a baby boy, they grab him from his mother’s arms. We have no idea how many babies they kill, but the great weeping and wailing of the mothers fulfills a Bible prophecy of God’s prophet Jeremiah.
In the meantime, Joseph and his family have safely made it to Egypt, and they are now living there. But one night Jehovah’s angel again appears to Joseph in a dream. ‘Get up and take Jesus and his mother back to Israel,’ the angel says, ‘for those who were trying to kill him are dead.’ So, in fulfillment of another Bible prophecy that says God’s Son would be called out of Egypt, the family return to their homeland.
Apparently Joseph intends to settle in Judea, where they were living before they fled to Egypt. But he learns that Herod’s wicked son Archelaus is now the king of Judea, and in another dream Jehovah warns him of the danger. So Joseph and his family travel north and settle in the town of Nazareth. Here in this community, away from the center of Jewish religious life, Jesus grows up. Matthew 2:13-23; Jeremiah 31:15; Hosea 11:1.
◆ When the astrologers did not return, what terrible thing did King Herod do, but how was Jesus protected?
◆ On returning from Egypt, why did Joseph not again stay in Bethlehem?
◆ What Bible prophecies were fulfilled during this period of time?

