Insight on the News
Economic Pastoral
“The U.S. bishops have stirred the waters, even kicked up a storm, with the release of their pastoral on the economy,” proclaimed the National Catholic Reporter. The pastoral, a letter entitled “Catholic Social Teaching and the U.S. Economy,” was released in preliminary form last November. Although it is not expected to be in final form until 1986, the letter has already elicited widespread criticism from many American businessmen and economists, including Catholics. Why? In part, because it advocates strong political reforms.
For example, the bishops propose that the government reduce unemployment to 3 or 4 percent, create more job-training programs, reduce or eliminate taxes for the poor, and increase the level of public assistance. But should followers of Christ take a stand on such highly controversial political issues?
Jesus Christ was very concerned with the condition of the poor and underprivileged. Furthermore, the early Christian congregation, out of concern, made provision for the care of its members who had limited resources. (Luke 14:13, 14; 18:22; Galatians 2:10; 1 Timothy 5:16) Yet Jesus and his followers avoided involvement in worldly affairs of their day. (John 6:15) Why? Because they centered their attention on the real solution to mankind’s problems​—God’s Kingdom.​—Matthew 6:33; John 17:16; 18:36.
Likewise, true Christians today maintain neutrality and do not seek to promote human political solutions for social ills. Doing so would divert attention from God’s Kingdom, which will soon replace the governments of our day and bring an end to all poverty and want. (Daniel 2:44) While the bishops’ pastoral makes scant reference to such a blessed prospect, true Christians proclaim this as welcome news.
Life​—From Clay?
“Scientists in California . . . reported a major discovery that supports the emerging theory that life on earth began in clay rather than the sea,” said The New York Times. Working at the Ames Research Center in Mountainview, California, the scientists discovered that ordinary ceramic clay has the capacity to store and transfer energy. This, they speculate, could have enabled clay to convert inorganic raw materials into chemicals that led to the first life forms. “The theory is also evocative of the biblical account of the Creation,” says the report. “In Genesis, it is written, ‘And the Lord God formed man of dust of the ground,’ and in common usage this primordial dust is called clay.” Still, according to this theory, life arose spontaneously. Does the Bible support this view?
No, it does not. The Bible says that God ‘created all things, and because of his will they existed and were created.’ (Revelation 4:11) In harmony with this, the amazingly complex and diverse life forms on earth bespeak the work of an intelligent Creator​—a fact that precludes life’s arising by chance.​—Compare Hebrews 3:4.
True, Jehovah God used “clay” or “dust from the ground” to create man. (Genesis 2:7; Job 33:6) But nowhere does the Bible suggest that life of any kind began as a random chemical reaction. To the contrary, the psalmist says of God: “With you is the source of life.”​—Psalm 36:9.
Help for Marriages
Premarital counseling apparently is on the increase. “The attitude seems to be that if you can get help before the problems begin, you have a better chance,” says Suzanne Prescod, editor in chief of the newsletter Marriage and Divorce Today. Indeed, of 90 married couples monitored between 1968 and 1978 by Dr. Claude Guldner of the University of Guelph in Ontario, Canada, the 30 who received counseling both before and just after their weddings were getting along the best.
Interestingly, a Biblical proverb urges: “Listen to counsel and accept discipline, in order that you may become wise in your future.” (Proverbs 19:20) The best counsel one can receive is that given in the Bible by Jehovah God, the Originator of marriage.​—Compare Ephesians 5:21-33; 1 Corinthians 7:3, 4; 2 Corinthians 6:14, 15.

