‘My Religion Is Good Enough for Me!’
HAVE you ever reacted with such words when one of Jehovah’s Witnesses called at your home? Perhaps you added: ‘It was good enough for my parents and my grandparents. So why bother with any other religion?’
Of course, we benefit greatly from the wisdom and experience of our parents. But is that necessarily a wise basis for following a religion? Certainly we do not imitate our parents and grandparents in everything we do. Why not? Because there has been progress in knowledge and understanding.
To illustrate: Over 40 years ago when people got sick, they may have died simply because available treatment was inadequate. Since 1943, antibiotics have been available and have saved many lives. Do we refuse to consider using antibiotics just because our grandparents did not know of them? No, we keep an open mind and weigh the merits of new developments. That same attitude is wise with regard to religion.
The apostle Paul’s case further illustrates that the religion of our forebears is not necessarily true worship that pleases God. Prior to Paul’s conversion to Christianity, his reaction to the Christian “Way” was violent in the extreme, for he “kept on persecuting the congregation of God and devastating it.” But why? Because he was ‘zealous for the traditions of his fathers.’ His sincere adherence to his former religion prevented him from recognizing the truth about Jesus Christ​—and that could not have pleased God.​—Acts 9:1, 2; Galatians 1:13, 14.
Your Religion​—By Choice or by Chance?
In most cases, a person’s religion is really a matter of coincidence. In what sense? In that you may have been born a Catholic, a Protestant, a Hindu, a Taoist, or a Buddhist because that was the religion of your parents. But suppose you had been born in another country or family. Perhaps you would now be fervently professing a different religion. Therefore, is it logical to assume that the religion of your birth is automatically the true one?
Whether you were born into your religion or not, you may still feel that it is good enough for you. But is right religion just a matter of personal opinion or taste? Is that a reliable guideline?
Perhaps we can illustrate this with food. Ask a child to tell you which he prefers​—a slice of cake or a dish of spinach. Most likely he will choose the cake. But will that choice be the most nutritious? Similarly, the fact that a religion appeals to your personal taste does not necessarily mean that it is the best for you spiritually.​—Compare Romans 10:2, 3.
Religion is not just a matter of subjective opinion. It involves the worship of God, so it must please him. Therefore, the vital question is not, Is my religion good enough for me? Rather, it is, Does my religion really please God?

