page 1 

VOL. XXXV JANUARY 1 No. 1 
A. D. 1914-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

Views From The Watch Tower 3 

The Days Are at Hand 4 

Time Features Unpopular 4 

"Rest in the Lord" 4 

Unrest on Every Side 5 

A Famine— But Not for Bread 5 

"Our Deliverance Draweth Nigh" 5 

The Great Privilege of True Service 6 

Selfishness Unfits for the Kingdom 6 

Our Responsibility as Stewards 7 

The Humble to Be Exalted 8 

The Millennial Reign a Service 8 

Who May Pray and for What? 8 

"Seek, Knock, Ask— And Receive" 9 

Prince of Darkness Vs. Prince of Light 10 

Names Written in the Lamb's Book of Life 11 

Two Books of Life 11 

Introduction to the Father 12 

Thanksgiving With Prayer and Supplication 12 

Some Interesting Letters 14 

Berean Questions in Scripture Studies 15 

page 2 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 



SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



THE MEMORIAL SUPPER- 19 14 

Friday evening, April 10th, after 6 o'clock, will be the proper 
date for the celebration of the Memorial Supper, according to 
the lunar or Jewish reckoning— Nisan, 14th, twenty-four hours 
in advance of the Jewish Passover— Nisan, 15th. 



HOW YOU CAN ASSIST US 

Our dear readers can save much of our time: 

By writing their letters plainly. 

By putting their full address at the head of the letter. 

By putting their orders on a separate piece of paper from 
their other correspondence. 

By giving our file reference in replying to any communications 
from our office. Write "File A," "File B" or "File R," 
as the case may be, on face of your addressed envelope or 
postal card and at beginning of your letter. 

Some, we notice, are using a small rubber stamp for their 
address. This is convenient and may also be used for stamping 
return address on your envelopes. 

We thank you for interesting clippings sent in, but request 
that you give name and date of the publication. If you send 
the paper entire be sure to mark the interesting items. 



When sending remittances to the Society, please remember 
to make them payable in all cases to the Watch Tower 
Bible and Tract Society. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR FEBRUARY 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens 
to the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in 
prayer. At the breakfast table the Manna text is considered. 
Hymns for February follow: (1) 14; (2) 208; (3) 
46; (4) 147; (5) 311; (6) 43; (7) Vow; (8) 145; (9) 12; (10) 
259; (11) 65; (12) 78; (13) 221; (14) 105; (15) 34; (16) 240; 
(17) 307; (18) 313; (19) 87; (20) 303; (21) 113; (22) 130; (23) 
152; (24) 286; (25) 176; (26) 300; (27) 191; (28) 224. 



R5373 : page 3 



VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

FROM every point of view the Year 1914 seems 

big with possibilities. The headlines of all 

the newspapers of the world tell that our 

Master's prediction of nearly nineteen centuries 

ago is being fulfilled— "Men's hearts 

are failing them for fear and for looking 

after those things which are coming on the 

earth" in the present social order of affairs. 

Evidences multiply on every hand that the 

teachings of the Colleges for the past thirty 

years along the lines of human Evolution and destructive 

Higher Criticism of the Bible are bearing their fruitage. 

What only the educated and the wealthy a few years ago 

knew respecting these matters, people of all classes now 

know. Doubts about the inspiration of the Bible have 

led people to guess for themselves and to realize that 

all who reject the Bible are merely guessing at the 

future. 

This matter affects the industrial classes as it does 
not affect the wealthy and the learned. The industrial 
classes, with little financial backing, do not feel satisfied 
with their own or other men's guesses respecting a future 
life. The next logical process of their minds is to 
inquire how we may know that there is a God, and in general 
to doubt everything. The next step in order is a 
determination to make the most of the present life, in 
view of their uncertainty about the future one. Under 
such conditions, can we wonder that Socialism in its various 
forms and phases is growing— that a general spirit 
of doubt and discontent is increasing? 

So long as employment continues at profitable wages, 
the majority of these people are too cautious to desire 
a wreck of the social system, through whose operation 
they have a comfortable living and by whose destruction 
their comforts might be diminished. The world, therefore, 
must face the fact that, if dire necessity comes, as 
it has done in the past, the common people, the artisans 
of the world, will meet the situation differently from 
what their fathers did. Faith in God and in the Bible 
shaken— gone with most of them— we may be assured 
that a stoppage of the wheels of industry would speedily 
bring a terrible Time of Trouble to the civilized world. 
And these very conditions are threatened at the present 
time. It is on this account that many of the rich and 
influential are trembling as they face the near future. 

The man or the woman possessed of a hope beyond 
the grave has in the storms of life an anchorage for the 
soul which others do not have. Should the time come, 
soon or later, when the social fabric will be stretched to 
the breaking point, when banks suspend payment of 
money to their depositors, when factories and mills are 
closed, when people are hungry, we may be sure that a 
roar and an explosion will not be long deferred. This 
awful condition is just what the Bible portrays. So far 



as our judgment goes, the Year 1914 is the last one of 
what the Bible terms "Gentile Times"— the period in 
which God has allowed the nations of the earth to do 
their best to rule the world. The end of their "Times" 
marks the date for the beginning of Messiah's Kingdom, 
which the Bible declares is to be ushered in with a great 
Time of Trouble, just such as we see impending. 

As already pointed out, we are by no means confident 
that this year, 1914, will witness as radical and swift 
changes of Dispensation as we have expected. It is beyond 
the power of our imagination to picture an accomplishment 
in one year of all that the Scriptures seem to 
imply should be expected before the Reign of Peace is 
ushered in. 

Letters from all over the world assure us that the sentiment 
of THE WATCH TOWER readers is in full accord 
with that of the Editor in a resolution that, whatever may 
occur or may not occur during these years, our faith in 
the great Divine Plan of the Ages and in the Harvest 
shall not be one bit shaken. We know in whom we have 
believed. We consecrated our lives to His service— even 
unto death, whether that death shall come within this 
year or at another time. 

The signs of the times clearly indicate the near approach 
of the very trouble for which we have for forty 
years been looking. The signs of the Son of Man in the 
wonderful inventions and progress of the world are manifest 
to us. We believe that the Parousia of our Redeemer 
took place thirty-nine years ago and that He is 
the potent Factor in all the affairs of His Church and 
the Supervisor now of the conditions which will shortly 
lead up to the establishment of His own Kingdom and 
the binding of Satan, the Prince of Darkness. 

We believe that the Year 1914 gives evidence of 
greater possibilities of service for the Truth than has 
any previous year of the Harvest. Moreover, all those 
who have tasted of the good Word of God and who are 
rejoicing in the light of Present Truth seem to be actuated 
by zeal for God and for His Cause and for His 
people, both in Babylon and out of Babylon, more than 
ever before. Besides, the number of these fully consecrated 
ones increases every day. Also the conditions are 

R5373 : page 4 

favorable to the opening of the eyes of understanding 
and the unstopping of the deaf ears of our dear brethren 
of various denominations. 

Let us be more than ever on the alert, therefore, to 
be used and useful in the service of our King. Let us 
remember that the moments and the hours are important, 
that no matter how many cares of life we may have, we 
can always find some time for the service of the Truth, 
not only in our own hearts and homes, but also in doing 
good to all men as we have opportunity, especially to the 
Household of Faith. 



While watching for the consummation, while realizing 
that it will bring the Time of Trouble, while seeking 
to be as fully prepared as possible for whatever share 
we may have in that Trouble, let us not unduly emphasize 
this feature of the Divine Plan in presenting matters to 
our Christian friends of the world. Let us more and 
more cultivate a sobriety of mind, a loving tenderness of 
disposition, which will seek to tell only so much as may 
be necessary to be known. Let us emphasize the goodness 
of God and the great blessing that is in store for 
mankind and the nearness of this blessing and the grand 
results to be obtained. Let us tell that the fulfilment of 
our Lord's prayer, "Thy Kingdom come," is close at hand! 



R5374 : page 4 

"THE DAYS ARE AT HAND" 

"For the vision is yet for an appointed time; but at the end it 
shall speak, and not lie; though it tarry, wait for it, because 
it will surely come; it will not tarry."— Habakkuk 2:3. 

GOD'S PLAN OF THE AGES is the vision 

seen by the Prophet Habakkuk, who was 

told to write it and to "make it plain upon 

tables, that every one may read it fluently" 

(Leeser's translation); that in the end the 

vision should "speak and not lie;" though it 

would seem to tarry, yet it would not tarry. 

It would seem to all that the great Plan of 

God was long delayed. The groaning creation 

would think the Heavenly Father was 

very slack. Many would be inclined to lose their faith in 

respect to the Seed of Abraham, and to think that God 

had forgotten the promise which He had made to Abraham. 

We know that disappointments have come to God's 

people along this line. The Jews were disappointed in 

their expectations. Christians in this Laodicean period 

were disappointed at first, not clearly understanding what 

to expect. 

During the early persecutions of the Church, it was 
believed that those who suffered would soon enter into 
glory. They thought the Kingdom was near. Some of 
the disappointed ones continued to wait and hope and 
pray. Others organized the great Papal System, and declared 
that the Church should have her glory now, that 
the Kingdom of Messiah was here, and that the representatives 
of Messiah should sit upon a throne and personate 
Messiah and bring the kingdoms of the world into 
subjection. They were evidently led to this by Messiah's 
not coming at the time expected, and they thought that 
they must bring about a fulfilment of the Scriptures 
which foretold His Coming and Reign. 



TIME FEATURES UNPOPULAR 

This has brought serious disaster in many respects; it 
has made all Christendom "drunk." (Rev. 17:2.) Many, 
even today, are in bewilderment. Some, getting out of 
that darkness, have stumbled into other errors. The 
majority have lost all faith in prophecy. God foreknew 
all these things and foretold them, and they will not interfere 
with the Divine Program. Just as the wrong impression 
that our Lord was born in Nazareth was a reflection 
upon Him, so that many would not accept Him as the long 
promised Messiah, so these have said, Can any good thing 
come out of the prophecies, or anything relating to the 
Second Coming of Messiah? These people who proclaim 
His Second Advent are laboring under a hallucination! 
Are not the things written in the prophecies merely fanciful 
dreams of men— of the rebuilding of Zion and the 
restitution of Jerusalem? 

Thus they scoff. They are inclined to feel an opposition 
to everything in the Scriptures regarding the return 
of our Lord to accomplish His foretold work. The Lord 
tells us that although the vision may seem to tarry, yet 
we are to exercise faith, because in the end it will speak; 
it will make itself heard, and will not lie. It will then be 
seen to be the Truth. The Divine Plan of the Ages is to 
be made plain upon tables. It will be made so very plain 
to us that he who runs may read. He who is asleep may 
not read; he who is drunken with the wine of false doctrine 
may not read; he who is standing in the way of 
sinners may not read. But he who runs may read, if his 
heart be teachable and pure. 

"REST IN THE LORD" 

This vision is to be made clear at the appointed time. 
We may not read the time features with the same absolute 
certainty as doctrinal features; for time is not so definitely 
stated in the Scriptures as are the basic doctrines. We 
are still walking by faith and not by sight. We are, however, 
not faithless and unbelieving, but faithful and waiting. 
If later it should be demonstrated that the Church is 
not glorified by October, 1914, we shall try to feel content 
with whatever the Lord's will may be. We believe that 
very many who are running the race for the prize will be 
able to thank God for the chronology, even if it should 
prove not accurate to the year, or even out of the way several 
years. We believe that the chronology is a blessing. If 
it should wake us a few minutes earlier or a few hours 
earlier in the Morning than we would otherwise have 
waked, well and good! It is those who are awake who 
get the blessing. 

If 1915 should go by without the passage of the Church, 
without the Time of Trouble, etc., it would seem to some 
to be a great calamity. It would not be so with ourself. 
We shall be as glad as any one if we shall all experience 
our change from earthly to spirit conditions before 1915, 



and THIS IS OUR EXPECTATION; but if this should not be the 
Lord's will, then it would not be our will. If in the Lord's 
providence the time should come twenty-five years later, 
then that would be our will. This would not change the 
fact that the Son of God was sent by the Father, and that 
the Son is the Redeemer of our race; that He died for our 
sins; that He is selecting the Church for His Bride; and 
that the next thing now in order is the establishment of 
the glorious Kingdom at the hands of this great Mediator, 
who during His Mediatorial Reign will bless all the 
families of the earth. These facts remain the same. The 
difference would be merely that of a few years in the time 
of the establishment of the Kingdom. 

If October, 1915, should pass, and we should find ourselves 
still here and matters going on very much as they 
are at present, and the world apparently making progress 
in the way of settling disputes, and there were no time of 
trouble in sight, and the nominal Church were not yet 

R5374 : page 5 

federated, etc., we would say that evidently we have been 
out somewhere in our reckoning. In that event we would 
look over the prophecies further, to see if we could find an 
error. And then we would think, Have we been expecting 
the wrong thing at the right time? The Lord's will might 
permit this. Our expectation as a Church is that our 
change is near. Nothing of Restitution blessings can 
come to the world until after the Church has been 
glorified. 

Another thing to be considered, should our hopes not 
be so soon realized as we expect, would be as to whether 
we were surely of the elect class. But we are not worrying 
ourself at all. "Sufficient unto the day is the evil 
thereof." There are no people in the world so blessed 
as those who have the Truth and are serving the Truth. 
There is plenty of work to do. 

UNREST ON EVERY SIDE 

The remainder of mankind are dissatisfied— not only 
the nominal Church, the professedly godly, but all others 
also. They are disappointed in all they undertake to do. 
There is failure on every hand. Not long since we were 
speaking to a business man, and our conversation turned 
to religious matters. He is a very fine man; whether a 
Christian or not we do not know. We find that there 
are a great many pleasant and very honorable people who 
are not Christians at all. This man, speaking of the 
Churches, said, "It is a sad thing— the condition of the 
Churches. I am particularly interested in the Methodist 
denomination. Some time ago our Church had a fortunate 
sale of their property, and they purchased a new 
site and built a fine church. And they think now that if 
there are sixty who attend service there it is a good congregation. 
And it is the same elsewhere. People are 



all going pleasure-mad. Every one wants to go on some 
pleasure excursion— to the beach, or what not. No one 
seems to care for religion now." This man voiced the 
general spirit of disappointment. But a better Day is 
near. 

In San Francisco, a year or more ago, at a Sunday 
School Convention, one speaker gave quite a long address 
on getting the children into the Church. He said that 
the whole Church institution was likely to be foundered. 
He said that every member brought into any of the 
Churches had cost six hundred and fifty dollars. Then 
he proceeded to tell how many workers were employed, 
and yet they were bringing only these comparatively few 
into the Church. 

And we know that the great majority of those who 
are brought in would not think of calling themselves 
saints, or of professing consecration at all. This gentleman 
seemed to think that there is not much in the Gospel 
for a mature mind. He said that the way to do was to 
train a child up for the church, and then he could not 
get away from it. Yet the statistics show that out of 
the thousands in Sunday Schools only a very small 
number ever go into the church. 

SORROW AT MAGNITUDE OF OUR WORK 

Some say they are sorry that our sermons are being 
printed in the newspapers all over this country, Great 
Britain, etc.; and that our seats are free, and that no 
collections are taken. One minister said, "By and by 
people will think it is a crime to take up a collection, and 
then where shall we be? Pastor Russell is bringing us 
all into disrepute." Another thing they say is, "When 
those doctrines are preached, they influence the best ones 
that we have." 

So we have every reason to feel that it is wonderful, 
very wonderful, that when we are comparatively so few, 
and with so comparatively small an amount of money 
used, we have so great privileges and opportunities in 
the Lord's service. In EVERYBODY'S PAPER was given, 
more than two years ago, the report of the American 
Tract Society, and next to it was given the report of the 
Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society. The former 
showed "excess of assets over liabilities, $851,092.53." 
The latter showed no assets in excess of liabilities. The 
reports show that the one without excess of assets is 
putting out vastly more literature than the other. We 
think this goes to show that we have miracles in our day. 

R5375 : page 5 

A FAMINE-BUT NOT FOR BREAD 

When we were in Boston some time ago, an Editor of 
a Boston religious journal said to us on the Monday following 
our discourse, "I was at your meeting yesterday; 



I saw that immense congregation. I looked it all over 
and said to myself, What is it that brings these people 
here? I remembered that there were seaside attractions, 
parks— everything to induce people to stay away. Yet 
on that warm summer afternoon there were four thousand 
present at the meeting, and two thousand turned away. We 
have many ministers in Boston, good choirs, and everything 
to attract; but these ministers at this time of the 
year have only forty or fifty at their services. How is it 
that so many came out to your meeting, and sat there 
for two hours?" 

We replied that it seems to us that we are seeing the 
fulfilment of the prophecy: "There shall be a famine in 
the land, not a famine for bread nor a thirst for water, 
but for hearing the Word of the Lord." (Amos 8:11,12.) 
We further remarked that the people have been 
feeding on very unsatisfactory nourishment, and that 
they are not satisfied with the chaff they have been receiving, 
and that they do not go to the churches for the 
reason that they do not believe in the eternal torment 
doctrine— the preachers do not believe it, and nobody 
believes it, except a comparatively small number, and that 
number is constantly diminishing. 

We reminded him that these people, instead of hearing 
of eternal torment, now have offered them suggestions 
from the colleges to the effect that their forefathers were 
monkeys; that there are large interrogation points in the 
minds of the people; that they are hungry to know the 
Truth. We told him that we believe this accounts for 
the large number present to hear us, that they were hearing 
something more rational, something more Biblical, 
than they had heard before. So we have everything for 
which to be thankful. 

"OUR DELIVERANCE DRAWETH NIGH" 

So far as we have been able to see up to the present 
time, the failure of a full development of matters in 1915, 
or before, would imply that all the chronological arrangements, 
as we have them, are wrong— our view of the 
Harvest and all. And we have no reason to believe that 
these are wrong. We remember that we are not infallible, 
and that our judgment is not infallible; but the 
wonderful inventions of today, and the light that is dawning 
in every direction, as well as the universal unrest, 
seem in corroboration of the chronology— that we are 
in the dawning of the New Age. But just how far along 
we are we do not positively know. We are waiting for 
the Sun of Righteousness to appear. 

The fact that the Vision is now speaking, and is made 
plain upon tables, is very convincing. We believe truly 
that "the days are at hand, and the effect [matter or 
thing (as spoken)] of every vision."— Ezek. 12:21-23. 



R5375 : page 6 

THE GREAT PRIVILEGE OF TRUE SERVICE 

"The Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, 
and to give His life a Ransom for many."— Matthew 20:28. 

THE word minister has the same import as the 

word serve. The Master tells us that the 

purpose of His coming into the world was 

not a selfish one. He had been quite content 

with the glory and honor which He had 

with the Father before the world was. 

(John 17:5.) While it is true that the 

Savior is now exalted to a position very 

much higher than His previous one, yet He 

assures us that it was not with the spirit, 

the desire, for exaltation that He came into the world. 

On the contrary, He wished to serve. He said, "I delight 

to do Thy will, O My God! Thy Law is written in 

My heart. "-Psalm 40:8. 

In obedience to this Divine will, our Lord left the 
glory which He had with the Father, came down to earth 
and gave Himself up to death, even the death of the 
cross. On the night of His betrayal and arrest He said, 
"The cup which My Father hath poured for Me, shall I 
not drink it?" He was obedient even unto the end. 

Before coming into the world, our Lord had perceived 
that mankind was in need of a Savior, and no doubt this 
had to do with His gladly accepting the Divine arrangement. 
He saw something of the Father's purpose in 
regard to fallen humanity. And when, during His 
earthly life, He saw these poor creatures in sin, degradation 
and weakness, He did not try to make them slaves. 
He did not try to use His power, His intelligence, selfishly 
for His own comfort; but He laid down His life unselfishly. 
He set Himself to work out the Plan which the 
Father had arranged. 

Our Lord came not to be ministered unto. He did 
not come into the world to have servants and to get all 
that He could in return for the expenditure of a small 
amount of His own energy. He came not from any 
selfish motive whatever, but to serve others— to do good. 
As He Himself testified, "Greater love hath no man than 
this, that a man lay down his life for his friends." This 
He did in harmony with the Father's Plan. 

We do not understand, however, that our Lord refused 
to have any one serve Him. He accepted service 
from others. The thought of our text is that He came 
to render a service; not that He might be served; and in 
order that He might carry out His purpose it was necessary 
for Him to become a servant. Had there been no 
need for that service, we cannot think that the Lord 
would have humbled Himself and taken the bondman's 
form, or have undergone the severe trials of His earthly 
existence. But He came to render a service that was 



necessary to the well-being, happiness, yea, the very life 
of the entire human family. 

Through Adam's disobedience sin had entered into 
the world. God's Law pronounced the penalty of death 
for that sin. Thus the whole race of mankind was 
perishing; and if they were ever to be rescued, so that 
they would not perish like brute beasts, they must be 
redeemed. According to the Divine Law, there must be 
a Ransom-price for the first perfect man, who had 
sinned. The Only Begotten was willing to meet this 
necessity. He rejoiced to do this work, to be the servant, 
the minister of God for this purpose, because of the need 
of the service, because it would bring blessing to others. 

This is the spirit that should actuate every one of us. 
We should desire to incorporate into our character this 
principle of service. We should not serve merely because 
we like to work, like to be busy, but because we perceive 
there is a work necessary, and we are glad to lay down 
our lives in this blessed service. 

THE ATTITUDE OF TRUE CONSECRATION 

There are some who think it necessary to wash the 
feet of others. But since there is no real good to be 
accomplished by such a ceremony— nothing desirable- 
there is no reason why it should be performed. We cannot 
think that Jesus would have washed His disciples' 
feet unless they had needed washing. But if at any time 
we can thus render a real service, any of us should be 
glad of the opportunity to serve a fellow-member of the 
Body of Christ— by washing his feet, or in any manner. 
The thought is to appreciate the privilege of real service, 
rather than the opportunity of doing something merely 
because it is menial. Jesus did what He did because it 
was helpful service, and was the Father's will. He 
wished also to teach His disciples that they should not 
be above doing the humblest service for each other as 
brethren. In addition, Jesus' words on this occasion 
seemed to emphasize the thought of the need of daily 
cleansing of the Lord's disciples from earth-defilement. 
See John 13:6-10. 

The laying down of our Lord's life was accomplished 
moment by moment, day by day, in teaching, in healing 
the sick, the deaf, the blind, and in instructing His disciples. 
In nothing did He seek to serve Himself. Therefore 
the record is, "He went about doing good." We 
should make application of this principle to ourselves; 
for "as He was, so are we, in this world." The attitude 
of true consecration is that we walk in Jesus' steps, and 
that we seek to know the Father's will in order to do it. 
This implies that we be Bible students, like the Bereans 
of old, who "searched the Scriptures daily." 

If we have the Master's spirit, we shall be desirous of 
"doing good unto all men as we have opportunity, especially 
unto them who are of the Household of Faith." 
(Galatians 6:10.) And this is the advice of St. Paul, 



who urged that we be followers of himself, even as he 
followed Christ. The lives of Jesus and the Apostles 
stand out very distinctly on the pages of history as 
notable for their unselfish service of others. 

Many have lorded it over God's heritage. The context 
shows that our Lord had this class in mind. He declares 
that the rulers of the Gentiles exercised authority 
over their people; and that this was at the expense of the 
ruled, and was very rarely accompanied by a desire to 
serve the people. 

SELFISHNESS UNFITS FOR THE KINGDOM 

We see how our Master came to use the words of our 
text. The disciples were afflicted with a common ailment 
—love of honor of men and also love of honor of 
the Lord. Two of them had made an earnest request 
to have a place of special honor in His Kingdom. Their 
request aroused a spirit of indignation among the other 
ten, and a controversy resulted. They had the thought 
fixed in their minds that Jesus had promised them a share 
in the Kingdom. (Matthew 19:27-29.) If it had been 
wrong for them to have this promise in mind, it would 
have been wrong for the Lord to give them the promise. 
But they failed to see that the Father would give that 
place to none who would not manifest fullest loyalty to 
Him and to His Word. 

The disciples had at that time a certain amount of 
false dignity, or pride, that would have made them unfit 
for a place in the Throne. Hence the Lord reminded 
them that the conditions upon which a seat in the Throne 
would be given to any one were that such a one should 

R5376 : page 7 

manifest so great loyalty to the principles of God's Government, 

and so great humility of spirit, that he would 

be glad to render service to any one in need. And He 

set Himself forth as an Example. 

We paraphrase our Lord's words: Do you think 
that I left Heaven and came down to earth that people 
might serve Me? No. The conditions to which I have 
come are very inferior to those which I left. But the 
Father gave Me the privilege of service in this matter, 
and I am glad to have this service, because it is the 
Divine will. I have come to minister, to serve, to give 
My life as a Ransom-price for all. 

This thought, then, He set before them— that they 
should rejoice in the privilege of service— rejoice in having 
the privilege of doing something really helpful to 
others, especially the brethren in the Body of Christ. As 
we apply this principle broadly, we see how it is exemplified 
in the world, in the affairs of every day life. 
The whole human family are servants. One man serves 
as a jeweler; another as a manufacturer of woolen 
goods. He serves by buying wool, converting it into cloth 



and into garments. Another serves as a grocer and supplies 
food. Some are chiropodists; some, barbers; some, 
tailors; some, physicians; etc. In every case it is a service 
to others. 

Bringing the matter still lower, we see that the principle 
extends even to service of the dumb brutes. A 
horse cannot curry himself; and even a hog needs to be 
served— needs a trough, a bed, and food. We in turn 
are served by the brute creation. Whoever separates 
himself from this arrangement of service is getting away 
from his own good, and violating a Law of the Universe. 
Whoever gets to the place where he does no service, but 
has others to serve him, is to be pitied. He will be 
unhappy, be he ever so wealthy. Whoever would take 
this attitude would be arrogant and selfish, and his life 
would be devoid of beauty or of worth. 

SERVICE A DELIGHT TO THE CHRISTIAN 

The true Christian enters into the spirit of service, as 
did his Master, and delights to do a good turn to any one 
as he has opportunity. If there are those who are helpless, 
who are sick, these are calls upon his services as he 
has ability and is able to lend a helping hand. We are 
to serve all men "as we have opportunity, especially 
those who are of the Household of Faith." 

Where shall we draw the line? The answer is that 
we must use moderation. We find ourselves every day 
passing by services that others have needed, but that we 
have not been able to perform. How then shall we 
regulate the matter, since we cannot do all that we 
would? Our own family should be our first charge, or 
responsibility. He who neglects his own is worse than 
an unbeliever. Charity begins at home. If we have responsibilities 
there, we could not give so much comfort, 
so much time, so much money, to others as we would to 
those of our own family. 

LAZINESS NOT TO BE ENCOURAGED 

Those who have money have a talent that they can 
use in doing good. They will not find very much opportunity 
so far as the world is concerned. Even if we had 
millions of dollars, the spirit of a sound mind should 
govern us in its expenditure. To give money to encourage 
anybody in wastefulness, slothfulness and idleness 
would be to misuse it, and not to do good. God 
Himself declared, "In the sweat of thy face shalt thou 
eat bread." The happiest people are those who are employed; 
the most unhappy are those who have nothing 
to do, those who have no ambition. 

We cannot do even for our own families all that we 
would wish to do; for in the case of our own there is 
often a lack of appreciation. Some of our relatives would 
never have enough. We could never do sufficient for 
them. We should exercise the spirit of a sound mind, 



then, in deciding what to do. Let us ever remember 
that when we have entered the service of the Lord we 
are given a new commission, a special work to do in the 
world. 

What kind of service are we then given? It is the 
service of ambassador of the Lord. We are to preach 
the Truth wherever there is an ear to hear and an eye to 
discern. Those who have not the hearing ear and the 
seeing eye might rend us, as the Master foretold. 
(Matthew 7:6.) We are therefore to use the spirit of 
a sound mind in discriminating between those who are 
good subjects for the Truth, and those who are not. 

We say to the Master, Lord, we will give all of our 
time to Thee and to Thy Truth. Then He replies, But 
you are not to go ragged or naked, in order that you 
may preach the Gospel. It is proper that you provide 
the things needful. But do not think to get a certain 
amount of money laid up for yourself first, and then 
afterwards go and proclaim the Kingdom. 

We may ask, Does this excuse us, Lord, from doing 
anything for our fellowmen and for our own families? 
He answers that we should not neglect our own families, 
but should care for them according to their necessities. 
We are, however, to guide our affairs with economy. If 
our family fail to do their part, and will not put forth any 
effort when of sufficient age and able to earn a livelihood 
for themselves, then we are to do nothing for them; for 
having their own strength, they do not need our assistance. 
We are to do for them only the things that 
are needful. We believe this is the mind of the Lord. 

OUR RESPONSIBILITY AS STEWARDS 

While we are to do good to all men, yet our special 
service is to be rendered in the Lord's work, the work of 
the Father— in dispensing the Truth. But while we are 
so doing, we may be able to speak a kind word to those 
with whom we come in contact. If we have money we 
may help in that way. But we should remember that we 
do not own even a penny of what we possess, or a 
moment of our time. All belongs to the Lord and should 
be spent along the lines of spiritual things, except where 
there is real necessity along earthly lines. To be sure, the 
world will not esteem us so much as if we would do 
more along earthly lines; but we have not received our 
commission from the world. 

We perceive that the spirit of the Lord Jesus has had 
great influence in the world. It has made a deep impression 
upon noble souls, and has led them to the establishment 
of Orphans' Homes, Hospitals for the blind, Homes 
for the incurable, etc.; and these institutions are provided 
for by the public. It is recognized today to be 
proper to provide for those unable to provide for themselves. 
Since the world has settled this matter from a 
business point of view, the Lord's people are excused 
from personal responsibility which they have as God's 



ambassadors. It is the proper thing to care for the sick 

and the maimed; but because the city and state have provided, 

individual responsibility is largely lifted. 

There are wealthy people who say, I prefer to look 
after my sick friends myself, and send them to a high-priced 
institution. If any do so, this is their own business. 
They may also say, I prefer to live in a million 
dollar house. This, too, is their own business. They 
have a right to do so; and they may also have their automobiles 
and private yachts for pleasure, etc. But with 
the Christian it is different. All he possesses belongs to 

R5376 : page 8 

the Lord. He therefore is in a different position from 
any others. He is not to be like the world. All that 
he does is for God— because of his relationship to Him 
as a son. "Now are we the sons of God." 

THE HUMBLE TO BE EXALTED 

In the words of our text, the Master was instructing 
His disciples that they should not desire to rule— that 
He desired as His followers those who had most of His 
spirit of humility and service. If any man were to 
exalt himself, they were to have correspondingly a lower 
esteem for him; for "He that exalteth himself shall be 
abased, and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted." 
The Lord will send the experiences which will exalt or 
abase, and it is for us to show our appreciation where 
we see the right principles in operation. Whoever manifests 
most of the Spirit of Christ is to be highest in our 
esteem. Whoever has less of the Spirit of Christ is to 
be lower in our esteem. These characteristics are to be 
quietly observed by us. 

The basis upon which the world operates is selfishness. 
This is the secret of war, rebellion, revolution, etc. 
—one party and another seeking selfishly to control riches, 
honor, power or authority. We are delighted, as Christians, 
to note the difference in the spirit which we are of. 
We are to remember that we are by nature "children of 
wrath even as others." We are not to suppose that we 
shall be changed instantly; but the mind will be changed, 
we shall grow more Christlike. And as New Creatures 
in Christ we are to keep a diligent watch lest the service 
we are so desirous of rendering to the Lord become 
vitiated more or less, after the fashion of the spirit of 
the world. 

THE MILLENNIAL REIGN A SERVICE 

Our Lord, when He takes His great power to reign, 
will not have the same motive as have the rulers of the 
present time— merely to assume power for His own 
glory and for vaunting Himself. He will, indeed, have 
great power and authority, but it will be in harmony with 



what the Heavenly Father has arranged. It will be a 

R5377 : page 8 

manifestation of glory and power, not to crash the world, 
but to bless and uplift it. This work will be accomplished 
from the standpoint of service, with a view to helping 
mankind to be the real rulers of the world; for the Messianic 
Kingdom will cease when the world shall be able 
to take care of itself. 

We perceive that this is the way it was purposed from 
the first. The Heavenly Father made man the king of 
earth. God crowned man with glory and honor, and set 
him over the works of His hands. (Psalm 8:5,6; 
Hebrews 2:7.) It is not His purpose to keep mankind 
under the iron rod forever. The rod will be merely for 
temporary service, for man's true development, that the 
race may be brought back to the full blessing of their 
original privilege as kings of earth. 

The Lord's Kingdom, we see, will be very different 
from any other ever instituted. Our service, as members 
of Christ's Body, will be the same as His. We shall 
share with Him in the uplifting of humanity. "God hath 
raised us up together, and made us sit together in 
Heavenly places in Christ Jesus; that in the ages to 
come He might show the exceeding riches of His grace 
in His kindness toward us through Christ Jesus."— 
Ephesians 2:6,7. 



R5378 : page 8 

WHO MAY PRAY AND FOR WHAT? 

-FEBRUARY l.-LUKE 11:1-13.- 

"Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, 
and it shall be opened unto you."— LUKE 11:9. 

APPARENTLY Jesus usually prayed alone. 

We read that on some occasions He spent 

the entire night in prayer to God. How inconsistent 

that would have been if He Himself 

were the Father, who for a time was 

with men and outwardly appeared as the 

"Man Christ Jesus" ! But how consistent 

is the thought of Jesus' prayer to the Father 

when taken in connection with His own 

declaration: "My Father is greater than I" 

(John 14:28); "I came not to do Mine own will, but the 

will of Him that sent Me" (John 6:38); "Of Mine own 

self I can do nothing; as I hear [of My Father], I 

judge."— John 5:30. 

Instead of being the Father masquerading as a man, 
Jesus was the Logos, the Word, or Message of God, whom 



the Father had sanctified and sent into the world to be 
the world's Redeemer, and who by and by is to be its 
King, to deliver it from the power of Satan and sin, and 
to restore the willing and obedient to the Divine likeness, 
the Father's favor and everlasting life.— Isaiah 25:6-8; 
Romans 8:21. 

Realizing the importance of His mission, Jesus kept 
properly in touch with the great Author of the Plan of 
Salvation, His Heavenly Father. His prayers were not 
mockeries; they were sincere. He worshiped the Father 

R5379 : page 8 

in spirit and in truth, as He declared all must do who 
would be acceptable to the Father. 

No doubt the disciples noted the Master's frequency in 
prayer, and the blessing which He seemed to receive 
therefrom. Instead of urging them to pray, Jesus by His 
example taught them to desire the privilege and blessing 
of prayer. In due time they requested instruction, saying, 
"Lord, teach us to pray!" It is well that we inquire 
who may pray, and for what things we may petition the 
great Creator, else we might be praying without authority, 
or praying amiss, as St. James declares some do. 

There is a difference between worship— adoration, 
homage— and prayer. Any one may offer homage to the 
Lord, bow the knee or express thanks and appreciation. 
But as for making requests of God, prayers, this privilege 
is distinctly limited. The Jews were privileged to offer 
prayer, because they as a nation were in typical relationship 
with God under the Law Covenant, as a "House of 
Servants." But the Gentiles had no privilege of approaching 
God in prayer until after the Jewish favor had 
ended— three and a half years after the crucifixion of 
Jesus. 

The first Gentile whose prayers were received, according 
to the Bible, was Cornelius. And even his prayers 
were not acceptable until he had been instructed respecting 
Christ and His redemption work and had become a 
follower of Jesus. Then his prayers and his consecration 
were acceptable to the Father, and he was received into 
the family of God as a son. Then as a son he had the 
right or privilege of prayer.— Acts 10:25-48. 

So today while any one may offer worship and reverence 
to God, none is privileged to pray unless he has 
become a consecrated disciple of Jesus, except it be the 
immature children of such consecrated persons. All over 
the world today's lesson will be misinterpreted. Jesus' 
words, "Our Father," will be misinterpreted to signify the 
"Fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man." The 

R5379 : page 9 

context will be ignored. The fact that these were consecrated 
disciples, and not mankind in general, who were 
instructed to pray "our Father," will be ignored. 



There is a general tendency to ignore personal faith 
in the redeeming blood— to ignore the fact that no man 
cometh unto the Father but by the Son. (John 14:6.) Adam 
indeed was created a son of God; but his disobedience 
and death sentence cancelled the relationship, which cannot 
be restored except in God's appointed way— through 
Christ. Prayer is a wonderful privilege. It is not for 
sinners, but for those who have been justified by the 
great Advocate whom the Father has appointed— Jesus. 

"AFTER THIS MANNER PRAY" 

The model prayer which Jesus gave His followers is 
grandly simple. It is devoid of selfishness. Instead of 
"I" and "me," the prayer is comprehensive of all who 
are truly the Lord's people, in any class— we, us, our. It 
is unselfish, too, in that it is not a prayer for earthly 
blessings. Only one petition, "Give us this day our daily 
bread," can be construed to apply to even the simplest of 
earthly blessings. And this may also be understood to 
signify more particularly spiritual nourishment. 

The prayer opens with a reverent acknowledgment of 
the greatness and sacredness of the Heavenly Father's 
name, or character. Next comes an acknowledgment of 
the present condition of sin in the world and an acknowledgment 
of faith in the promise that God has given, that 
eventually His Kingdom shall be established in the earth, 
and shall overthrow the reign of Sin and Death which has 
prevailed for six thousand years, and will bind Satan, 
"the Prince of this world." (Rev. 20:1-3.) The petition, 
"Thy Kingdom come," not only manifests faith in God 
and in His promise to abolish sin and establish righteousness 
in the earth, but it means more; namely, that the 
suppliant is in his heart in sympathy with God and His 
righteousness and out of sympathy with the reign of 
Sin and Death. 

The next petition is, "Thy will be done on earth, as it 
is done in Heaven." This signifies full confidence in the 
promise of God that His Kingdom when it shall be established 
will not be a failure— that Satan will be bound; 
that the reign of Sin and Death will end; that the light 
of the knowledge of the glory of God will fill the whole 
earth and triumph, destroying all wilful opposers, until 
finally every knee shall be bowing and every tongue confessing, 
to the glory of God. 

It is an expression of confidence that the Kingdom 
will effect the full restoration of the earth to its Edenic 
condition and of man to his primeval perfection in the 
image of his Creator; for not until such conditions prevail 
will it be possible for God's will to be as perfectly 
done on earth as it is now done in Heaven. An included 
thought is that when sin and death shall thus have been 
effaced, the world of mankind will be as happy in God's 
favor as are the angels now. This Jesus clearly expressed 
later, assuring us that eventually there will be no more 
sighing, crying or dying, because all the former things of 



sin and death will have passed away.— Rev. 21:5. 

The request for daily bread implies our realization 
that our sustenance, both temporal and spiritual, must 
come from God. And the failure to specify any particular 
kind of food implies not only a hunger and desire on our 
part, but a full resignation to the provision of Divine 
Wisdom. 

When the justified pray, "Forgive us our trespasses," 
they do not refer to Original Sin; for they were freed 
from that condemnation in their justification. By trespasses 
are signified those unintentional imperfections 
which appertain to all, and which all the followers of 
Jesus are striving to overcome. The request that we shall 
have forgiveness of our blemishes as we are generous and 
forgiving toward those who trespass against us is a reminder 
of the general terms of our relationship to 
God. We cannot grow in grace and abide in the sunshine 
of God's favor except as we cultivate the spirit of love, 
which is the spirit of God— a forgiving spirit, a generous 
spirit, in our dealings with others. God thus purposes to 
favor more especially those who particularly strive to 
exemplify His gracious mercy. 

"Abandon us not in temptation" indicates that we are 
aware that we are surrounded by the powers of evil, and 
that as New Creatures we would be unable to withstand 
these successfully except as we should have Divine aid. 
"Deliver us from the Evil One" is a recognition that 
Satan is our great Adversary; and that we are on the 
alert to resist him, and yet realize our own insufficiency, 
our need of Divine aid. "We are not ignorant of his 
[Satan's] devices." (2 Corinthians 2:11.) "We wrestle 
not against flesh and blood [merely], but against wicked 
spirits in high positions."— Ephesians 6:12. 

"SEEK, KNOCK, ASK-AND RECEIVE" 

In the concluding verses of the Study, Jesus admonished 
that the prayer should be with fervency or earnestness, 
and not merely lifeless, formal words. He gave 
the illustration of the man who at first refused to be 
disturbed, even by his friend, but was finally moved by the 
earnestness of his friend's petition. So when we pray for 
God's Kingdom to come and His will to be done, as it 
delays long, we are not to think that our prayers are 
unheeded. We are praying in harmony with the Divine 
promise, and although we are not hastening the Kingdom 
by our prayers we are entering into a blessing of rest 
through faith, by continually bringing before our minds 
these promises of God, and thus waiting upon the Lord 
for the fulfilment of His promise. 

What God really wishes to give to His people is His 
Holy Spirit. Because of the imperfections of the flesh 
none of us can be filled with the Spirit at first, as was our 
perfect Master. But as we come to God desiring to be 
filled with His spirit, desiring to be in harmony with Him, 
desiring to be in His character-likeness, by the seeking 



we find, and to our knocking the door is opened. 

Nor should we be afraid that our Heavenly Father 
would give any bad answer to our requests. Would an 
earthly parent give to a hungry child a stone when it 
asked for bread; a serpent when it asked for fish; a 
scorpion when it asked for an egg? Surely not! We 
are to know that our Heavenly Father is much better than 
we, much kinder, much more just and loving, and that 
He delights to give His good gifts, His Holy Spirit, to 
those consecrated disciples of Jesus who earnestly seek it. 



R5373 : page 9 

"A little talk with Jesus- 
How it smooths the rugged road! 

How it seems to help me onward, 
When I faint beneath my load! 

When my heart is crushed with sorrow, 
And my eyes with tears are dim, 

There is naught can yield me comfort 
Like a little talk with Him. 

"The way is sometimes weary 

To yonder nearing clime, 
But a little talk with Jesus 

Has helped me many a time. 
The more I come to know Him, 

And all His grace explore, 
It sets me ever longing 

To know Him more and more." 



R5377 : page 10 

PRINCE OF DARKNESS VS. PRINCE OF LIGHT 

-FEBRUARY 8. -LUKE 11:14-26,33-36.- 

"Look therefore whether the light that is 
in thee be not darkness."— LUKE 1 1:35. 

HOWEVER much the worldly-wise may scoff 

at the Bible teaching that there is a personal 

Devil, and that he is a prince over a 

demon host of spirit beings— rebels against 

God's government— let us always remember 

that this is the teaching of the Bible, from 

Genesis to Revelation. The difficulty with 

the worldly-wise is that their good reasoning 

faculties are not guided by the Word 

of God. They say it is difficult enough to 

believe in a God and an angelic host, His servants, spirit 

beings and invisible to men. Much more difficult is it— 



yea, to them unreasonable— to believe in another spirit 
ruler and another spirit host, the adversaries of God. 
They reason that it would not be thinkable that God 
would create beings opposed to Himself; or that if, created 
holy, they became the adversaries of righteousness, 
an all-powerful Creator would not destroy them, but permit 
them to continue their evil opposition. 
The Bible explains that Satan was the first transgressor, 

R5378 : page 10 

in that previously he was a cherub, an angel of superior 
rank and nature, who lost his loyalty to God 
through pride and ambition; and that he seduced into 
disobedience those whom the Bible now designates a 
demon host. Everywhere the Scriptures set forth that 
this host of spirit beings are associated with our earth, 
and not in some far-off fiery furnace torturing the human 
dead. 

The Bible indicates that God does not lack the power 
to deal with these rebels, but that He is permitting them 
for a time, allowing them to manifest the fruitage of 
sin, anger, malice, hatred, envy, strife— as a lesson for 
angels and men. They are under certain limitations 
which the Apostle styles "chains of darkness." They 
have not been permitted to materialize as men since the 
Deluge. But they have sought intercourse with humanity; 
and in proportion to their success their victims are 
said to be obsessed by evil spirits. When the victory 
is complete, the victim is said to be possessed of 
a demon and insane. 

It is estimated that fully one-half of those in insane 
asylums are demon-possessed— the demons belonging to 
the very class so frequently mentioned in connection 
with our Lord's ministry. As in the past, intercourse 
was sought through witches, wizards, necromancers, etc., 
so today, intercourse with humanity is sought through 
ouija boards, planchettes, and spirit mediums. Humanity, 
deceived by the doctrines of these demons inculcated 
in the Dark Ages (1 Timothy 4:1), has neglected God's 
testimony in the Bible to the effect that the dead are 
asleep, and "know not anything." (Ecclesiastes 9:5.) 
"Their thoughts perish," until their awakening in the 
morning of the New Dispensation, otherwise styled "the 
Day of Christ"— "the Times of Restitution"— the Millennial 
Day. (Philippians 1:10; Acts 3:21.) Today's 
Study introduces the Master delivering a man from demon 
possession. The people rightly understood what 
was the difficulty; but, being opposed to the Master, 
some of them evilly declared that the demons obeyed 
Jesus because He Himself was Satan, Beelzebub, the 
Prince of devils. Others said: Your miracles are all 
earthly; show us some sign from Heaven. 

Jesus answered the accusation that He was the Prince 
of demons rather than the Prince of Light by showing 
that for Satan to cast out his own hosts would signify 



a warfare in the camp of the evil ones, which would imply 
that Satan's house was divided and that it would 
soon fall. It would be foolish, therefore, for Satan to 
cast out Satan; consequently such an argument should 
have no weight. But, said Jesus, other Jews have exercised 
this same power of casting out devils, and you 
never charged these with being the Prince of demons. 
And how could there be several princes of demons? 
Judge according to this whether your argument against 
Me is good. But, on the contrary, to those of you who 
realize the truth that I am casting out demons by the 
"finger" of God, the power of God, there will be no 
doubt that this power, which I possess more than others, 
and which I have exercised through My Apostles also, is 
an evidence of special favor from God and a corroboration 
of My testimony that God's Kingdom is near you— 
that the power of that Kingdom is being exercised in 
your midst. 

But, as a matter of fact, when that nation rejected 
Christ, the Kingdom which God offered them was taken 
away from them. The offer was discontinued. They were 
turned aside for a time from God's favor, while the 
Message of Grace and Truth has since been gathering 
another Israel— drawing first of all from the Jews such 
as were Israelites indeed; and later, going hither and 
thither, it has gathered for this same class saintly ones 
out of every nation. 

The power of Jesus in casting out demons showed 
that He was thoroughly competent to deal with the 
Prince of this world, the Prince of Darkness, Satan; 
and that, had the Kingdom been set up at that time, Satan 
and his angels would have been bound or restrained 
then. However, in view of the foreknown and foretold 
rejection of Jesus and the Kingdom, the work of binding 
Satan did not progress, but delayed until the Second 
Coming of Jesus. Then, His Bride class having meantime 
been selected to be His joint-heirs in the Kingdom, 
He will take His great power and reign. At that time 
He will deal with Satan and his subordinate demons; 
yea, with all that have cultivated sin and the spirit of 
Satan, which has so seriously gotten hold of humanity 
under the conditions of the fall. 

THE BINDING OF SATAN 

Our Lord tells that in the end of this Gospel Age 
Satan shall be bound for a thousand years (the thousand 
years of Messiah's glorious Reign), that he may deceive 
mankind no longer, as he has been deceiving and deluding 
them for six thousand years, putting darkness for 
light and misrepresenting the Heavenly Father as the 
worst being imaginable, plotting and predestinating thousands 
of millions to be born and to go to eternal torture. 

Jesus pictures Satan's control of the world at the 
present time, likening him to a strong man armed and 
guarding his palace. He can maintain his control until 



a stronger comes, overcomes him and takes possession 
of his wrongly-acquired valuables. Thus Jesus foretold 
that His own Messianic Kingdom will be stronger than 
that of Satan, and will control it and bind him. The result 
will be the deliverance of mankind from the curse 
of sin and death which has rested upon the race for now 
six great Days of a thousand years each. Messiah's 
Kingdom will be in the great Seventh Day, or Sabbath, in 
which all who will accept the Savior may enter into rest. 
Meantime Jesus, according to the Father's Plan, during 
this Gospel Age, through His own Message and the 
Message of the Apostles, has been gathering out of the 
world a Bride class, to be His joint-heirs in the Kingdom. 

R5378 : page 1 1 

Satan is allowed considerable liberty in the testing 

of the loyalty of all these. There can be only the 

two masters. Knowingly or ignorantly, people are serving 

either the One or the other. As Jesus said, "He 

that is not with Me is against Me." 

THE WHOLE WORLD OBSESSED 

St. Paul declares that the Prince of this world (Satan) 
"now works in the hearts of the children of disobedience." 
Jesus took up this same thought, and likened 
the world to the poor demoniac whom He had released 
from Satan's grasp. Similarly, all who accept 
Christ are delivered from the power of Satan. Let not 
sin, therefore, have dominion in your mortal bodies. 
—Romans 6:12. 

Jesus represents such hearts as swept and garnished 
—sins forgiven and grace of God received. But He declares 
that Satan will seek to regain control of such 
through the spirit of the world— pride, anger, malice, 
hatred, strife, works of the flesh and of the Devil. (Matthew 12:43-45.) 
"Whom resist, steadfast in the faith," 
writes the Apostle. (1 Peter 5:9.) If Satan be not resisted, 
the danger is that the light and the blessing received 
through the knowledge of God will become a 
curse and an injury; and that the result with such a person 
will be worse than before he came into relationship 
with Christ. 

Jesus emphasized this, declaring that as a candle 
should not be put under a bushel and hidden, but should 
be exposed so as to do good, so also the light of the 
Truth, the grace of God received, must not be hidden, 
but must be let shine to the glory of God. Otherwise, 
the light would become extinguished and the darkness 
would prevail. The eye represents intelligence; and as 
long as we have the true enlightenment, or intelligence, 
the whole body is blessed thereby; but if the intelligence 
be destroyed, if the eye be blinded, the whole body will 
suffer and be in darkness. 

Every one, therefore, receiving the light should take 



heed to it as a precious thing lest he lose it, and have 
darkness instead. The eye, the light, here represents the 
enlightenment of the Holy Spirit, which has the greatest 
power to bless us; and this, if lost, would mean to us 
even a greater darkness than that we experienced before 
coming to a knowledge of the Lord. 



R5377 :page 11 

NAMES WRITTEN IN THE LAMB'S BOOK OF LIFE 

"He that overcometh, the same shall be clothed in white 
raiment; and I will not blot his name out of the Book of 
Life, but I will confess his name before My 
Father, and before His angels."— REV. 3:5. 

THE invitation of this Gospel Age is to a 
special class, a class which professes to be 
out of harmony with present conditions- 
out of harmony with sin. 

Those who may become of this class 
are such as have been granted a knowledge 
of God's arrangement through Christ, and 
these may avail themselves of this privilege 
without delay, if they choose, by making 
a consecration to the Lord. 

As Jesus laid down His earthly life in the service of 
the Father and of the Truth, and was misunderstood by 
those about Him, so those who follow in Jesus' footsteps 
must in like manner suffer disappointments in 
earthly matters, if they would be sharers in His glory and 
immortality. As Jesus overcame and sat down with the 
Father in His Throne, so those who overcome will sit 
down with Jesus in His Throne. 

We must distinguish between the overcoming of Jesus 
and that of His followers. His was a perfect overcoming. 
While He had the instruction of the Father and the 
help of the angels, He had no one as a sin-bearer, no one 
to impute any righteousness to Him. His overcoming 
was full and complete. His followers, being imperfect in 
the flesh, cannot do perfectly; and therefore by the grace 
of God it has been so arranged that these may be acceptable 
through Jesus, if they have the spirit to overcome, 
the desire to overcome— if they manifest righteousness 
of heart. But they must show this overcoming spirit, 
else they can never be associated with our Lord in His 
Kingdom. They must be copies of their Master in spirit, 
even though imperfect in the flesh. 

Thus the very moment that we take the step of consecration 
and are accepted, all our blemishes and imperfections 
are covered by the robe of Christ's righteousness. 
But it is not only while we have blemishes that we 
need to be covered; even all those represented in the 
symbolic pictures of the Scriptures are there shown as 



clothed. The pictures given of the Heavenly Father 
represent Him as clothed, and the pictures of our Lord 
represent Him as clothed. The Revelation pictures represent 
our Lord and the saints as clothed in white garments. 
The angels who appeared at the time of our 
Lord's resurrection are represented as clothed in white. 
Our Lord said: "Blessed is he that watcheth, and keepeth 
his garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame." 

The glorified Church is represented, not as taking 
off the robe of righteousness, but continuing to walk in 
white raiment. It will no longer be an imputed robe of 
righteousness, however; our righteousness will be our 
own. To be clothed in white garments then will be to be 
recognized as one of the pure ones— not as now, in a robe 
of reckoned righteousness, but in a robe of actual righteousness. 
"It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption; 
it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory; 
it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power." 

TWO BOOKS OF LIFE 

The Bible mentions two books of life— one appertaining 
to the present time, and the other to the Millennial 
Age. As we read: "He that overcometh, the same shall 
be clothed in white raiment; and I will not blot out his 
name out of the Book of Life." Again, "And the books 
were opened; and another book was opened, which is the 
Book of Life." (Rev. 3:5; 20:12.) The special Book 
of Life that is open at this present time is the one in 
which the names of all the overcomers of this Gospel Age 
are written. When we take the step of consecration 
and are begotten of the Holy Spirit, it is appropriate that 
we should be reckoned as belonging to the family of God. 
Just as a family will keep a record of its members- 
Joseph, Mary, Martha, etc.— so with those who become 
members of the family of God, through Christ; their 
names will be recorded. 

This recording has been going on throughout this 
present Age. This means that those whose names are 
therein written are not only members of the family of 
God, but also members of the Bride class. In order to 
maintain this position, they must be overcomers. In 
some Scriptures it seems that the Great Company class 
are included; in other passages it is not so. Those who 
will constitute the Little Flock, or those who will be of 
the Great Company, or those who will attain perfection as 
earthly beings by and by, must all be overcomers. The 
Bride class is referred to as "more than conquerors." 

R5377 : page 12 

They will gain the abundant entrance into the Heavenly 
Kingdom. -2 Peter 1:10,11. 

In our text we may not be sure whether or not 
the Great Company is included. From one standpoint it 
looks as though they were; from another, as though they 



may not be. We do well not to settle it too definitely in 
our minds, but wait to see what the Lord's intention is. 
We know that there will be some names blotted out. All 
those who go into the Second Death will be blotted out 
of the special record, and their names have no place in 
the Book of Life. Perhaps the Great Company class will 
also be blotted out of the special Record. But we are not 
anxious to put that construction upon it. They are our 
brethren, they also are brethren of the Lord, and we 
would like to think of them as favorably as possible. 

INTRODUCTION TO THE FATHER 

"I will confess his name." This gives us, first of all, 
the thought that, although we have been begotten of 
God, we have never been introduced to Him— in His 
actual presence. Our Lord is not only represented as our 
Bridegroom, but also as our Elder Brother, and is pictured 
as waiting on the other side until we, His brethren, 
shall pass over. And as we shall pass over, Our Lord 
being the One to whom the Father delegated the work 
of instructing us in the School of Christ, it will be appropriate 
that He should introduce us to the Father. 

In another place, our Lord says that if we are 
ashamed of Him, He will be ashamed of us. This expression 
would rather imply that the Great Company class 
would not be included here. But we are sure respecting 
the Little Flock class, that they will be introduced to 
the Father and to the holy angels as the Bride of Christ. 
This is pictured in the 45th Psalm: "She shall be brought 
unto the King in raiment of needlework; the virgins, her 
companions that follow her, shall be brought unto Thee." 
Those especially confessed, introduced, are the Bride class 
only. And we are to hope and strive that we may have 
a place amongst these. The place that the Father would 
prefer us to have is the place we would prefer to have. 



R5379 : page 12 

THANKSGIVING WITH PRAYER AND SUPPLICATION 

The following Scriptures have been compiled by Brother 
Daniel Toole: 

TAKE TIME TO PRAY. 

For my love they are my adversaries; but I give myself 
unto prayer.— Psalm 109:4. 

But we will give ourselves continually to prayer and to 
the ministry of the Word.— Acts 6:4. 

He went out into a mountain to pray and continued all 
night in prayer to God.— Luke 6:12. 

Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be 
hasty to utter anything before God; for God is in Heaven 



and thou upon earth.— Eccl. 5:2. 
PRAY IN SECRET. 

Thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when 
thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in 
secret; and thy Father which seeth in secret shall reward 
thee openly.— Matt. 6:6. 

And when He had sent the multitudes away, He went up 
into a mountain apart to pray; and when the even was come 
He was there alone.— Matt. 14:23. 

R5380 :page 12 

PRAY IN GOD'S PRESENCE. 

Draw nigh to God and He will draw nigh to you. Cleanse 
your hands, ye sinners, and purify your hearts, ye double-minded. 
—James 4:8. 

Have faith in God. What things soever ye desire when 
ye pray, believe that ye receive them and ye shall have them. 
-Mark 11:22,24. 

O, Lord God of our Fathers, art not Thou God in 
Heaven? and rulest not Thou over all the kingdoms of the 
heathen? and in Thine hand is there not power and might 
so that none is able to withstand Thee?— 2 Chron. 20:6. 

AS A CHILD OF A FATHER. 

If a son shall ask bread of any of you that is a father, will 
he give him a stone? or if he ask a fish will he for a fish 
give him a serpent? or if he shall ask an egg will he offer 
him a scorpion? If ye then, being evil, know how to give 
good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your 
Heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask 
Him?-Luke 11:11-13. 

ANSWER CERTAIN. 

Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; 
knock, and it shall be opened unto you; for everyone that 
asketh receiveth, and he that seeketh findeth; and to him 
that knocketh it shall be opened.— Matt. 7:7,8. 

If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth 
to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given 
him.— James 1:5. 

And whatsoever ye shall ask in My name, that will I do, 
that the Father may be glorified in the Son.— John 14:13. 

PRAY HAVING FAITH IN GOD. 

And Jesus answering saith unto them, "Have faith in 
God."-Mark 11:22. 

And this is the confidence that we have in Him, that if 
we ask anything according to His will, He heareth us: And 
if we know that He hear us, whatsoever we ask, we know 



that we have the petitions that we desired of Him.— 
1 John 5:14,15. 

And they were helped against them, and the Hagarites 
were delivered into their hand, and all that were with them; 
for they cried to God in the battle and He was entreated of 
them because they put their trust in Him.— 1 Chron. 5:20. 

Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence 
toward God. And whatsoever we ask, we receive of 
Him, because we keep His commandments, and do those 
things that are pleasing in His sight.— 1 John 3:21,22. 

Having, therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the 
holiest by the blood of Jesus by a new and living way, which 
He hath consecrated for us, through the veil, that is to say, 
His flesh.-Heb. 10:19,20. 

But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering; for he that 
wavereth is like a wave of the sea driven with the wind and 
tossed. For let not that man think that he shall receive anything 
of the Lord.— James 1:6,7. 

Therefore I say unto you, what things soever ye desire, 
when ye pray, believe that ye shall receive them, and ye shall 
have them. -Mark 1 1:24. 

PRAY BEING FREE FROM CONDEMNATION. 

Let us search and try our ways, and turn again unto the 
Lord. Thou hast covered Thyself with a cloud that our 
prayer should not pass through.— Lam. 3:40,44. 

Come and hear, all ye that fear God, and I will declare 
what He hath done for my soul. I cried unto Him with my 
mouth, and He was extolled with my tongue. If I regard 
iniquity in my heart the Lord will not hear me.— 
Psalm 66:16-18. 

Likewise, ye husbands, dwell with them according to 
knowledge, giving honor unto the wife as unto the weaker 
vessel, and as being heirs together of the grace of life; that 
your prayers be not hindered.— 1 Peter 3:7. 

For if our heart condemn us, God is greater than our 
heart, and knoweth all things. Beloved, if our heart condemn 
us not, then have we confidence toward God, and 
whatsoever we ask, we receive of Him, because we keep His 
commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in His 
sight- 1 John 3:20-22. 

WITH THE WHOLE HEART. 

I cried with my whole heart, hear me, O Lord; I will 
keep Thy statutes.— Psalm 119:145. 

Thou hast given him his heart's desire and hast not withholden 
the request of his lips.— Psalm 21:2. 

TRUSTING GOD'S FAITHFULNESS. 

Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without 
wavering, for He is faithful that promised.— Heb. 10:23. 

Know, therefore, that the Lord thy God, He is God, the 
faithful God, which keepeth covenant and mercy with them 



that love Him and keep His commandments to a thousand 
generations.— Deut. 7:9. 

For from the top of the rocks I see him, and from the 
hills I behold him. ...God is not a man that He should 
lie; neither the son of man that He should repent; hath He 
said, and shall He not do it? or hath He spoken, and shall 
He not make it good?— Num. 23:9,19. 

Through faith also Sara herself received strength to conceive 
seed, and was delivered of a child when she was past 

R5380 : page 13 

age, because she judged Him faithful who had promised.— 
Heb. 11:11. 

Their children also multipliedst Thou as the stars of 
Heaven, and broughtest them into the land, concerning which 
Thou hadst promised to their fathers, that they should go 
in to possess it— Neh. 9:23. 

PRAY TRUSTING GOD'S POWER. 

Is anything too hard for the Lord? At the time appointed 
I will return unto thee, according to the time of life, and 
Sarah shall have a son.— Gen. 18:14. 

Ah, Lord God, behold Thou hast made the heaven and 
the earth by Thy great power and stretched-out arm, and 
there is nothing too hard for Thee.— Jer. 32:17. 

For with God nothing shall be impossible.— Luke 1:37. 

And Asa cried unto the Lord his God and said, Lord, it 
is nothing with Thee to help whether with many or with 
them that have no power; help us, O Lord our God; for 
we rest on Thee, and in Thy name we go against this multitude. 
O Lord, Thou art our God; let not man prevail 
against Thee.— 2 Chron. 14:11. 

Now unto Him that is able to do exceeding abundantly 
above all that we ask or think, according to the power that 
worketh in us.— Eph. 3:20. 

TRUSTING IN GOD'S LOVE AND MERCY. 

Have mercy upon me, O God, according to Thy loving-kindness; 
according unto the multitude of Thy tender mercies 
blot out my transgressions.— Psalm 51:1. 

O my God, incline Thine ear and hear; open Thine eyes 
and behold our desolations, and the city which is called by 
Thy name; for we do not present our supplications before 
Thee for our righteousness, but for Thy great mercies.— 
Dan. 9:18. 

Good and upright is the Lord; therefore will He teach 
sinners in the way. ...Remember, O Lord, Thy tender 
mercies and Thy loving-kindnesses, for they have been ever 
of old.-Psalm 25:8,6. 

Make Thy face to shine upon Thy servant; save me for 
Thy mercies' sake.— Psalm 31:16. 

Let, I pray Thee, Thy merciful kindness be for my comfort, 
according to Thy word unto Thy servant— 



Psalm 119:76. 

And being not weak in faith, he considered not his own 
body now dead, when he was about an hundred years old, 
neither yet the deadness of Sarah's womb: He staggered not 
at the promise of God through unbelief, but was strong in 
faith, giving glory to God, and being fully persuaded that, 
what He had promised, He was able also to perform. ~ 
Romans 4:19-21. 

PRAY PLEADING OUR NEED. 

Be not far from me; for trouble is near; for there is none 
to help.— Psalm 22:11. 

Attend unto my cry; for I am brought very low; deliver 
me from my persecutors; for they are stronger than I.— 
Psalm 142:6. 

For he shall deliver the needy when He crieth; the poor, 
also, and him that hath no helper. He shall spare the poor 
and needy, and shall save the souls of the needy. He shall 
redeem their souls from deceit and violence; and precious 
shall their blood be in His sight. -Psalm 72:12-14. 

Truly my soul waiteth upon God; from Him cometh my 
salvation. ...He only is my Rock and my Salvation; He 
is my defence; I shall not be greatly moved.... My 
soul, wait thou only upon God; for my expectation is from 
Him. -Psalm 62:1,2,5. 

PRAY PLEADING GOD'S GLORY. 

And Moses said unto the Lord, "Then the Egyptians shall 
hear it (for Thou broughtest up this people in Thy might 
from among them); and they will tell it to the inhabitants 
of this land; for they have heard that Thou, Lord, art 
among this people, that Thou, Lord, art seen face to face, 
and that Thy cloud standeth over them, and that Thou goest 
before them, by day time in a pillar of a cloud, and in a pillar 
of fire by night. Now if Thou shalt kill all this people as 
one man, then the nations which have heard the fame of 
Thee will speak, saying, Because the Lord was not able to 
bring this people into the land which he sware unto them, 
therefore He hath slain them in the wilderness."— 
Num. 14:13-16. 

O Lord, what shall I say, when Israel turneth their backs 
before their enemies! For the Canaanites and all the inhabitants 
of the land shall hear of it, and shall environ us 
round, and cut off our name from the earth; and what wilt 
Thou do unto Thy great name?— Joshua 7:8,9. 

And it came to pass at the time of the offering of the 
evening sacrifice that Elijah the Prophet came near and 
said: Lord God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, let it be 

R5381 :page 13 

known this day that Thou art God in Israel, and that I am 
Thy servant and that I have done all these things at Thy 
word.... Hear me, O Lord, hear me; that these people 



may know that Thou art the Lord God and that Thou hast 
turned their heart back again.— 1 Kings 18:36,37. 

For Thou art my Rock and my Fortress! Therefore for 
Thy name's sake lead me and guide me.— Psalm 31:3. 

Now, therefore, O our God, hear the prayer of Thy servant, 
and his supplications, and cause Thy face to shine upon 
Thy sanctuary that is desolate, for the Lord's sake. O my 
God, incline Thine ear and hear; open Thine eyes and behold 
our desolations, and the city which is called by Thy 
name; for we do not present our supplications before Thee 
for our righteousness, but for Thy great mercies. O Lord, 
hear; O Lord, forgive; O Lord, hearken and do; defer not, 
for Thine own sake, O my God; for Thy people and Thy 
city are called by Thy name.— Dan. 9:17-19. 

PRAY PLEADING GOD'S JUSTICE. 

That be far from Thee to do after this manner, to slay 
the righteous with the wicked; and that the righteous should 
be as the wicked, that be far from Thee; shall not the Judge 
of all the earth do right?— Gen. 18:25. 

In Thee, O Lord, do I put my trust; let me never be 
ashamed; deliver me in Thy righteousness.— Psalm 31:1. 

PRAY PLEADING OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. 

I beseech Thee, O Lord, remember now how I have 
walked before Thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and 
have done that which is good in Thy sight. And Hezekiah 
wept sore.— 2 Kings 20:3. 

Think upon me, my God, for good, according to all that I 
have done for this people.— Neh. 5:19. 

And before this, Eliashib the priest, having the oversight 
of the chamber of the house of our God, was allied unto 
Tobiah.-Neh. 13:4. 

PRAY PERSEVERINGLY. 

And He said unto them, Which of you shall have a friend, 
and shall go unto him at midnight, and say unto him, friend, 
lend me three loaves; for a friend of mine in his journey 
is come to me, and I have nothing to set before him? and 
he from within shall answer and say, Trouble me not; the 
door is now shut, and my children are with me in bed; I 
cannot rise and give thee. I say unto you, though he will 
not rise and give him because he is his friend, yet because 
of his importunity he will rise and give him as many as he 
needeth. And I say unto you, ask, and it shall be given you; 
seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto 
you. For everyone that asketh, receiveth; and he that seeketh, 
findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened. 
If a son shall ask bread of any of you that is a father, will 
he give him a stone? or if he ask a fish, will he for a fish 
give him a serpent? or if he shall ask an egg, will he offer 
him a scorpion? If ye then, being evil, know how to give 
good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your 



Heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask 
Him?-Luke 11:5-13. 

And He spake a parable unto them to this end, that men 
ought always to pray, and not to faint; saying, There was 
in a city a judge, which feared not God, neither regarded 
man; and there was a widow in that city, and she came unto 
him saying, Avenge me of mine adversary. And he would 
not, for awhile; but afterward he said within himself, 
Though I fear not God, nor regard man, yet because this 
widow troubleth me, I will avenge her, lest by her continual 
coming she weary me. And the Lord said, Hear 
what the unjust judge saith. And shall not God avenge His 
own elect, which cry day and night unto Him, though He 
bear long with them? I tell you that He will avenge them 
speedily. Nevertheless when the Son of Man cometh, shall 
He find faith on the earth?-Luke 18:1-8. 

I waited patiently for the Lord; and He inclined unto me, 
and heard my cry. He brought me up also out of an horrible 
pit, out of the miry clay, and set my feet upon a rock, 
and established my goings. And He hath put a New Song 
into my mouth, even praise unto our God; many shall see 
it, and fear, and shall trust in the Lord.— Psalm 40:1-3. 

And Jacob said, O God of my Father Abraham, and God 
of my Father Isaac, the Lord which saidst unto me, Return 
unto thy country, and to thy kindred, and I will deal well 
with thee; I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, 
and of all the truth which Thou hast shown unto Thy 
servant; for with my staff I passed over this Jordan; and 
now I am become two bands. Deliver me, I pray Thee, 
from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau; for 
I fear him, lest he will come and smite me, and the mother 

R5381 :page 14 

with the children. And Thou saidst, I will surely do thee 
good, and make thy seed as the sand of the sea, which cannot 
be numbered for multitude.— Gen. 32:9-12. 

And it came to pass when he saw the earring and bracelets 
upon his sister's hands, and when he heard the words of 
Rebekah, his sister, saying, Thus spake the man unto me; 
that he came unto the man; and behold, he stood by the 
camels at the well.— Gen. 24:30. 

He took his brother by the heel in the womb, and by his 
strength he had power with God; yea he had power over 
the angel and prevailed; he wept, and made supplication 
unto Him: he found Him in Bethel, and there He spake 
with us; even the Lord God of Hosts: the Lord is his 
memorial, therefore turn thou to thy God; keep mercy and 
judgment, and wait on thy God continually.— Hosea 12:3-6. 

PRAY WITH PURE MOTIVES. 

Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye 
may consume it upon your lusts.— James 4:3. 

PRAY WITH THANKSGIVING. 



Continue in prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving. 
-Col. 4:2. 

Be careful for nothing; but in everything by prayer and 
supplication with thanksgiving let your requests be made 
known unto God.— Phil. 4:6. 

By Him, therefore, let us offer the sacrifice of praise to 
God continually; that is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks 
to His name.— Heb. 13:15. 

I will offer to Thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and will 
call upon the name of the Lord.— Psalm 116:17. 

I will praise the name of God with a song, and will magnify 
Him with thanksgiving. This also shall please the Lord 
better than an ox or bullock that hath horns and hoofs.— 
Psalm 69:30,31. 

STIR YOURSELF TO IT. 

And there is none that calleth upon Thy name, that stirreth 
up himself to take hold of Thee; for Thou hast hid 
Thy face from us, and hast consumed us, because of our 
iniquities.— Isa. 64:7. 

Or let him take hold of My strength, that he may make 
peace with Me; and he shall make peace with Me.— 
Isa. 27:5. 

Wherefore I put thee in remembrance that thou stir up 
the gift of God, which is in thee by the putting on of my 
hands.— 2 Tim. 1:6. 

LET YOUR FAITH GROW STRONG BY MEDITATION UPON THE 
PROMISES. 

The workman melteth a graven image, and the goldsmith 
spreadeth it over with gold, and casteth silver chains. He 
that is so impoverished that he hath no oblation, chooseth 
a tree that will not rot; he seeketh unto him a cunning 
workman to prepare a graven image, that shall not be moved. 
Have ye not known? have ye not heard? hath it not been 
told you from the beginning? have ye not understood from 
the foundations of the earth? It is He that sitteth upon 
the circle of the earth and the inhabitants thereof are as 
grasshoppers; that stretcheth out the heavens as a curtain, 
and spreadeth them out as a tent to dwell in; that bringeth 
the princes to nothing; He maketh the judges of the earth 
as vanity. Yea, they shall not be planted; yea, they shall 
not be sown; yea, their stock shall not take root in the 
earth; and he shall also blow upon them, and they shall 
wither, and the whirlwind shall take them away as stubble. 
To whom, then, would ye liken Me, or shall I be equal? 
saith the Holy One. Lift up your eyes on high, and behold 
who hath created these things, that bringeth out their host 
by number; He calleth them all by names by the greatness 
of His might, for that He is strong in power; not one faileth. 
Why sayest thou, O Jacob, and speakest, O Israel, my 
way is hid from the Lord, and my judgment is passed over 
from my God? Hast thou not known? hast thou not heard, 



that the everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends 
of the earth, fainteth not, neither is weary? there is no 
searching of his understanding. He giveth power to the 
faint; and to them that have no might He increaseth 
strength. Even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the 
young men shall utterly fall: But they that wait upon the 
Lord shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with 
wings as eagles; they shall run and not be weary; they shall 
walk and not faint.— Isa. 40:19-31. 

And call upon Me in the day of trouble; I will deliver 
thee, and thou shalt glorify Me.— Psalm 50:15. 

The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and His 
ears are open unto their cry. The righteous cry, and the 
Lord heareth, and delivereth them out of all their troubles. 
-Psalm 34:15-17. 

For Thou, Lord, art good and ready to forgive; and 
plenteous in mercy unto all them that call upon Thee.— 
Psalm 86:5. 

The Lord is righteous in all His ways and holy in all His 
works.— Psalm 145:17. 

For there is no difference between the Jew and the Greek; 
for the same Lord over all is rich unto all that call upon 
Him.— Romans 10:12. 

R5382 : page 14 

If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that 
giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall 
be given him.— James 1:5. 

Let us, therefore, come boldly unto the throne of grace, 
that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of 
need.-Heb. 4:16. 

And I say unto you, Ask and it shall be given you; seek, 
and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. 
For every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh 
findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened.— 
Luke 11:9,10. 

And whatsoever ye shall ask in My name, that will I do, 
that the Father may be glorified in the Son.— John 14:13. 

Hitherto have ye asked nothing in My name; ask, and ye 
shall receive, that your joy may be full.— John 16:24. 

ENCOURAGED AND INSTRUCTED BY PRAYERS OF THE SAINTS. 

Moses for help to judge Israel.— Num. 11:11-15. 

Moses for Israel's forgiveness.— Exod. 32:11-13. 

Moses for Miriam.— Num. 12:13. 

Moses for murmurers.— Num. 14:13-19. 

Moses for Pharaoh.-Exod. 8:12,13,30,31; 9:33. 

Moses in the case of fiery serpents.— Num. 21:7,8. 

Moses for Aaron.— Deut. 9:20. 

Samuel for Israel.— 1 Sam. 7:5-10. 

Elijah for the widow's son.— 1 Kings 17:20-23. 

Hezekiah against the king of Assyria.— 2 Kings 19:15-20;32-37. 

Hannah for a son.— 1 Sam. 1:9-11,27. 

Abraham's prayer.— Gen. 18:23-33; 20:17. 



Lot's prayer.— Gen. 19:17-22,29. 
Isaac's prayer.— Gen. 25:21. 
Jehoahaz for Israel.— 2 Kings 13:4,5. 
Asa's prayer.— 2 Chron. 14:11,12. 
Jehoshaphat's prayer.— 2 Chron. 20:1-24,26. 
Manasseh's prayer.— 2 Chron. 33:10-13. 
Job for his friends.-Job 42:7-10. 
Ezra's prayer.— Ezra 8:21-23,31. Chaps. 9; 10:1-19. 
Nehemiah's prayer.— Neh. Chaps. 1; 2:1-8. 

David's.-Psalm 18:6; 28:6,7; 31:22; 34:1-10; 118:5; 116:1,2; 138:3. 
Paul and Silas. -Acts 16:25,26. 
Manoah's prayer.— Judges 13:8,9. 
See Psalms 62:1-5; 145:15; James 1:17. 
Prayer a necessity.— Luke 21:36; 1 Peter 4:7; Eph. 6:18. 
"Consider what I say, and the Lord give thee understanding."— 2 Tim. 2:7. 
"When prayer delights thee least, 

Then learn to say, 
Now is the greatest need 

That I should pray." —See Romans 10:12. 



R5382 : page 14 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
WATCHING LEST HE SHOULD SEEM TO COME SHORT 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Greetings in the name of our precious Redeemer! During 
the weeks that have intervened since leaving Bethel en route 
for the South, it has been on my mind to write you; and I 
have refrained from so doing merely because I know that 
your time is so thoroughly occupied in the Master's service. 
However, I want to say that the Truth is becoming more 
precious; and that my appreciation of spiritual things is daily 
increasing and I am rejoicing in the many, many evidences of 
the Lord's love and care. 

The last few TOWERS have been so grand and truly a 
spiritual feast; especially those articles re the time features 
of the Divine Plan. While I have full confidence in the chronological 
features of the Plan, yet nevertheless my consecration 
is unto death and forever; and I am trying to live each 
day as if it were my last, and then there is just ONE DAY between 
me and the Kingdom. 

My heart has been grieved, as I have come in contact with 
the dear brethren in different parts of the country, to note in 
many the tendency to complain and to find fault on the slightest 
pretext. I feel we are drawing very near a time of testing 

R5382 : page 15 

for the Church. Surely if we have a deep heart appreciation 

of the Truth, we would not be so prone to find fault and 

to criticize. Personally, the Truth is so precious and so all-absorbing 

that I feel less inclined to murmur, and more and 



more inclined to be thankful for every experience in life, be 
it pleasant or unpleasant. The resolution not to murmur or 
complain has been so helpful, for which I thank the Lord. 

Every day sees fresh cause for thankfulness for "The 
Vow." As I see the wave of immorality and debauchery 
which is sweeping the country, and the generally prevailing 
tendency to lower the standards of morals and propriety, I 
am sure the Lord has given us the Vow for our protection. 
Some of the dear friends seem to think they are strong 
enough without the Vow, and perhaps they are; but for my 
part I am glad for any protection and help which will enable 
me to stand more firmly. 

Another thing that comes under my observation is this: 
Some of the friends seem inclined to be rather lax or careless 
in their deportment, with the excuse that their motives 
are pure and that they mean no harm; and it seems to anger 
them if their actions are called in question. Sometimes I wonder 
how many of those who profess to be in Present Truth 
will be "overcomers." The standard is so high and we have 
so much to fight against! Many seem to be lacking in a deep 
spiritual appreciation of the Truth. I cannot judge the motives 
of the dear friends; and therefore I am trying by the 
Lord's grace to walk more circumspectly and watch myself 
closely lest I would even "seem to come short." 

Oh, that prize is so wonderful, so glorious, and the Kingdom 
so near, "what manner of people ought we to be in all 
holy conduct"! Praise the Lord, we are almost home! The 
lights of the Eternal City are almost discernible, and soon we 
shall be at Home and at Rest! 

In conclusion, dear Brother, let me assure you of my hearty 
co-operation in the promulgation of the Harvest Message, 
with which I am in perfect harmony. I hope, if it should be 
the Lord's will, to see you some time this winter. In the 
meantime, I hope and pray the Father's smile of approval will 
continue to be your daily portion. Pray for me, as I do for 
you and all the family. 

The classes throughout the South send their love and 
greetings. With much Christian love, I am 

Your Brother, by His Grace, J. P. MACPHERSON. 



"CAST NOT AWAY YOUR CONFIDENCE" 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

Although our Heavenly Father sees fit to try the faith of 
His people along various lines, yet it seems that during the 
coming year we may meet a more severe testing of our confidence 
in God and His Word. 

I am aware, however, that the faith of the dear brethren 
and sisters is very strong, and believe they will continue to 
fight the good fight of faith successfully to the end. 

Pastor Russell, as I have always understood him, never 
claimed his interpretation of the time prophecies to be infallible. 
His writings have always impressed me that way. 

Should the year 1915 come and not witness all that many 



of the brethren expect, it will matter but little to me. We 
know still that "Thy Word is Truth," and that not one jot 
or tittle will pass till all be fulfilled. We know further that, 
according to the signs of the times, the Day is not far distant. 

When fiery trials assail us, let us remember the words of 
inspiration, "Cast not away, therefore, your confidence, which 
hath great recompense of reward." 

Yours in faith and hope, N. E. BUTLER, N.S. 



WITHOUT HIS CONSENT 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

A copy of 1913 "Convention Report" has just come to my 
attention. It contains what purports to be a report of a discourse 
delivered by me at the Springfield Convention. 

I have not the disposition nor the power to control the actions 
of others in the publication of what I say at Conventions; 
but I would like to have the friends know that such 
publication is without my consent. A stenographic report of 
the above mentioned discourse was handed me at Springfield, 
but I declined to read it, not wishing to have anything to do 
with its publication. 

Yours in His service, J. F. RUTHERFORD. 



page 15 

BEREAN QUESTIONS IN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
FEBRUARY 1 
Read p. 715, par. 1, to p. 719, par. 1. 

(35) What will be the special advantage in the awakened 
ones being able to remember their past experiences? P. 715, 
par. 1. 

(36) How will these experiences and the lessons of the 
Millennial Age benefit mankind? And what is the relation 
between their judgment and the present trying experiences 
of the Church class? P. 715, par. 2. 

(37) Into what classes does the Prophet Daniel divide the 
awakened ones? P. 716, par. 1. 

(38) How does the Prophet's declaration support our position 
that the world will not be awakened to instantaneous 
perfection? P. 716, par. 2. 

(39) Explain how Nero may be used as an illustration of 
those who will "come forth to shame and lasting contempt." 
P. 716, par. 3, to P. 718. 

PUNISHMENTS FOR SINS OF THIS LIFE 

(40) Will mankind be punished in the Millennial Age for 
the sins of this life? If so, for what kind of sins? P. 718, 



par. 2; P. 719, par. 1. 

FEBRUARY 8 
Read p. 719, par. 2, to p. 722, par. 2. 

(41) Explain the meaning of the statement, "Some men's 
sins go before to judgment, and some they follow after," 
using Nero as an illustration. P. 719, par. 2; P. 720, par. 1. 

"THUS IS THE (CHIEF) RESURRECTION OF THE (SPECIAL) DEAD. 
(1 COR. 15:42.) 

(42) Why is the resurrection of the Church designated 
"the First Resurrection"? And what two other classes will 
experience an instantaneous resurrection to perfect life? 
And what is the meaning of the statement, "The rest of the 
dead lived not again until the thousand years were finished"? 
(Rev. 20:5.) P. 720, par. 2. 

(43) What are some of the characteristics of the First 
Resurrection— with what bodies and powers will the New 
Creation come forth? P. 721, par. 1, 2. 

(44) How does the Apostle Paul in 1 Cor. 15, guard against 
the thought that all mankind shall eventually bear the image 
of the Heavenly Father? P. 722, par. 1. 

(45) What does the Apostle declare respecting "flesh and 
blood" inheriting the Kingdom? P. 722, par. 2. 

FEBRUARY 15 



Read p. 723, par. 1, to p. 726, par. 1. 



(46) Is it difficult to fully grasp the thought of this complete 
change from fleshly to spiritual conditions? And how 

has the Apostle anticipated this difficulty in 1 Cor. 15:51,52? 
P. 723, par. 1. 

(47) Why has so plain a statement been so generally misunderstood? 
P. 723, par. 2. 

(48) What will be the experience of the Lord's people who 
remain until His Second Advent— will they not die? Quote 
Scriptures to support position taken. P. 724, par. 1, 2. 

"IT DOTH NOT YET APPEAR WHAT WE SHALL BE" 

(49) While all the perfected New Creatures will have the 
same kind of glory, will they all enjoy the same degree of 
glory? P. 725, par. 1. 

(50) How has the Lord indicated these differences in two 
of His parables? P. 725, par. 2. 

(51) Judging from the different degrees of nearness to the 
Lord among His Apostles, would it not be reasonable to 
expect various positions of power, honor and closeness of 
relationship to Him in the Kingdom? P. 726, par. 1. 

FEBRUARY 22 



Read p. 726, par. 2, to p. 728, par. 3. 



(52) In the Apostle's description of the First Resurrection 
in 1 Cor. 15:42-44, to what does "It" refer? P. 726, par. 2. 

(53) What is the nature of the spiritual body in which "It" 
shall be raised? P. 727, par. 1, 2. 

(54) Why is the statement, "It is sown in dishonor," specially 
applicable to the New Creation in the trial state? P. 727, 

par. 3. 

(55) What is the significance of the statement, "It is sown 
in weakness"? P. 728, par. 1. 

(56) Explain, "It is sown a natural body; it is raised a 
spiritual body." P. 728, par. 2. 

(57) If the very thought of the future glory lifts us above 
our earthly cares and sorrows, what must the realities mean, 
and how should we strive to be overcomers and so receive an 
abundant entrance into the Kingdom? P. 728, par. 3. 


