Announcements
USING THE SPIRITUAL SWORD AGAINST WICKED SPIRITS
In Ephesians 6:12 (NW) we are forewarned that “we have a fight, not against blood and flesh, but . . . against the wicked spirit forces in the heavenly places.” We cannot directly engage the wicked spirit forces in combat, for they are invisible to us. But we can counteract their attacks upon ourselves and others by the use of the “sword of the spirit,” as directed in Eph 6 verse 17. The weapon, the Word of God, is mighty for the gaining of a victory over Satan and his spirit forces of wickedness. The more widely the Word of God is circulated the more good-will persons will have opportunity to learn of God’s provisions for them to be secure from attacks of the demons. In June Jehovah’s witnesses will use the spiritual sword by calling on people everywhere and offering them a valuable Bible study aid book and booklet on a contribution of 50c.
SELECT YOUR OWN BIBLE READING
Who selects your spiritual diet for you? Do you rely upon others to determine what you should believe or what you should read for Bible instruction? Compare the matter for a moment with your physical diet. When you go into the butcher shop you do not ask the butcher to give you anything that he thinks suitable, even though he may know better than you what he has or more about the animal that the cut is taken from. You consider what is available and make your own selection, having in mind the needs of your family. How much more important is your spiritual welfare than mere physical strength! Jesus said bread alone does not give life. God’s Word does. That puts Bible study first. But how can you make a selection? Do as the approved ones in Paul’s day did who “received the word with the greatest readiness of mind, carefully examining the Scriptures daily as to whether these things were so.” (Acts 17:11, NW) Take the Bible study aid “Let God Be True” and determine from your own Bible what you can receive in much needed strength for our times. Send 50c for your copy and receive a free booklet as well.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
June 24: Youth in the New World Society, and Careful Living Helps Avoid Life’s Pitfalls, ¶1-5. Page 304.
July 1: Careful Living Helps Avoid Life’s Pit falls, ¶6-28. Page 311.

