From Our Readers
Cocaine, Dangerous Drug?
I wish to express my appreciation for the article “Cocaine​—Dangerous Drug or Innocent Pastime?” (August 8, 1983) It was the most truthful, no-nonsense report I’ve ever read, not only on the problem of cocaine use itself but also on the evidence regarding addiction and the danger involved in using this “seductive” drug even one time. I am a former cocaine addict and dealer, and I only wish that more people would learn from this article.
K. D., California
This is to express my appreciation for the article on “Cocaine.” My husband left his three children and me one and a half years ago because of cocaine addiction. His life is near ruin at present. The article really hit home, and my hopes are that this might help him to have hope. I’ve read every article I could find on this subject. This one surpassed them all. You have the facts and used insight.
J. S., Illinois
Video Games
Thank you for your article on video games. (September 8, 1983) I’ve just finished going over the article with my children. . . . They decided that when their father offers them quarters to go to play video games, they will suggest to him that the money be used for a “family fund for entertainment,” one that can grow and be used to promote a wholesome family activity.
L. K., Massachusetts
My son and I read with great interest the article on violent video games. Even though we didn’t have any ‘shoot-’em-up-type’ games, we still found that playing what we had was very detrimental to us​—mentally, emotionally, physically and spiritually. And these were the nice games! Just to show what playing such did to us: I was playing a game like tennis one evening, the baby started crying and my son was supposed to be looking after her. I got so upset I swore at my son. While I used to have a foul mouth, I had not sworn in more than ten years. That made me realize what my husband had been saying all along​—these games were turning my son and me into aggressive and selfish people. We sold the game with all the tapes and a week hadn’t gone by when all three of us noticed the complete change in the family. We were a loving, caring, sharing family again. I guess this all sounds a little too dramatic, but it really is true.
B. S., Maryland
In publishing these articles (November 8, 1982; September 8, 1983), we did not intend to imply that video games per se are always dangerous or even that every arcade has a very bad environment. But we do believe that very often there will be found in the arcades an unwholesome environment that people interested in guarding their spiritual and moral standards will want to avoid. Further, there is not only the unwholesome influence of the violent games but also the fascination with the electronic games in themselves that can get too great a hold on some people, with undesirable results, even as the above letter shows. These are the reasons for the cautions we have published on this matter.​—ED.

