Prepared Childbirth​—A Realistic Alternative
CAROL’S contractions began at four in the morning. Her husband, Brian, however, waited until the contractions became stronger and closer together before taking her to the hospital.
By the time the admission routine was completed, Carol’s contractions were coming every five minutes. In accordance with her special preparation course, she started her “Phase I” breathing. When the contractions were two minutes apart, Carol switched to her “Phase II” breathing. A doctor then examined her and told her it would be a while before delivery. He had hardly left the room, however, when Carol’s contractions increased. She moved into “Phase III” breathing.
And where was husband Brian? Nervously pacing the floor? Banished from the delivery room? Not at all! Brian was right there coaching her through her labor and, probably most important of all, giving moral support.
Now the time of delivery came. Brian was right behind his wife​—literally—​supporting her head and shoulders as she complied with her doctor’s commands to “Push! Push!” Within minutes a ten-pound girl announced her arrival! And that without anesthetics or medication. By being trained and prepared ahead of time, they had shared in a prepared birth. Having the birth in the hospital assured them that medical help would be available if complications developed.
This was quite different from the birth of their previous child, some ten years earlier. At that time, Carol had gone into labor totally unprepared to cope with the intensity of her contractions. When she discovered she was pregnant again, Carol decided there had to be a better way.
The Lamaze Technique
The “better way” for this couple proved to be a technique developed by French obstetrician Fernand Lamaze. Sometime after attending a gynecological conference in Paris in 1952, he traveled to Russia to learn more about their recently developed methods of reducing childbirth pain. After making a few modifications, such as adding rapid accelerated breathing techniques (the kind Carol practiced), he introduced these methods into his own medical practice.
Since then there has been a growing movement away from “managed birth” (using anesthesia), a method practiced in many parts of the world. Why? Some parents have been concerned about the relatively high infant mortality rates in North America, where “managed” childbirth methods are traditional. Some are very concerned about the prospect of giving birth and want to be better informed. Other parents simply desire a more active role in the birth of their children. And the medical profession has acknowledged the importance of parental involvement in childbirth. After all, “Doctors don’t deliver babies,” said Dr. Murray Enkin, “women do”!
Natural birth methods have therefore caused somewhat of a revolution in the delivery room. In his 1956 book Painless Childbirth, Lamaze stated: “A woman learns how to give birth in the same way that she learns how to swim, or write or read.” Many doctors now see the value of physical, emotional and mental preparation of a woman for childbirth​—aided by the coaching and encouragement of her husband.
How Does It Work?
A couple gains this preparation by attending special classes. There the woman is taught to regard birth as a positive experience. She learns something not only about her anatomy but also about the mechanics of childbirth. She practices the breathing and relaxation techniques Carol used effectively.
These methods will later serve to distract the woman and, hence, alleviate some of the pain of her uterine contractions. Of course, a woman should expect some pain or discomfort in labor. The Bible shows that such pain has been a part of childbearing from the first human birth. (Genesis 3:16) But this training helps her to approach giving birth more positively. Thus the birth pains can be less distressing. Often the need for anesthetics is reduced, if not eliminated.
The Benefits
The old image of an anxious father wearing out the carpet in the waiting room is no longer typical. Nowadays many husbands realize that providing their wives with moral support not only makes giving birth easier but also has the long-term benefit of strengthening their marriage. Said one appreciative wife: “I think it is so wonderful when a husband can be with his wife in the delivery room. My husband was there for the birth of our son, and he still talks about it to this day.”
One survey revealed that in Holland, where over 80 percent of the women use prepared childbirth techniques, fewer than 5 percent need drugs of any kind when they give birth. Perhaps the one who benefits the most from this is the newborn infant. Pediatrician T. Berry Brazelton observed that “in a study of a group of breast-fed babies, we found that the ones whose mothers had no medication recovered and began to gain weight twenty-four to forty-eight hours before the group of infants belonging to medicated mothers. This implied to me that the mothers’ milk production was cut down while the medication was affecting her.”
Similarly referring to the aftereffects of medication administered to a mother in labor, Dr. N. J. Eastman, in an editorial of Obstetrical and Gynecological Survey, wrote: “The onset of respiration is usually less prompt and less vigorous when sedative drugs have been given than when they have been completely withheld.”
Studies published in Johns Hopkins Magazine further suggest that any drug given during labor​—be it a sedative or a regional anesthetic—​may possibly affect the fetus. These studies indicate that nearly all drugs have the potential of inhibiting the action of an oxygen-binding enzyme, thus reducing oxygen transport to the baby by way of the placenta. Natural childbirth, however, along with husband and wife preparation, may make such medication unnecessary.
Closer Bond
Researchers have discovered another apparent benefit of prepared childbirth: a closer bond between the parents and the newborn baby. For one thing, it usually results in a speedier and smoother delivery of the baby, although it should not be expected that all deliveries will be quick and trouble free. A mother who has undergone a smooth labor may more easily have positive feelings toward her infant than one who has had a rough delivery. And a husband’s participation allows him, too, to experience a unique closeness with his infant. As one father expressed it: “I felt close to my son right from his birth. I naturally take an active part in his care and I believe that this will have a significant bearing on our relationship when he’s older.” Another father said similarly: “I was amazed at how efficient the training [for prepared childbirth] was. The rapport that exists between my wife and me toward the baby is amazing.”
How to Get Training
Of course, it must be stressed that what each couple does in this regard is an entirely personal decision. Children, whether born under traditional methods or with the help of parent preparation, are indeed a blessing. (Psalm 127:3) Nevertheless, if you are interested in learning more about the Lamaze method, possibly your local hospital or family doctor will be able to assist you. Statistics indicate that only a small minority of prospective parents are taking advantage of the training offered in their area. Some, however, may choose to receive their training by means of some of the excellent books that are presently available. That is how Brian and Carol received their training.
Giving birth to and raising a child is indeed an awesome responsibility. But it need not be faced with fear or unwholesome anxiety. For some, “prepared childbirth” courses will prove to be a helpful and realistic alternative.
[Blurb on page 14]
“I think it is so wonderful when a husband can be with his wife in the delivery room”
[Blurb on page 15]
A husband’s participation allows him to experience a unique closeness with his infant

