What a Tragic Flood Could Not Sweep Away
By “Awake!” correspondent in Spain
WELCOME rains began to fall over southeastern Spain, the rich agricultural areas of Valencia, Albacete and Murcia. The often dry region of Alicante also got its share. But the rain outstayed its welcome. In a few hours it rained more than it had in three years! A refreshing change was suddenly converted into a nightmare. The rivers began to flood as the rains swept down off the mountains.
Some 50 kilometers (31 mi) from the coast a new danger suddenly developed. The dam at the Tous reservoir began to crack. Too late for some, a warning was sent out. The dam gave way and a wall of water, in some places nearly 9 meters (30 ft) high, rushed down the valley of the river Júcar, swallowing up all in its path.
The flood left behind a trail of desolation: 60 towns were ravaged, 3,000 homes disappeared, another 8,000 were severely damaged and 5,000 vehicles were lost in the sea of mud. Some 140,000 people suffered loss in one way or another; in some cases it was the loss of dear ones. In the province of Valencia 42 dead and 19 missing was the count at one point. In the small town of Carcagente alone 11 people perished. More lives were lost in the provinces of Albacete and Alicante.
Eyewitness Reports
Jehovah’s Witnesses in the zone were also greatly affected. Although no loss of life was reported among them, several suffered injury, about 25 lost their homes and many more lost their furniture and possessions. Three Kingdom Halls were severely damaged. The truth of the Bible’s saying certainly came home to all: “Time and unforeseen occurrence befall them all.”​—Ecclesiastes 9:11.
One young Witness, wading through mud and water, failed to notice an open drain hole. Down she sank. As the mud reached her shoulders, her screams drew the help of a neighbor who saved her life.
Another Witness who was in the flood zone relates: “It was about two o’clock in the afternoon and we were just finishing eating when suddenly a neighbor appeared at the door to warn us that a great avalanche of water was bearing down on our town. Alarmed, we went out on the street. We saw coming toward us a huge river of water. We dashed back into the house, shut the door and tried with sacks and other things to stop the water from getting through . . . but the water, with overpowering force, passed over the barrier.
“At that moment we saw and felt the water creeping up our legs. We tried to save our books and other belongings, but the water entered so rapidly it prevented us. Before we realized it, the water was swirling around our waists. We rushed to save our lives and with great effort got to the upper floor of our dwelling. From there we watched as the water rose to almost cover that floor too. We passed the night praying to Jehovah and wishing that daylight would soon come. They were anxious hours!”
Aid Rushed In
Local organizations, such as the fire departments and the Red Cross, as well as many other volunteers, swiftly rushed in to help the affected region. The day after the devastating flood, an aid committee, appointed by the branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Spain, also managed to establish contact with some of the Witnesses in the affected areas. Two days later, with great difficulty, a truck entered Alcira loaded with food, clothing and other provisions that the Valencia congregations had collected to help their needy spiritual brothers.
Alcira, with a population of 37,000, was one of the worst-hit cities, since it is situated on the banks of the river Júcar, and is only 14 meters (46 ft) above sea level. In some of the towns the water reached a height of some 8 meters (26 ft) above street level! When the waters subsided, everything was converted into a bog, with more than half a meter (1 1⁄2 ft) of foul-smelling mud.
Because of the traffic difficulties and the danger of epidemics from the rotting carcasses of animals, the authorities controlled access to the worst-hit towns. However, the aid committee got permission to enter the blocked areas to attend to the most urgent needs of the congregations of Witnesses in the zone. In addition to a supply of food and clothing, it was necessary to clean the homes of the layer of mud that had entered. In the first weekend after the catastrophe, some 200 members of the congregations in Valencia city and province helped in that work. Others who were not Witnesses were also aided, such as neighbors and those who lived near Kingdom Halls. Help came from all over Spain as the brothers responded to the need in different ways. Many Witnesses with specialized ability voluntarily offered to help restore homes and Kingdom Halls.
The Vital Role of the Elders
Up-to-date congregation records, indicating the complete address of where everyone lived, were a great help in reaching the needy ones. In time of emergency, that information is essential. A circuit overseer who helped in the flood zone added: “The presence of an elder in the congregation who goes looking for the brothers is a matchless means of encouragement and comfort. In difficult times like these there is no substitute for good, faithful elders as a source of comfort and strength.”
He then drew attention to another vital need in time of distress. “On Wednesday, October 27, a week after the disaster, we were able to hold our first meeting with the Carcagente Congregation. Since the Kingdom Hall was damaged, we used a private home. It was a heartwarming experience. The brothers entered the apartment and saw one another for the first time since the flood had struck. Their eyes filled with tears and they tenderly embraced.
“The meetings played an important role in strengthening the brothers. I believe that the continuing of regular theocratic activities gave the brothers strength from Jehovah. Not even a flood that reached to the ceiling is strong enough to sweep away our theocratic habits. The meetings have been a first step toward a normal life, raising the morale of the brothers.
“At the meetings arrangements were made for preaching activity. This, although limited by the circumstances, helped the brothers to feel that they continued to be ministers. These three factors​—the help offered by the local elders, the meetings and the preaching—​can be seen as provisions from Jehovah himself, ‘the God of all comfort.’”​—2 Corinthians 1:3, 4.
Right Attitude Essential
These floods that took place in October 1982 helped the Witnesses to see the importance of one’s attitude toward material things. If a person’s whole trust is in possessions, then in a disaster like this everything is lost. As one Witness commented: “The apostle Paul’s expression ‘a lot of refuse’ is really appropriate. Because that is what our possessions really are​—you work all your life to get them and in half an hour a bit of water reduces them to refuse. Then they are piled up in the street and rot.”​—Philippians 3:8.
Yet the Witnesses, in spite of their material losses, recognize that they have something that the most powerful flood cannot sweep away​—the love and solidarity of their brothers who came to their aid. They also have the privilege of sharing with others the encouraging hope of God’s Kingdom rule for mankind, as well as the blessing of meeting together to build up their faith and trust in Jehovah.
[Picture on page 26]
Streets became rivers

