
Learn From God’s Word
Does the Bible Foretell the Future?

This article considers questions you may have raised and shows where you can read the answers in your Bible. Jehovah’s Witnesses would be pleased to discuss these answers with you.
 1. Are Bible prophecies specific?
Only Almighty God can foresee the future in detail. (Amos 3:7) For example, since early times, he foretold the arrival of someone called the Messiah, or Christ. The Messiah would be a descendant of the faithful man Abraham. He would be a ruler who would make it possible for obedient humans to regain the blessing of perfect life free of disease. (Genesis 22:18; Isaiah 53:4, 5) This Promised One was to come from Bethlehem.—Read Micah 5:2.
Jesus proved to be the Messiah. Over seven centuries in advance, the Bible foretold that the Messiah would be born of a virgin and would be despised. He would give his life for the sins of many, and he would be buried with the rich. (Isaiah 7:14; 53:3, 9, 12) The Bible also proclaimed, over five centuries in advance, that he would enter Jerusalem on a donkey and that he would be betrayed for 30 pieces of silver. Every detail came true.—Read Zechariah 9:9; 11:12.
 2. Does God predict dates?
Over five centuries in advance, the Bible prophesied the exact year of the Messiah’s appearance. The time until his arrival was measured in weeks of years, meaning that each “week” was seven years long. There would be 7 plus 62 of such weeks, making a total of 69 weeks of years. That equals 483 years. When did that span of years begin? According to the Bible, the period began when God’s servant Nehemiah arrived in Jerusalem and began to rebuild the city. Persian history establishes the date as 455 B.C.E. (Nehemiah 2:1-5) Jesus was baptized as the Messiah 483 years later, in the year 29 C.E., exactly on time.—Read Daniel 9:25.
 3. Are Bible prophecies coming true now?
Jesus prophesied momentous events for our time. His prophecy mentions the good news of God’s Kingdom, which will bring worldwide relief to people who love God. The Kingdom will bring an end to the entire wicked system of things in which we live.—Read Matthew 24:14, 21, 22.
Bible prophecies describe in detail the concluding period of the present system of things. The Bible revealed that in contrast with what might be expected in an age of progress, people would be ruining the earth. Distress caused by wars, food shortages, earthquakes, and disease epidemics would increase. (Luke 21:11; Revelation 11:18) Moral standards would collapse. In these difficult times, Jesus’ followers would preach the good news of God’s Kingdom in all nations.—Read Matthew 24:3, 7, 8; 2 Timothy 3:1-5.
 4. What will be mankind’s future?
Almighty God has good things in store for faithful mankind. Jesus Christ, the Messiah, along with his chosen ones, will rule over the earth from heaven. They make up the Kingdom government, which will rule for a thousand years. The dead will be raised and will have the opportunity of being judged worthy of everlasting life. Furthermore, the Kingdom will cure everyone then living. Sickness and death will be no more.—Read Revelation 5:10; 20:6, 12; 21:4, 5.
For more information, see pages 23-25 and 197-201 of the book, What Does the Bible Really Teach?, pictured here.

