Announcements
USING WISELY THE REDUCED TIME LEFT—Eph. 5:15, 16, NW.
The amount of time remaining to Armageddon is continually being reduced. We do not know the exact amount of time still remaining before Armageddon strikes and terminates the evil old world dominated by Satan, but we positively know it will be within this generation. Wise use of the remaining time must be made by Jehovah’s witnesses’ publishing the good news of Jehovah’s kingdom as the only hope of all mankind. It is the business of all who serve God to use their time wisely declaring the message of salvation. This will be done during November by offering all persons with whom Bible studies have been held during the year one or more volumes of the New World Translation of the Scriptures on a contribution of $1.50 each. From house to house the offer will be a volume of the New World Translation together with one of the Society’s books on a contribution of $2. Write for particulars on sharing in this activity.
WORLD CONQUEST SOON—BY GOD’S KINGDOM
Fear of world conquest haunts both political parties of today’s divided world. It is a fear by man of world conquest by man. But even the announcement that there is every good reason why God himself should conquer the world and rule the earth by his kingdom arouses suspicions. The religions of the world also hate and fear one another. Are you afraid and confused? You need not be! You may rejoice with the hundreds of thousands who thrilled to the comforting message delivered world-wide at the “Triumphant Kingdom” Assemblies of Jehovah’s witnesses. Prophecies from God’s own Word were unfolded to identify the true Kingdom, to contrast the “works of the flesh” manifest in Christendom with the “fruitage of the spirit” of Jehovah God. How and when that conquest is to come is of vital interest to all who fear God. This also is emphasized by the stirring title of this thought-provoking lecture by N. H. Knorr, president of the Watchtower Society, “World Conquest Soon—by God’s Kingdom.” Send 5c for your copy of this lecture. Or 10c for 3, or 25c for 7.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
December 4: Qualified to Be Ministers, and Ordination of the Qualified Ministers, ¶1-8. Page 657.
December 11: Ordination of the Qualified Ministers, ¶9-30. Page 664.

