Announcements
THE WRITING OF THE HUMAN RECOMMENDATION LETTER
Ones who have listened to, believed in and acted upon the preaching of a minister of Jehovah God “are shown to be a letter of Christ written by us as ministers,” writes Paul at 2 Corinthians 3:1-3 (NW). Those who have heartily accepted the truth are real Christians, devoted exclusively to the service of Jehovah God and his Son Christ Jesus. At every opportunity they delight to inscribe on the hearts of good-will persons Kingdom truths. As newly interested persons grow in knowledge and understanding of God’s purposes they are privileged to aid yet others to become human recommendation letters as God’s true ministers. Let all of Jehovah’s witnesses and their companions continue to write recommendation letters during the month of October by presenting Awake! The offer will consist of a year’s subscription for this splendid magazine on a $1 contribution. Three Bible booklets will be given free with each new subscription.
WORTHWHILE POPULARITY
With many people popularity is an accomplishment in itself. If there is good cause for that popularity it might be enhanced in the eyes of a few, but with many the reason is relatively unimportant. In the field of reading matter this is particularly true. A “best seller” is required reading for some, but a discriminating reader will give some thought to the author or the publisher. That is why the magazine Awake! is rapidly growing in popularity. It has the same publisher as The Watchtower, recognized since 1879 as the leading exponent of Bible truth. Just leafing through a copy reveals its wealth of material; it leaves you refreshed, invigorated, happy. That is because it maintains strict neutrality in reviewing the news; it views current events with an eye to the causes and reports them with confidence in the future—not of this present system of things, but of God’s new world now at hand. With an increase of 150 percent in five years its current circulation is over two million. Read it twice a month for a year for $1. Send now and receive three booklets also.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
October 14: Theocratic Marriage in an Alien World. Page 560.
October 21: Marriage Ceremony and Requirements. Page 567.

