
Benefit From Jehovah’s Guidance Today



A WISE CHOICE IN POLAND

“I WAS 15 years old when I got baptized, and six months later I began sharing in the auxiliary pioneer service. After one year, I applied for regular pioneer service. When I graduated from secondary school, I asked to serve where the need for Kingdom preachers was greater. I wanted to move away from my hometown and from my grandmother with whom I had been living but who was not one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. How sad I was when the circuit overseer said that my territory assignment would be right there in the town where I was born! I tried not to let him know how I felt. With my head down, I walked away to think about what he had said. I told my service partner: ‘I think I’m behaving like Jonah. But in the end Jonah did go to Nineveh. Thus, I too will serve where I am assigned.’
“I have now been a pioneer in my town for four years, and I can see how wise it was to follow the direction given. My negative attitude had been the main problem. I now experience much joy. In one month, I managed to conduct 24 Bible studies. Thanks to Jehovah, I even started a Bible study with my formerly opposed grandmother.”



A HAPPY OUTCOME IN FIJI

A Bible student in Fiji had to choose between attending a Christian convention and going with her husband to a relative’s birthday party. Her husband agreed that she could attend the convention. She told him that she could join him at the gathering afterward. When she returned home from the convention, however, she felt that in her case, it was better to avoid even putting herself in a situation that could be spiritually dangerous, so she did not go.
Meanwhile, when her husband told his relatives that at his request his wife would join them after attending her “Witness meeting,” they replied, “She won’t come; Jehovah’s Witnesses do not celebrate birthdays!”a
As it turned out, her husband was very proud that his wife had taken a stand in line with her beliefs and her conscience. Her faithful course later gave her an opportunity to witness to him, as well as to others. The result? The husband accepted a Bible study and began attending meetings with his wife.



See “Questions From Readers” in The Watchtower of December 15, 2001.


