See the Blessings of Kingdom Unity!
“All those seeing them will recognize them, that they are the offspring whom Jehovah has blessed.”​—ISAIAH 61:9.
 1. (a) What modern provision of Jehovah displays his generosity toward multitudes that do not yet know him? (b) How are his own blessed people identified?
SINCE 1914 a heavenly King has been enthroned and empowered to rule. And provision has been made for an earthly organization under “princes” who rule for justice itself. (Isaiah 32:1, 2) In all of this, Jehovah has proved to be generous to all who hunger and thirst after righteousness. And the hungry and thirsty ones come flocking to the people whom Jehovah has thus blessed. But how do they recognize them? Are they prominent socially, politically or financially? No, it is for none of these reasons that they are recognizable. It is because they reflect their generous God by their willingness to share with others the blessings they have already received.
 2. In keeping with Isaiah 32:8, what quality is in evidence among Jehovah’s servants on earth today, and that is because they have heeded what counsel of their Leader?
2 The generous God has taught his servants to be generous too. Regarding a person of generous disposition Isaiah 32:8 states: “As regards the generous one, it is for generous things that he has given counsel; and in favor of generous things he himself will rise up.” Just as Jesus set aside his own will and denied himself many things in order to carry out his God-given commission to share the glorious good news of the Kingdom with others, so his followers are intent upon doing the same thing. They hearken to Jesus’ counsel: “Practice giving, and people will give to you. They will pour into your laps a fine measure, pressed down, shaken together and overflowing. For with the measure that you are measuring out, they will measure out to you in return.” (Luke 6:38) Jehovah and Christ Jesus are the ones who can and will return such generosity on the part of their servants by granting them satisfaction, peace of mind and joy in the fruitage of their loyal service involving the Kingdom interests.
 3. How does the attitude of Jehovah’s loyal servants contrast with that of those of Christendom and her abettors?
3 The generous, industrious attitude of openhanded spreaders of the good news contrasts with that of others. God’s prophet speaks of calamity for women who were careless ‘lovers of ease’ in unfaithful Jerusalem. (Isaiah 32:9-14) Their attitude may remind us of some who claim to be servants of God and Christ, but who are not industrious or zealous for Jehovah’s service. Indeed, we may think of those in Christendom and those who are not really concerned about the hungering and thirsting multitudes. Their preoccupation with secular matters, with no thought of busying themselves in the work commanded by Jehovah for this very time in history, can only end disastrously for them, even as calamity is associated with a harvest failure.
 4. What future awaits all those who continue to deal dishonestly with God’s Word?
4 There is only sorrow and destruction ahead for Christendom and her aiders and abettors. Spiritual starvation and consequent depopulation are to be the results of her lack of generosity and fruitfulness in Jehovah’s service. Since all those bogus Christians have failed to plant and water properly, not using the Word of God honestly, Jehovah is under no obligation to ‘keep making it grow.’​—Compare 1 Corinthians 3:6-9.
Good News for the Loyal
 5. What was foretold at Isaiah 32:15, and with what wonderful developments right up to this year, 1984?
5 Encouragingly for those who wait patiently upon Jehovah while loyally putting to work the Kingdom interests entrusted to them, there is good news. It is recorded at Isaiah 32:15 in these words: “Until upon us the spirit is poured out from on high, and the wilderness will have become an orchard, and the orchard itself is accounted as a real forest.” God’s holy spirit has been poured out upon his modern-day witnesses, much as it was upon the waiting apostles and disciples at Pentecost of 33 C.E. (Acts 2:1-4, 14-18; Joel 2:28, 29) As then, so also now, the result is that Jehovah’s loyal servants on earth have busied themselves in the work of making more disciples. Particularly in 1919 and 1922 were there outpourings of Jehovah’s spirit upon his people, and commencing especially in 1922 great impetus was given to the Kingdom-preaching work. This activity has continued and expanded right up to this year, 1984, despite the troublous conditions that blanket the earth. The number of generous proclaimers of the good news has exploded from the modest figure of 7,000 or 8,000 in 1922 to the grand peak of 2,652,323 today.
 6. There have been what other marvelous effects from the pouring out of holy spirit upon Jehovah’s earthly organization?
6 The ‘poured-out spirit’ has surely resulted in fruitfulness. We no longer share the wilderness state of Satan’s world, nor the spiritual famine for hearing the Word of Jehovah. (Ezekiel 36:29, 30) From Pentecost of 33 C.E. onward, God has planted “big trees”​—stalwart, steadfast Christians—​in the spiritual estate of his people. Such stately “trees,” fruitful ones, “the planting of Jehovah,” have grown and prospered into a virtual forest as the visible organization of Jehovah’s worshipers extends to all willing ones the refreshing shade and spiritual sustenance from their God.​—Isaiah 61:3.
 7. What has moved a great crowd of honest-hearted ones to rally to Jehovah’s visible organization?
7 Honest-hearted people who now come streaming into Jehovah’s visible theocratic organization are attracted by the wonders of a spiritual paradise. Nowhere else on earth have they found righteousness and justice. They have had their fill of faithless clergymen, self-serving politicians and greedy commercial moguls. Their eyes have been opened to a society of God-fearing men and women among whom senseless and unprincipled ones are never whitewashed and made to appear noble; where ungodly and unchristian conduct is reproved and the practicers of uncleanness and wickedness are dealt with speedily.
 8. How is Isaiah 32:16 fulfilled upon Jehovah’s people today?
8 The prophet continues with his divinely given message, stating: “And in the wilderness justice will certainly reside, and in the orchard righteousness itself will dwell.” (Isaiah 32:16) Certainly, justice and righteousness dwell in Jehovah’s visible theocratic organization. Of course, all true servants of God recognize that everything they have and enjoy, including their favorable standing with Jehovah, comes to them as unmerited kindness. Their righteousness is of God.
 9. How do the labors of Jehovah’s faithful witnesses contrast with the works and attitude of Christendom’s clergy?
9 This is so strikingly different from the self-righteous and sanctimonious stance of Christendom’s prominent ones. It is a righteousness that is proved by works​—works that bring praise to Jehovah and benefits to his obedient creatures of all races and tongues. Not the least of those works is that of proclaiming the King who now reigns according to God’s will. No other organization of people is engaged in publishing that gladdening fact. And each honest-hearted hearer of the message is, in turn, eager to pass on to his neighbors information about the blessings of Kingdom unity.
The Blessing of Peace
10. What does Isaiah go on to describe in his prophecy at Isa chapter 32, verse 17?
10 This spreading global work, this sacred service, goes forward in an organizational atmosphere of peace, quietness and security such as Isaiah goes on to describe at Isa chapter 32, verse 17, of his prophecy, saying: “And the work of the true righteousness must become peace; and the service of the true righteousness, quietness and security to time indefinite.” It is this true righteousness that God-fearing people of all races and languages have been seeking, and they now find it in the organization of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Here there is peace, for everyone is cooperative, having “plenty to do in the work of the Lord.”​—1 Corinthians 15:58.
11. (a) Who have no place in Jehovah’s organization? (b) How are they gathered out, and with what result to Jehovah’s loyal servants?
11 Among God’s people, there is no room for idle talkers and those who do not wish to work in Jehovah’s service. In fact, the promise implied in Jesus’ illustration at Matthew 13:24-30, 39, 41 is now being fulfilled. The angelic reapers are indeed ‘collecting out from his Kingdom organization all things that cause stumbling and persons who are doing lawlessness.’ The angels can discern who are the true servants of Jehovah and who the false. They are well able to bring about circumstances whereby the workers of iniquity are exposed and dismissed from the association of true Christians. And the result? A healthy organization, functioning to Jehovah’s praise and to the advancement of his Kingdom under Jesus Christ.
12. (a) What strong assurances does Jehovah give his people as expressed at Isaiah 32:18? (b) What coming events cast their shadows in advance, and how are Jehovah’s loyal ones affected thereby?
12 Isaiah further declares (Isa 32:18): “And my people must dwell in a peaceful abiding place and in residences of full confidence and in undisturbed resting-places.” Jehovah has indeed granted to his faithful servants on earth a place and a work from which no one will be permitted to drive them away. They are here to stay until Jehovah has brought to completion his purpose for them this side of Har–Magedon. (Revelation 16:14, 16) In their case, Babylon the Great, the world empire of false religion, has already fallen. Her influence is swiftly diminishing. Even now, elements of the wild beast described in Revelation chapter 17 are eyeing her, preparing to eat her flesh and burn her utterly with fire. (Revelation 17:16) But Kingdom witnesses are not at all disturbed by such events looming on the horizon. They do not share the fear and dismay of worldly people. Since Jehovah has blessed us with advance knowledge of coming developments, we are able to face the future with confidence as to the outcome. “Abundant peace belongs to those loving [Jehovah’s] law, and for them there is no stumbling block.”​—Psalm 119:165.
13. What significant improvement has Jehovah brought about in his visible organization, and what effect has this had on the attitude and work of his people?
13 At Isaiah 60:17 the prophet foretold that there would be significant improvements in theocratic order and procedures among Jehovah’s earthly servants. This he illustrated by the replacement of combustible material and inferior metals with copper, silver and gold. Then we read: “And I will appoint peace as your overseers and righteousness as your task assigners.” All in this Kingdom publicity organization are happy to serve together peacefully, for all their tasks, in whatever branch of service they are engaged, are connected with the proclamation of the Kingdom throughout the earth. All see eye to eye, and all are concerned about getting the work done. How completely different from the selfish, continuing war between labor and management that causes so many problems in the world around us! All in Jehovah’s organization, no matter what position they occupy, are taught by Jehovah and so are able to proceed with their work in peace and good order.​—Isaiah 54:13.
14. What very different future faces (a) the industrious people of Jehovah? (b) Christendom and all her political paramours?
14 This blessed and industrious people will continue undisturbed even as the end of Satan’s system of things arrives with surprising suddenness. Jehovah’s execution of judgment, like a storm of heavy hail upon Christendom and all the world, will completely annihilate the enemy. But God’s people will be safe under his protection when the great “forest” of Satan’s armed hosts is laid low, just as Isaiah 32:19 foretells: “It will certainly hail when the forest goes down and the city becomes low in an abased state.” Through all this world-shaking process Jehovah’s servants will rest in the assurance that “the angel of Jehovah is camping all around those fearing him, and he rescues them.”​—Psalm 34:7.
A Vast Work to Be Completed
15. What work is yet to be done by Jehovah’s people?
15 Meanwhile, there is yet a vast work to be completed while Jehovah still provides the opportunity for multitudes in all nations to have their eyes opened and their ears unstopped to the significance of the message of salvation. Happy indeed are those giving of themselves unstintingly to such service of the Kingdom, busily sowing the seeds of Kingdom truth among people of all nations! This blessedness is like that described in the final verse of Isaiah 32:20, which reads: “Happy are you people who are sowing seed alongside all waters, sending forth the feet of the bull and of the ass.” These animals were beasts of burden used by the ancient people of God to plow the land for the sowing of seed. Comparably today, Jehovah has provided the equipment needed by his modern witnesses so that the sowing of Kingdom truth may be accomplished rapidly and effectively, with the confident hope that Jehovah will add his blessing in the form of a bumper harvest.
16. What evidences do we have that Jehovah now is richly blessing his Kingdom witnesses in all the earth?
16 As we survey the field, which is the world, do we not behold Jehovah’s evident blessing on our efforts to preach the Kingdom message with zeal and regularity? Larger and improved branch quarters house the increasing number of willing worker-ministers that are required to care for the Bethel work load in many lands. Modern printing equipment and time-saving procedures have been made available in country after country, so that the production of Bibles, Bible handbooks and magazines has vastly increased. Growing numbers of dedicated, baptized servants of God are volunteering to serve as regular and auxiliary pioneers, spending time each and every day in the vital service of planting Kingdom truth in the hearts of many. Kingdom proclaimers in almost all congregations are striving to increase their ministry, doing so out of deep appreciation for the blessings that Jehovah has already showered upon them.
17. What is unique about Jehovah’s Witnesses and their work in our day?
17 Only Jehovah’s Witnesses are engaged in this life-imparting work on behalf of God’s Kingdom government. Only they are rejoicing in the harvest returns that are even now manifest. The seed, too, that Jehovah supplies for his willing field workers is so well screened and selected! Our Bible study aids are prepared with a view to stirring the hearts of many who are yet to be harvested and brought into Jehovah’s peaceful organization, the Christian congregation, which at Matthew 13:30 is likened to his Son’s “storehouse.”
18. Why should we be determined to push on in our Kingdom service with satisfaction and joy?
18 Truly, we are in the day of Jehovah, the day of realization of his “precious and very grand promises” to his devoted people. (2 Peter 1:4) Peace and unity are flourishing among us. We have been granted a clear understanding of the purposes of our God. We have peace of mind amid a fear-stricken and anxious world population. A future filled with still greater blessings awaits us. Are we not overjoyed to be the recipients of all these blessings of Kingdom unity? And are we not determined to forge ahead with our Kingdom work to Jehovah’s everlasting praise?
What Is Your Answer?
□ How does the attitude of Jehovah’s servants contrast with that of those in Christendom?
□ In what has the outpouring of God’s spirit resulted?
□ In harmony with Isaiah 32:17, 18, what blessings do Jehovah’s people now enjoy?
□ What proof do we have that Jehovah is blessing his Kingdom witnesses?
[Picture on page 20]
The need to ‘advertise the King and Kingdom’ was emphasized during the 1922 convention of Jehovah’s people at Cedar Point, Ohio
[Picture on page 23]
Jehovah has blessed his people with worldwide peace and unity

