Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting November 10
Song 205
10 min: Local announcements. Include comments from the service overseer on the congregation’s progress in covering the territory with the tract Would You Like to Know the Truth? Since many publishers have already been offering the November 1 Watchtower and the November Awake! invite audience to comment on how they have presented the magazines with good results.
15 min: Be Cultivating a Loving and Generous Spirit. Talk by an elder based on the November 15, 2008, Watchtower, pages 6-7.
20 min: “We Have Precious Treasures to Share.”a When considering paragraph 2, invite audience to comment on specific Bible truths that attracted them to Jehovah’s organization or that they have come to appreciate more fully since their baptism.
Song 71
Week Starting November 17
Song 80
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
15 min: Question Box.b
20 min: “You Can Be a Teacher!”c Interview a publisher or a pioneer who overcame feelings of inadequacy to conduct a Bible study. How did he rely on Jehovah for help? In what specific ways has the organization helped him to become qualified? What rewards has he experienced from sharing in the Bible study work?
Song 143
Week Starting November 24
Song 217
10 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Mention the literature offer for December, and have one or two presentations demonstrated.
20 min: Local needs.
15 min: Prepare to Offer the December 1 Watchtower and the December Awake! Give a brief overview of the magazines, and ask the audience which articles may have more appeal in the local territory. What questions and scriptures could be used to introduce the articles? Demonstrate how a sample presentation from Our Kingdom Ministry might be used. Have one of the elders demonstrate a brief presentation that he has prepared based on an article that would fit the local territory.
Song 208
Week Starting December 1
Song 84
10 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for November.
15 min: Local experiences. Inform the congregation how much of the territory was covered in the distribution of the tract Would You Like to Know the Truth? Invite the audience to relate experiences enjoyed when distributing the tract or when using it to start Bible studies. Also relate encouraging experiences related to offering the Bible Teach book in November. One or two outstanding experiences may be reenacted.
20 min: “Prepare New Ones to Face Opposition.”d When considering paragraph 2, briefly consider how the information in the Reasoning book under “Jehovah’s Witnesses” may help Bible students to answer questions from concerned relatives and friends.
Song 105
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

