You Can Be a Teacher!
 1. What privileged opportunity is before every Kingdom publisher?
1 One of the most rewarding aspects of the ministry is teaching someone the truth. Seeing him respond to the Kingdom message and assisting him in drawing close to the Sovereign of the universe is an experience to be cherished. (Jas. 4:8) To teach someone who is hungering for truth and watch that one begin to make significant changes in his personality, outlook, and conduct should be a goal of every Kingdom publisher.​—Matt. 28:19, 20.
 2. Why may some hold back from conducting a Bible study, and what will help them to overcome this problem?
2 Rely on Jehovah: In times past, faithful servants questioned their qualifications to fulfill their commission. Reliance on Jehovah God enabled Moses, Jeremiah, Amos, and other ordinary people to overcome their own doubts or insecurities and carry out a significant work. (Ex. 4:10-12; Jer. 1:6, 7; Amos 7:14, 15) The apostle Paul too “mustered up boldness,” or literally, was “made outspoken.” How? He revealed that it was “by means of our God.” (1 Thess. 2:2, ftn.) Yes, all of us can trust in Jehovah to provide the help, wisdom, and strength we need to conduct productive Bible studies.​—Isa. 41:10; 1 Cor. 1:26, 27; 1 Pet. 4:11.
3, 4. What training is in place to assist us in teaching God’s Word?
3 Accept Training: Our Grand Instructor, Jehovah God, provides training through a regular program of spiritual education so that we can become fully competent as teachers. (Isa. 54:13; 2 Tim. 3:16, 17) Accept this training by taking full advantage of opportunities to increase your understanding of the Scriptures and improve in your ability to teach Bible truths. While this is primarily the purpose of the Theocratic Ministry School and Service Meeting, all congregation meetings train us to teach from God’s Word.
4 Strive to learn simple ways to teach even deep spiritual truths. The Ministry School book, page 227, explains: “You must clearly understand your subject yourself if you are going to make it understandable to others.” Commenting at meetings helps us to fix main points in our mind for future use. So prepare well, and your confidence in your ability to teach will grow.
 5. What additional training do we have within the congregation to help us progress as teachers?
5 From the outset, Christian ministers no doubt learned from one another while engaging in the disciple-making work. (Luke 10:1) If possible, accompany experienced publishers, including pioneers, elders, and traveling overseers, in the Bible study work. Note how they utilize the simple illustrations and other teaching aids found in our study publications to explain Scriptural truths. Ask them for suggestions on how you can become a better teacher. (Prov. 1:5; 27:17) Appreciate all such training for what it is​—training provided by God.​—2 Cor. 3:5.
 6. Essentially, what is needed to become a teacher of God’s Word?
6 Rely on Jehovah, and benefit from the training he provides. Make your advancement a matter of prayer. (Ps. 25:4, 5) You too can experience the joy of helping someone to become, like you, a teacher of God’s Word!

