Bermuda Rejoices in Kingdom Increase
“JEHOVAH himself has become king! Let the earth be joyful. Let the many islands rejoice.” So sang the Biblical psalmist. (Psalm 97:1) Among these “many islands” is Bermuda, a self-governing British colony in the West Atlantic, some 700 miles (1,100 km) southeast of New York City.
With its famous pink beaches and clear blue waters, Bermuda certainly is one of the beauties among the islands of the Atlantic. Visitors are delighted by its charming way of life. “In place of automobile horns, factory whistles, traffic lights, skyscrapers, subways, and hurrying throngs,” a longtime admirer once observed, “there was the clippety-clop of horses’ hoofs, the jingle of bicycle bells, carriage drivers wearing pith helmets, ‘bobbies’ directing traffic that keeps to the left, business men in shorts, veranda cafés, the dazzling cleanliness of pastel-colored buildings and low, white-roofed houses.”
That observation was made in 1939. What about today? Modern travel and communication have made this small group of islands very much a part of Western society. This has brought many advantages and material prosperity. But has this resulted in a totally joyful way of life for the islanders? Not really.
To illustrate, one newspaper recently said: “Premier gives Bermudians a stern warning . . . the Island’s economy was facing serious challenges.” A later article reported: “Minister says changes must be made, tourism sinking.”
Compared with many other places, Bermuda may still seem rather paradisaic. Nevertheless, crime is reported to be rising at about 4 percent a year. Other newspaper articles speak of “the existence of a hard drug culture in Bermuda” and the “Saturday night specials or deadly automatics” that “are back on streets.” No wonder that a recent survey revealed that “about one Bermudian in four thinks that conditions are not as good now as they were in the past and will get worse in the next five years.”
Yet, is there hope for a brighter future? Can Bermudians find a sound basis for happiness and true joy?
Joyful Message Comes to Bermuda
The hope of a joyful future through God’s Kingdom first reached Bermuda in 1913. At that time a Bible Student named Nelson distributed some Watch Tower publications in the islands. Later, however, local authorities asked him to leave.
Religious prejudice against Jehovah’s Witnesses persisted for many years. Thus, in 1933, the Roberts family from the West Indies was forced to leave Bermuda. Many others experienced similar treatment​—simply for trying to spread the Bible’s joyful message. Among them was Fredricia “Freddy” Johnson, who in the 1930’s often visited these islands as a full-time minister of the good news. In 1940, however, she was haled into court and told: “You are not the kind of person we want in Bermuda, and the sooner you leave the better.”
Despite continuing pressure, Kingdom proclaimers did not cease to spread the Bible’s joyous message. In 1945 two graduates of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead arrived. Although they were deported in 1947, for some 19 months they had carried out a fruitful ministry, helping the islanders to learn what the hope of Jehovah’s Witnesses is and what type of people they are. The Witnesses let their conduct speak for them, and Jehovah rewarded their persistent efforts.
Two specially trained graduates of Gilead School arrived in 1951. By this time, the authorities had developed a more tolerant attitude toward the Witnesses.
Kingdom Increase Brings Joy
In 1950 there were only five Kingdom publishers associated with the one congregation in Bermuda. Ten years later, the number of publishers had risen to 43, and by 1970, 118 Witnesses of Jehovah were serving joyously in that congregation. Another decade gave evidence of Kingdom increase as the number of congregations had risen to four, with a total of 214 publishers. By January of 1985, more than 310 individuals associated with these congregations were actively sharing their joyous hope with others.
However, it is not just the numerical growth that brings joy. It is seeing the changes in the lives of those who embrace the good news that brings delight. While more and more people, young and old, turn to drugs and alcohol, others are taking up the truly happy way of life.
For example, Randy became involved in the use of drugs at the age of 12. “Due to my bad associations, I started off with marijuana. This led to such hard drugs as speed and LSD. My first 15 trips were beautiful​—or so I thought at the time. Then the bad trips started. On one occasion, I spent four to five hours drinking milk and water because I thought my insides were on fire. Another frightening experience was sitting in a corner thinking my body was shrinking and at the same time my feet were getting larger and larger. If I had had a gun at that time, I would have shot myself. . . .
“Hardly a day went by that I did not smoke marijuana.  . . . I also lived a very immoral life, which at the time seemed to me to be quite normal.”
After living in this way for 11 years, Randy came in touch with the truth. His brother and sister had begun studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses, and his sister would leave Bible literature in his room. He never read it. Then one day he was attracted by the cover of an Awake! magazine on the subject of world peace. He read the magazine with interest and admitted this to his sister, who immediately gave him the book The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life. “I took it to work with me every day,” said Randy, “and in one week I read it through. This was the first book I had read from cover to cover.”
Randy’s brother invited him to attend a meeting at the Kingdom Hall, but he was somewhat reluctant because he “hated to dress up.” However, he did attend and now says: “Since then I have never stopped enjoying these wonderful arrangements that Jehovah is providing.” Shortly thereafter, he was baptized in symbol of his dedication to Jehovah God. “From then on I spent 75 to 90 hours a month telling others of my hope for the future,” continued Randy. “I especially made sure I told all my former friends about this good news.” In time Randy married a zealous preacher of the good news. In January 1983 she became a regular pioneer. One year later he was able to join her in this purposeful and joyous way of service to Jehovah. Also, for over six years now he has served as an appointed elder in one of the local congregations. Says Randy: “I thank Jehovah every day for opening my heart to the truth!”
Many other individuals in Bermuda have been able to change their lives and become better and happier husbands, wives, mothers, fathers, brothers, and sisters. Especially among the youth and young adult population do we see keen interest in a reliable hope for the future. Consider one family that provides a fine example of this.
Gretchen first started studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses in 1961. She could see the error in the doctrines taught by other religions, so she expected to find something wrong in the things she was taught by the Witnesses. But she could not do so. Gretchen was baptized in 1963. Today, over 20 years later, two of her sons and three of her daughters also serve as baptized and joyful witnesses of Jehovah.
Joyful Service Ahead
All these young people, along with their spiritual brothers and sisters older in years, are reaping the joys of sacred service to Jehovah.
During 1984, there was a ratio of one Witness to every 170 inhabitants. But is there hope of greater Kingdom increase? Indeed there is, for about 300 home Bible studies are now being conducted with interested persons. Clearly, then, there are grand prospects of further Kingdom increase that will surely bring greater joy to Bermuda.
[Maps on page 28]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
N
Hamilton
[Map]
ATLANTIC OCEAN
[Picture on page 30]
Kingdom Halls​—centers of true worship in Bermuda

