Do You Remember?
Have you enjoyed the last several issues of The Watchtower? See if you can remember the following points:
□ What can help Christians to overcome secret faults?
Christians who want to please Jehovah should live with an awareness that they cannot hide their faults from God. Also, they should accept Jehovah’s help to overcome such weaknesses. (Ecclesiastes 12:14; Philippians 4:13)​—4/15, page 20.
□ What challenge involving Christian maturity should each servant of Jehovah seriously consider?
Is Jehovah’s servant willing and eager to accept the responsibility that comes with being a full-grown, mature spiritual person? Or is he content merely to coast along, letting others shoulder that responsibility for him? (Galatians 6:4, 5)​—5/1, pages 9, 10.
□ How can we show kindness by cultivating true friendship?
Kindness on our part is shown when we let the others know that we appreciate them. This we can do by listening to others and not dominating the conversation by talking exclusively about ourselves. Kindness is further shown by watching what we say to others. (Proverbs 12:18)​—5/15, page 4.
□ What did Jesus mean when he said at Mark 9:50: “Have salt in yourselves”?
Jesus was referring to his disciples’ being considerate, tactful, wholesome, and peaceable in word and conduct​—acting in good taste toward one another.​—5/15, page 24.
□ What are some facts that argue against Jesus’ having been born on December 25?
December is a rainy, cold season in Bethlehem, so shepherds would not be out at night with their flocks. The people would not likely have been asked by the Roman Caesar to travel in winter for registration because the Jews were already at the point of revolting against the Romans.​—6/1, page 8.
□ Why should baptism be a time for meditation and sober thought by candidates?
Baptism is the time when an individual shows that he has made a vital decision​—to submit to God as the Sovereign Lord and, as a Witness for Jehovah, to be no part of the world. (Luke 3:21; Matthew 4:10; 1 John 5:19)​—6/1, page 31.
□ What did Gabriel mean when he said at Luke 1:37: “With God no declaration will be an impossibility”?
Gabriel’s words do not mean that God can say just anything but, rather, that no word or declaration given by Jehovah can go unfulfilled. (Isaiah 55:10, 11)​—6/15, page 14.
□ How do Jehovah’s people today feed on “every utterance coming forth through Jehovah’s mouth” (Matthew 4:4)?
This feeding is not done simply by personally reading and studying God’s Word the Bible, but it is by Jehovah’s people experiencing, collectively and individually, the wonderful way in which Jehovah fulfills his utterances toward his people, acting on their behalf.​—6/15, page 17.
□ What are some chief characteristics of the Hindu religion?
Hindu worshipers are not governed by any central body; there is no set form of worship; their source of beliefs is not any one book like the Bible; but, instead, over the centuries a vast array of Hindu writings have appeared, and six different schools of philosophy have been developed.​—7/1, page 4.
□ How did Christians in the first century act toward someone who was not an expelled wrongdoer, but who willfully renounced the Christian way?
The apostle John gave counsel about persons who had ‘gone out from among us’ and about those who brought false teaching. (1 John 2:19) At 2 John 10 he advised that Christians were not to ‘receive such persons into their home’ or greet them. The word “apostasy” is from a Greek word that has the sense of ‘desertion, abandonment, or rebellion,’ and a person who had willfully and formally disassociated himself from the Christian congregation would have matched such a description. Loyal Christians would not have wanted to fellowship with such an apostate.​—7/15, page 31.
□ How can the true religion be determined?
True religion should meet God’s standards of truth as laid down in the Bible; it ought to produce the peaceable fruit of love; and it must also honor God’s name, Jehovah.​—7/15, page 7.

