Do You Remember?
Have you read recent issues of The Watchtower carefully, with the object of retaining the information? If you have done so, undoubtedly you will remember the following points:
● Has it been left to the individual to choose whether his hope will be earthly or heavenly?
No. Before a person can entertain any Scriptural hope, he must make an unqualified dedication to Jehovah God and be baptized, agreeing henceforth to do God’s will. Jehovah causes his will to be done by the operation of his holy spirit, and within prospective members of the “little flock” that spirit has quickened a heavenly hope. However, the “great crowd” that is now being gathered, with prospects of living forever on earth, also receive God’s spirit. (Luke 12:32; Rom. 8:14-17)​—3/1 p. 12.
● How should we react if someone imputes wrong motives to us?
It is good to refrain from taking offense. (Eccl. 7:9) As Christians, we should desire to imitate God, who displays self-control in the face of accusations. He will comfort us, and we will have joy if we continue to “trust in Jehovah and do good.” (Ps. 37:3) If God wants to vindicate us, he can do this at the proper time.​—4/1 p. 14.
● What is the ‘pain that will be no more’ among earthly subjects of Kingdom rule?
The prophetic promise that there will not be pain anymore does not mean that the Kingdom’s subjects on earth will become insensitive to all pain. (Rev. 21:4) Ability to feel physical pain can be beneficial. But mental, emotional and severe physical pain resulting from sin and imperfection will ‘be no more’ in the sense that the causes thereof will be eliminated.​—4/15 p. 5.
● For Christians, what is a principal way of showing love for God and neighbor?
Preaching the “good news” is a major way to show that we love God with our whole heart, soul, strength and mind. (Luke 10:27) Also, teaching fellow humans the “good news” is one of the greatest expressions of love for them because this aids them to attain a good standing with Jehovah.​—4/15 p. 28.
● How does a person gain by being a dedicated, baptized disciple of Jesus Christ?
Such an individual has the satisfaction of knowing that he is doing what is approved by Jehovah God and Jesus Christ. As a Christian, he also gains brothers, sisters, mothers and children in a spiritual sense.​—5/1 p. 14.
● What is Babylon the Great, and why heed the call to “get out of her”?
Babylon the Great is the world empire of false religion, and getting out of her is the only way of avoiding destruction with her at the coming “great tribulation.” (Matt. 24:21; Rev. 18:4) ‘Getting out’ is urgent as it will be impossible to get out of Babylon the Great after her former political lovers turn upon her. (Rev. 17:15-18)​—5/15 pp. 17, 18.
● Why can we, as Jehovah’s people, expect him to listen to our prayers?
He is the “Hearer of prayer” and commands us to pray. (Ps. 65:2; Rom. 12:12) Also, we can confidently approach Jehovah in prayer because his name is involved, he knows our limitations and wants to help us, and he will hear our prayers on the basis of our being integrity-keepers.​—6/1 pp. 17, 18.
● In the Christian congregation, is it possible for there to be an environment that is not conducive to proper Christian growth?
Yes, there may be an environment or association that is not most helpful spiritually. For example, some who recently symbolized their dedication to God may tend to bring a measure of worldliness into the congregation. So we should exercise care in our associations because, like soil, the environment in which the seeds of our personal traits are buried and nourished can make us a poor variety of what was intended when we began sowing as Christians.​—6/15 pp. 19, 20.
● Will the new covenant come to an end?
Yes, the new covenant mediated by Christ Jesus will end when it fulfills its purpose of producing 144,000 spiritual sons of God. This will be when all such anointed ones are resurrected to immortal heavenly life. However, people living on earth will benefit from the new covenant everlastingly. This is because the 144,000 will then share with Christ in his millennial kingdom over the earth and in administering his ransom sacrifice, as mankind is restored to perfection with eternal life in view.​—7/1 p. 31.
● Who are the “other sheep” of John 10:16?
Since it is stated that the “other sheep” do not belong to “this fold,” they are not spiritual Israelites, heirs of the Abrahamic promise with heavenly prospects. Rather, they are an earthly class, and will be made up ultimately of all those who attain to everlasting life on earth, and for whom the “fine shepherd,” Jesus Christ also surrendered his soul. (John 10:14)​—7/15 pp. 26-28.
● As Christians, what should we do if disturbing doubts start troubling us?
We should examine our motives to see if our doubts are genuine or indicate such things as a lack of endurance or of faith in God’s power to forgive. Also, we should keep a positive attitude and remember all that Jehovah God has done for us through Jesus Christ as well as all we have learned about God’s purposes and promises through the spiritual food provided by means of the “faithful and discreet slave.” (Matt. 24:45-47)​—8/1 pp. 14, 15.

