
CHAPTER 11
Arrangements for Places of Worship




TRUE worshippers of Jehovah are commanded to assemble together to receive instruction and to encourage one another. (Heb. 10:23-25) The first place of worship for God’s chosen people, the Israelites, was “the tabernacle, the tent of meeting.” (Ex. 39:32, 40) Later, David’s son Solomon built a house, or temple, for God’s glory. (1 Ki. 9:3) After that temple was destroyed in 607 B.C.E., the Jews arranged to meet in buildings called synagogues to worship God. In time, the temple was rebuilt, and once again it served as a center of true worship. Jesus taught both in synagogues and in the temple. (Luke 4:16; John 18:20) Jesus even held a meeting on a mountain.​—Matt. 5:1–7:29.
2 After Jesus’ death, Christians assembled in public places and in private homes to teach the Scriptures and to enjoy association with fellow believers. (Acts 19:8, 9; Rom. 16:3, 5; Col. 4:15; Philem. 2) Sometimes it was necessary for the early Christians to meet in isolated places to avoid detection by persecutors. Indeed, faithful servants of God in the past had a sincere desire to assemble in places of worship in order to be “taught by Jehovah.”​—Isa. 54:13.
3 Today, too, public places and private homes are used for Christian meetings. Private homes often serve as places to meet for field service. Those who offer their home for such gatherings view this as a privilege. Many feel that they have benefited spiritually by opening their home in this way.



KINGDOM HALL

4 The principal meeting place of Jehovah’s Witnesses is the Kingdom Hall. Generally, property is purchased, and a new Kingdom Hall is constructed or an existing building is renovated. In order to save on costs and optimize the use of our facilities, several congregations may be able to share the use of a Kingdom Hall when practical. In some localities, it is necessary to rent a hall. For new Kingdom Halls and those that have had major renovations, it is appropriate to have a dedication program. However, if only minor renovations are made to an existing Kingdom Hall, there is no need to have a dedication program.
5 The Kingdom Hall should not be an elaborate building made to impress others. While the design may vary from place to place, the purpose is always functional. (Acts 17:24) In accord with local circumstances, it should be a comfortable and convenient place for holding Christian meetings.
6 All congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses contribute toward the use, operation, and maintenance of the Kingdom Hall to which they are assigned. No collections are taken; nor are funds solicited. A contribution box is provided so that those attending meetings may contribute for necessary expenses in connection with the use of the hall. They do so willingly and from the heart.​—2 Cor. 9:7.
7 All in the congregation consider it a privilege to support the Kingdom Hall financially and to volunteer their services in keeping it clean and well-maintained. An elder or a ministerial servant is usually assigned to schedule this work. Generally, cleaning is handled by field service groups, with the group overseer or his assistant taking the lead. Both inside and out, the Kingdom Hall should properly represent Jehovah and his organization.
All in the congregation consider it a privilege to support the Kingdom Hall financially and to volunteer their services in keeping it clean and well-maintained


8 Where more than one congregation meets in a hall, the elders of the congregations involved set up a Kingdom Hall Operating Committee, which will coordinate matters involving the building and property. The bodies of elders choose a brother to serve as the operating committee coordinator. Working under the direction of the bodies of elders, the operating committee monitors the hall cleaning, making sure that the hall is well-maintained and that sufficient supplies are on hand. This calls for close cooperation among the congregations involved.
9 When several congregations use one Kingdom Hall, the schedule of meeting times may involve rotation. The elders will work out this schedule in a spirit of mutual concern and brotherly love. (Phil. 2:2-4; 1 Pet. 3:8) No one congregation would take it upon itself to make decisions on behalf of the other congregations. When the circuit overseer visits one of the congregations using the Kingdom Hall, the other congregations will adjust their meeting times as needed for that week.
10 The Kingdom Hall may be used for weddings and funerals with the permission of the Congregation Service Committee. These elders carefully consider what is requested and base their decision on direction provided by the branch office.
11 Those who are granted use of the Kingdom Hall for such purposes are expected to conduct themselves in a way that befits genuine Christians. Nothing should be done at the Kingdom Hall that would offend the congregation or bring reproach on Jehovah and the good name of the congregation. (Phil. 2:14, 15) Under the direction of the branch office, the Kingdom Hall may be used for other spiritual functions, such as the Kingdom Ministry School and the Pioneer Service School.
12 The congregation will always treat its meeting place with respect. Dress, grooming, and decorum should reflect the dignity associated with the worship of Jehovah. (Eccl. 5:1; 1 Tim. 2:9, 10) By applying counsel in this regard, we show appreciation for our Christian meetings.
13 Maintaining order during meetings is important. It is recommended that children sit with their parents. Parents with young children can be encouraged to sit where they will cause the least disturbance if it becomes necessary to take the children out to discipline them or to care for other needs.
14 Qualified brothers are assigned to serve as attendants at meetings in the Kingdom Hall. They should be alert and friendly and use good judgment. Their responsibilities include greeting newcomers and making them feel welcome, helping latecomers to find seats, recording attendance figures, and giving necessary attention to proper heating and ventilation of the hall. Where necessary, attendants will remind parents to give proper supervision so that children will not run around before and after the meetings or play on the platform. In a kind and tactful way, an attendant might ask the parent of an unruly child to take the child out so that the audience will not be overly distracted. The work of the attendants contributes much to everyone’s enjoyment of the meetings. It is preferable that elders and ministerial servants be used as attendants.



KINGDOM HALL CONSTRUCTION

15 In the first century, some Christians were better off materially than were others, so the apostle Paul wrote: “By means of an equalizing, your surplus at the present time might offset their need, so that their surplus might also offset your deficiency, that there may be an equalizing.” (2 Cor. 8:14) Today, a similar “equalizing” takes place. Funds contributed by congregations worldwide are pooled to provide financial assistance to build and renovate Kingdom Halls. The generous support of the worldwide brotherhood is greatly appreciated by the organization and by the congregations that benefit from these contributions.
16 Based on a region-wide plan, the branch office assigns congregations to specific Kingdom Halls. The branch office also determines when and where to construct new Kingdom Halls and renovate existing halls in the branch territory. When disasters occur, arrangements are made for needed repairs to damaged Kingdom Halls and, on occasion, to the homes of the brothers.
17 The branch office coordinates the use of volunteers to help with property acquisition, Kingdom Hall design, building permits, construction, and maintenance. Because of the great need for Kingdom Halls in most lands, many volunteers are needed. All baptized publishers who qualify and desire to help are encouraged to complete an application and give it to their local Congregation Service Committee. Even unbaptized publishers may assist with the building or renovating of their own Kingdom Hall.



ASSEMBLY HALLS

18 Early Christians generally met in small groups. However, sometimes “quite a crowd” assembled. (Acts 11:26) Similarly, Jehovah’s people today meet in large gatherings for circuit assemblies and regional conventions. Local facilities are often rented for this purpose, but where such are not suitable or available, a place of worship called an Assembly Hall may be acquired.
19 At times, a building is purchased, renovated, and used as an Assembly Hall. More often, though, property is obtained and a new hall is built. Assembly Halls vary in size, depending on local needs. The branch office makes the decision to purchase or construct such a building only after the cost has been carefully analyzed and the amount of use determined.
20 The branch office appoints brothers to care for the operation and maintenance of the Assembly Hall. Arrangements are made for the circuits to do the regular cleaning, the semiannual cleaning, and the preventive maintenance. It is beneficial for the brothers to volunteer to do this work. Therefore, congregations are encouraged to support these arrangements wholeheartedly.​—Ps. 110:3; Mal. 1:10.
21 At times, the Assembly Hall may also be used for other theocratic functions, such as Bible schools and special meetings for circuit overseers. Like the Kingdom Hall, an Assembly Hall is a dedicated place of worship. When we are meeting at an Assembly Hall, our conduct, dress, and grooming should be dignified, just as when we are meeting at the Kingdom Hall for worship.
22 Many new ones are hastening to be part of God’s organization during the final part of these last days. This is evidence of Jehovah’s blessing. (Isa. 60:8, 10, 11, 22) Thus, we want to support the arrangements to obtain and maintain clean and comfortable places of worship. In doing so, we show our appreciation for the role that such facilities play in helping us to encourage one another all the more so as we see Jehovah’s day drawing near.




