
CHAPTER 15
Benefiting From Theocratic Subjection




BEING in subjection to God, the Universal Sovereign, is essential if we are to be organized to do Jehovah’s will. We recognize his Son’s headship over the Christian congregation and also observe the headship principle in other areas of life. Such theocratic subjection benefits everyone concerned.
2 The idea of subjection to constituted authority was introduced to mankind in the garden of Eden. It is embodied in God’s commands found at Genesis 1:28 and 2:16, 17. Lower creatures were to be in subjection to humans, and Adam and Eve were to submit to God’s will and authority. Obedience to this divine authority would result in peace and good order. The headship principle is later highlighted at 1 Corinthians 11:3. The apostle Paul wrote: “I want you to know that the head of every man is the Christ; in turn, the head of a woman is the man; in turn, the head of the Christ is God.” This indicates that in this overall arrangement, everyone except Jehovah is subject to headship.
3 Most people today do not recognize or observe the headship principle. Why? The trouble started in Eden when mankind’s parents deliberately chose to take themselves out from under God’s sovereign headship. (Gen. 3:4, 5) However, they did not obtain greater freedom. Instead, they became subject to a wicked spirit creature, Satan the Devil. The first rebellion alienated mankind from God. (Col. 1:21) As a result, the majority of mankind today remain in the power of the wicked one.​—1 John 5:19.
4 By learning the truth of God’s Word and acting on it, we have come out from under Satan’s influence. As dedicated, baptized Witnesses, we accept Jehovah as the Sovereign of our life. We agree with King David, who acknowledged Jehovah as “head over all.” (1 Chron. 29:11) Yes, we humbly confess: “Know that Jehovah is God. He is the one who made us, and we belong to him. We are his people and the sheep of his pasture.” (Ps. 100:3) We recognize that Jehovah is great and is worthy of our total submission, since he created all things. (Rev. 4:11) As ministers of the true God, we follow Jesus Christ, who set the perfect example of subjection to God.
5 What did Jesus learn from the things he suffered while on earth? Hebrews 5:8 answers: “Although he was a son, he learned obedience from the things he suffered.” Yes, Jesus remained in loyal subjection to his heavenly Father, even when facing adversity. Furthermore, Jesus did not do a single thing of his own initiative. He did not speak of his own originality; nor did he seek his own glory. (John 5:19, 30; 6:38; 7:16-18) During his ministry, he found delight in doing his Father’s will, even though this course brought him opposition and persecution. (John 15:20) Nonetheless, Jesus showed subjection to God. Jesus “humbled himself” even to the point of “death on a torture stake.” The outcome of his complete subjection to Jehovah was rewarding in many ways, resulting in everlasting salvation for mankind, exaltation for himself, and glory to his Father.​—Phil. 2:5-11; Heb. 5:9.



AREAS OF THEOCRATIC SUBJECTION

6 When we subject ourselves to God by doing his will, we escape many of the anxieties and frustrations that overtake those who refuse to submit to Jehovah’s sovereignty. Our adversary, the Devil, constantly seeks to devour us. We will experience deliverance from that wicked one if we take a stand against him and humble ourselves before Jehovah in willing subjection.​—Matt. 6:10, 13; 1 Pet. 5:6-9.
7 Within the Christian congregation, we recognize Christ’s headship and the authority he has given to “the faithful and discreet slave.” This affects our attitude and conduct toward one another. Godly subjection in the congregation will move us to be obedient to God’s Word in all aspects of our worship. This obedience involves our ministry, our meeting attendance and participation, our relationship with the elders, and our cooperation with organizational arrangements.​—Matt. 24:45-47; 28:19, 20; Heb. 10:24, 25; 13:7, 17.
8 Our subjection to God contributes to the peace, security, and good order of the Christian congregation. Jehovah’s qualities are reflected in his godly subjects. (1 Cor. 14:33, 40) Our own experiences with Jehovah’s organization have led us to express sentiments similar to those of King David. After noting the contrast between Jehovah’s servants and the wicked, David joyfully exclaimed: “Happy is the people whose God is Jehovah!”​—Ps. 144:15.
9 Within the marriage arrangement and the family structure, “the head of a woman is the man.” At the same time, men are to be in subjection to Christ, while the head of Christ is God. (1 Cor. 11:3) Wives are to be in subjection to their husbands, and children to their parents. (Eph. 5:22-24; 6:1) Peace results when each family member follows the headship principle.
10 A husband is to exercise headship in a loving way, imitating Christ. (Eph. 5:25-29) When he does not abuse or abdicate his headship, his wife and children are delighted to be in subjection to him. The wife’s role is that of a helper, or complement. (Gen. 2:18) By patiently supporting and respecting her husband, she gains his favor and brings praise to God. (1 Pet. 3:1-4) When husbands and wives follow the Bible’s counsel on headship, they set an example for their children in showing subjection to God.
Theocratic subjection affects all aspects of life


11 Our being in subjection to God also affects how we view “the superior authorities,” which “stand placed in their relative positions by God.” (Rom. 13:1-7) As law-abiding citizens, Christians pay taxes, paying back “Caesar’s things to Caesar, but God’s things to God.” (Matt. 22:21) Additionally, arrangements for covering territory comply with applicable data protection laws. Being submissive and obedient to the duly constituted authorities in everything that is not in conflict with Jehovah’s righteous law, we are able to direct our efforts and energies to the preaching work.​—Mark 13:10; Acts 5:29.
12 Theocratic subjection affects all aspects of life. With eyes of faith, we see the day when all mankind will be subject to Jehovah God. (1 Cor. 15:27, 28) How blessed and favored will be those who joyfully acknowledge Jehovah’s sovereignty and remain in subjection to him for all eternity!




