
CHAPTER 1
Organized to Do Jehovah’s Will




THROUGHOUT the world, there are numerous religious, political, commercial, and social organizations with varying characteristics, objectives, viewpoints, and philosophies. But one organization is noticeably different from all the rest. God’s Word clearly identifies that organization as Jehovah’s Witnesses.
2 Happily, you have become associated with Jehovah’s organization. Having proved to yourself what God’s will is, you are now doing it. (Ps. 143:10; Rom. 12:2) You are an active minister serving with a loving, worldwide association of brothers. (2 Cor. 6:4; 1 Pet. 2:17; 5:9) As promised in God’s Word, this brings you rich blessings and much happiness. (Prov. 10:22; Mark 10:30) By faithfully doing Jehovah’s will now, you are being prepared for a lasting, glorious future.​—1 Tim. 6:18, 19; 1 John 2:17.
3 Our Grand Creator has a unique worldwide organization that is ruled theocratically. This means that it is ruled by Jehovah, who is Head over all. We have complete confidence in him. He is our Judge, our Lawgiver, and our King. (Isa. 33:22) Being a God of order, he has coordinated arrangements for our “working together with him” in serving the divine purpose.​—2 Cor. 6:1, 2.
4 As the end of the present system of things draws ever nearer, we move ahead under the leadership of the appointed King, Christ Jesus. (Isa. 55:4; Rev. 6:2; 11:15) It was none other than Jesus who foretold that his followers would do works greater than those he accomplished during his earthly ministry. (John 14:12) That would be true because over a longer period of time and in increasing numbers, Jesus’ followers would cover a widening territory. They would proclaim the Kingdom good news to the ends of the earth.​—Matt. 24:14; 28:19, 20; Acts 1:8.
5 This has already proved to be a reality. However, as Jesus clearly stated, the activity of declaring the good news will end at Jehovah’s appointed time. All indications in God’s prophetic Word are that Jehovah’s great and awe-inspiring day has drawn close.​—Joel 2:31; Zeph. 1:14-18; 2:2, 3; 1 Pet. 4:7.
We need to intensify our efforts in doing what God requires. This calls for us to become well-acquainted with the way God’s organization functions


6 As we perceive what the will of Jehovah is at this late hour, we need to intensify our efforts in doing what God requires. This calls for us to become well-acquainted with the way God’s organization functions and to cooperate fully with it. The operation of the organization is based on Scriptural principles, including the commandments, laws, orders, regulations, and teachings set out in God’s inspired Word.​—Ps. 19:7-9.
7 When Jehovah’s people adhere to such Bible-based direction, they dwell and work together in peace and unity. (Ps. 133:1; Isa. 60:17; Rom. 14:19) What strengthens bonds among our brothers everywhere? Love. We are motivated by and clothed with love. (John 13:34, 35; Col. 3:14) In this divinely favored way, we keep pace with the heavenly part of Jehovah’s organization.



THE HEAVENLY PART OF JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION

8 The prophets Isaiah, Ezekiel, and Daniel saw visions of the heavenly part of Jehovah’s organization. (Isa., chap. 6; Ezek., chap. 1; Dan. 7:9, 10) Likewise, the apostle John had a vision of this heavenly arrangement and provided us a glimpse of it in the book of Revelation. He saw Jehovah on a glorious throne accompanied by angelic creatures, who proclaim: “Holy, holy, holy is Jehovah God, the Almighty, who was and who is and who is coming.” (Rev. 4:8) John also saw “standing in the midst of the throne . . . a lamb,” the Lamb of God, Jesus Christ.​—Rev. 5:6, 13, 14; John 1:29.
9 This vision of Jehovah sitting on a throne indicates that he is the Head of this organization. Regarding him and his superior position, 1 Chronicles 29:11, 12 states: “Yours, O Jehovah, are the greatness and the mightiness and the beauty and the splendor and the majesty, for everything in the heavens and on the earth is yours. Yours is the kingdom, O Jehovah. You are the One exalting yourself as head over all. The riches and the glory are from you, and you rule over everything, and in your hand there are power and mightiness, and your hand is able to make great and to give strength to all.”
10 As Jehovah’s fellow worker, Jesus Christ occupies an elevated position in the heavens, and much authority has been given to him. Indeed, God “subjected all things under his feet and made him head over all things with regard to the congregation.” (Eph. 1:22) The apostle Paul said of Jesus: “God exalted him to a superior position and kindly gave him the name that is above every other name, so that in the name of Jesus every knee should bend​—of those in heaven and those on earth and those under the ground—​and every tongue should openly acknowledge that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God the Father.” (Phil. 2:9-11) Thus, we can have full confidence in the righteous leadership of Jesus Christ.
11 The prophet Daniel saw in vision the Ancient of Days on His heavenly throne and angels numbering “a thousand thousands [who] kept ministering to him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him.” (Dan. 7:10) The Bible refers to this army of angels as “spirits for holy service, sent out to minister for those who are going to inherit salvation.” (Heb. 1:14) All these spirit creatures are organized into ‘thrones, lordships, governments, and authorities.’​—Col. 1:16.
12 When we take time to contemplate these features of the heavenly part of Jehovah’s organization, we can understand Isaiah’s reaction to the vision in which he “saw Jehovah sitting on a lofty and elevated throne,” and “seraphs were standing above him.” Isaiah stated: “Woe to me! I am as good as dead, for I am a man of unclean lips, and I live among a people of unclean lips; for my eyes have seen the King, Jehovah of armies himself!” Indeed, Isaiah was awestruck and humbled when he grasped the scope of Jehovah’s organization. He was so deeply affected by this experience that when a call went out from heaven regarding a special work of proclaiming Jehovah’s judgments, Isaiah’s reaction was: “Here I am! Send me!”​—Isa. 6:1-5, 8.
13 Recognizing and appreciating Jehovah’s organization motivates His people in a similar way. As the organization moves forward, we endeavor to keep up with it. We strive to demonstrate our confidence in Jehovah’s organization today.



JEHOVAH’S ORGANIZATION ON THE MOVE

14 In chapter 1 of Ezekiel’s prophecy, Jehovah is pictured as riding on a colossal heavenly chariot. This resplendent vehicle represents the invisible part of Jehovah’s organization. He rides this chariot in the sense of benevolently directing it and using it according to his purpose.​—Ps. 103:20.
15 Each wheel of this chariot has a wheel inside it​—one of the same diameter that fits crosswise into the base wheel. Only in this way can the wheels be said to “go in any of the four directions.” (Ezek. 1:17) The wheels can instantly change course. However, this chariot is not without control or intelligent supervision. Jehovah does not let his organization go in just any direction that it might be inclined to go. Ezekiel 1:20 says: “They would go where the spirit inclined them to go.” Thus, it is Jehovah who causes his organization to move to wherever his spirit impels it to move. The question we must ask ourselves is, ‘Am I in step with it?’
16 Keeping pace with Jehovah’s organization involves more than just attending meetings and participating in the field ministry. Primarily, our keeping pace has to do with progress and spiritual growth. We “make sure of the more important things” and stay up-to-date with the spiritual feeding program. (Phil. 1:10; 4:8, 9; John 17:3) We must remember, too, that where there is organization, there is good coordination and cooperation. So we must see the importance of making the best use of the spiritual and material assets that Jehovah has entrusted to us in order to accomplish his work. As we keep pace with Jehovah’s heavenly chariot, our lives are consistent with the message we proclaim.
17 With the help of Jehovah’s organization, we are moving forward in doing God’s will. Remember that the Rider of this heavenly chariot is Jehovah. Therefore, keeping pace with his chariot shows that we have respect for Jehovah and confidence in our Rock. (Ps. 18:31) The Bible promises: “Jehovah will give strength to his people. Jehovah will bless his people with peace.” (Ps. 29:11) Being a part of Jehovah’s organization today, we share in the strength that he gives and enjoy the peace with which he blesses his organized people. Yes, there is no question about it, rich blessings will continue to be ours as we do Jehovah’s will now and forever.




