VOL. XXIII. SEPTEMBER 1, 1902. No. 17. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 259 

Dr. Henson and The Fall 259 

A Lonely Voice of Protest 

Against Evolution 262 

Zionists Fail to Obtain From the 
Sultan the Kind of Concessions 

in Palestine They Desire 262 

Touched With the Feeling 

of Our Infirmities 262 

Striving Lawfully 264 

The Claims of Love and Justice 265 

Poem— "That I May Know Him" 266 

A Prophet Like Moses 267 

Love of God in Mouth and Heart 269 

page 258 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



MISSIONARY ENVELOPES. 

Every letter you send through the mail may be a more 
or less potent messenger of the truth, even on its outside, 
by the use of these envelopes. They catch the attention 
not only of those to whom they are addressed, but postmen 



and others have an opportunity, and often the curiosity, to 
read their message of peace; the gospel in a condensed 
form. Price 25c per hundred post paid. 



WE ARE HOLDING some of the new Bibles for a time, for 
some of those who hope to find it more convenient to send the 
money later. We still have some of both styles of binding ($2 
and $3), and those desiring may order. 



"TABERNACLE SHADOWS OF BETTER SACRIFICES" is out of 

stock temporarily (both English and German), but we 
hope to have plenty very soon. 



WALL CHARTS are again out of stock. Orders must wait 
until painters' slack season— about November. 



PAPER CHARTS 36 in. long with hangers, metal bound, 
showing chart of the ages and prophetic outlines, prepaid 25c 
each. 

We are preparing a smaller edition of this chart on very 
tough paper, suitable for inserting in the new Bibles. They 
will be very convenient for reference. Price postpaid 10c. 



R3065 : page 259 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
DR. HENSON AND THE FALL. 



HAVING BEEN obliged in the past to criticize 

the teachings of the celebrated Baptist 

preacher, P. S. Henson, in respect to the 

eternal torment of the large proportion of our race 

being the divine program, we are the more pleased 

now to be able to quote with approval his public utterances 

respecting original sin— the Fall of man— 

from the image and likeness of his Creator. He says: 

"The Bible does not declare how old are the heavens 
and the earth, but only that in the 'beginning,' whenever 
that was, the Lord created them. How long were the 
creative processes we are not informed, for the word 
translated, 'day' in Genesis is often employed in the Bible 
to denote great tracts of time. 

"As to the method of creation the Scriptures make no 



explicit statement, though an evolutionist might imagine 
that he found some shadow of support for his theory when 
he reads that the Lord said: 'Let the waters bring forth 
such creatures as live in the water, and let the earth bring 
forth such creatures as live on the land.' As to man, indeed, 
a different formula entirely is used, for God said: 
Let us make man in our image after our likeness.' 

THE FIRST MAN. 

"But whether He made man by direct creative act 
or by the slow evolutionary processes of the ages, the great 
fact remains that He made him, and this is all that the 
Bible directly declares. But whenever made and however 
made there must have been a first man, and as he had a 
name, or ought to have had, at least, for the purposes of 
history, there would seem to be no valid objection, save 
that which arises from the 'odium theologicum' to the traditionary 
name of Adam.' So far, then, there would seem 
to be no reasons for controversy between the foremost scientist 
and the most literal Scripturalist. 

"The great battle ground is rather to be found in the 
third chapter of Genesis, which gives an account of that 
tremendous transaction which by common consent through 
all the ages has been denominated 'the fall of man.' And 
never was there a more widely prevalent disposition than 
there is to-day to discredit the whole Scripture narrative 
and to brand it as preposterous and absurd. And many 
timid souls have been so overawed by the toploftiness of 
the modern critics that they scarcely dare affirm their belief 
in the substantial verity of the Bible story. 

FACTS FOR DOUBTERS. 

"Now, for the confirmation and the consolation of such 
quaking Elis there are a few things it may be helpful to 
remember. The opening and the closing scenes of man's 
'strange, eventful history' as portrayed in the Bible are 
each laid in a garden— the one in Eden and the other in 
Paradise. Whether the trees and rivers described in both 
stand for literal trees and rivers, such as we are accustomed 
to, does not concern our present purpose. But 
they stand for something, and no doubt the real fact will 
at last be found to be far beyond the figure. 

ARGUMENT PROVING FALL. 

"Now, whatever may be said of the figurative character 
of the language of Genesis, some things loom up as 
indubitably true unless the whole story be discredited as 
a tissue of lies. 

"One is that man's original state was a state of innocence. 
Of course it was if he came fresh from the hand 
of God by direct creative act. And the like might be affirmed 
if the life he wore was the last result of evolution 
from the brute creation. No brute is a sinner, for he always 



acts up to the nature that is in him, but man is a 

sinner, and therefore some time, somehow he must have 

fallen, for now he consciously lives below his proper level. 

His very nature is depraved in its propensities, and therefore 

now 'when he would do good evil is present with 

him.' 

"We excuse the sinner of to-day on the ground of bad 
heredity; but how came he by the bad heredity? We only 
dodge the difficulty by removing it farther back. And yet 
we cannot help asking whence flows the filthy stream that 
befouls all human history? The Scriptures locate the 
fountain. Has philosophy been able to do any better? 

R3065 : page 260 

INTERDICT AGAINST EVIL. 

"The second indubitable thing is that God laid upon 
man an interdict. What a pity and a shame, cries the 
horrified critic, that God should set a snare by which to 
entrap the unsuspecting creature of His hand! 

"And yet if man were to be a subject and not a sovereign 
it must some day and in some way be determined 
whose will was to be law upon this planet. If that matter 
once for all were to be tested, can any complainant 
conceive of a test more wise, more considerate, more conclusive 
than the one that was adopted? But what an outrage 
to interdict knowledge! and the devil has rung the 
changes on that outrage all down the ages. But he lies 
about this, as is his wont about everything else. It was 
not the tree of knowledge about which God drew a cordon, 
but the tree of the knowledge of good and evil— such 
knowledge of good and evil as comes from experience in 
evil doing. And the very words employed suggest their 
symbolic significance. 

MAN'S NATURE POLLUTED. 

"The third great fact that looms up darkly is that man 
transgressed the interdict and went beyond the bounds 
that God in wisdom and in love, and from the very necessities 
of being, had appointed, and so laid himself liable 
to the penalty which the Sovereign of the universe must 
needs attach to violated law. Not only so, but in the act 
of transgression he did violence to his own nature as well 
as to the law of God, and so became crippled and depraved. 
That nature he transmitted to his posterity; for 
the Word reads that 'he begat a son in his own likeness.' 
God never made a thing like Cain. Humanity in its totality 
was in Adam, and therefore in a very true sense what 
was done by Adam was done by us all, for the nature that 
was in Adam is in us all. It is not then without reason 
that we speak of the 'old man' in us, for it comes down to 
us from the very fountain head of humanity, and if the 
fountain head be foul nothing but the salt of the grace of 
God can purify the stream that flows from it. 



THE BIBLICAL REMEDY. 

"However much the language may be abused, there 
is such a thing as 'the solidarity of society' and the 'unity 
of race.' It is true that 'God hath made of one blood all 
nations to dwell on the face of the earth,' and hence if 
one member suffer all the members suffer with it, and being 
partakers of a common nature and all its heritage of 
pain and penalty, up from the depth of the sin and sorrow 
into which the first Adam has plunged us, we need to look 
to the Second Adam through whose atoning death we have 
redemption from the curse of sin, and through identification 
with whose risen life we are made partakers of the 
divine nature and are reinstated in the relationship of sonship 
to God. 

"Such we believe to be substantially the Scripture doctrine 
of the fall of man through Adam and the restoration 
of man through Jesus Christ." 

"THE WAY OF THE LORD MORE PERFECTLY." 

The foregoing is good— Scriptural and logical; 
but Brother Henson should carry the question farther 
on the same Scriptural and logical plane if he 
would have the whole truth. For instance: 

WAS THE REAL PENALTY NOT STATED IN THE 
SENTENCE? 

(1) Where does the Doctor get his theory of 
eternal torment? Answer. Undoubtedly from this doctrine 
of the Fall where all other "orthodox" people 
claim to find it. The claim is that our Creator not 
only meant all that he said in his threat to our first 
parents, and in the curse or sentence following it, 
but unutterably and infernally more: that 
when he said, "Dying thou shalt die," and, 
"Dust thou art and unto dust shalt thou 
return," he meant not only all the degradation 
and pain and anguish and dying of 
the past 6,000 years, referred to above by Dr. Henson, 
but included also an eternity of anguish beyond 
this mentioned dying— for the disobedient pair and for 
all their unfortunate offspring who would not be 
so blessed as to escape it by being of the "elect,"— 
brought to a knowledge of the Lord, assisted to faith 
and obedience and sanctification of spirit, and to correct 
views of baptism and obedience thereto. 

Where in the Scripture will the Doctor find for us 
this diabolical plan set forth as the divine plan 
of the ages which our Heavenly Father purposed in 
himself before the world was? Nowhere! Where 
will he find logic or reason to support such a 
theory? Nowhere! 

Logic and all the facts known to men corroborate 



the Scripture teachings that God declared the whole 
truth in the death sentence promulgated against our 
first parents when they sinned, and inherited by their 
posterity in a natural way. This sentence includes 
mental, moral and physical degeneracy, as Brother 

R3066 : page 260 

Henson in the foregoing statement admits; and both 
logic and Scripture declare that death, the total absence 
of life, is the climax of this course of degeneracy. 
"The soul that sinneth it shall die." (Ezek. 18:4,20.) 
"The wages of sin is death." (Rom. 6:23.) 
Eternal life is a gift of God through Jesus Christ 
our Lord, to be given only to the believing and obedient. 
He that hath the Son hath life; he that hath 
not the Son of God hath not life." I Jno. 5:12. 

(2) Brother Henson also lacks the appreciation of 
"The Biblical Remedy" as he states it. 

He perceives the solidarity of the race in the 
first Adam,— in the prevalence of his condemnation 
upon all his posterity. Why can he not see the 
solidarity of the race in respect to the sacrifice of 
Christ, that he "by the grace of God tasted death for 
every man." (Heb. 2:9.) Why can he not see that 
divine provision of a remedy for sinners is co-extensive 
with the blight of sin? Why does he fail to 
give weight to the clear Scriptural declaration that— 
Christ's sacrifice is "a propitiation [satisfaction] for 
our sins [the church's sins] and not for ours only, but 
also for the sins of the whole world"? (I Jno. 2:2.) 
If under the gloomy shadowings of creeds and theories 
formulated in "dark ages" or in the haze just 
following them, the Doctor has been in the habit of 
applying all these texts which so clearly specify "the 
whole world" to merely the elect church, it is surely 
time to see the error and to note the fact that our 
Heavenly Father's plan centered in Christ Jesus our 
Lord, is so high and so deep, so long and so broad, 
as to provide not only the special heavenly salvation 
of the elect church of this age, to "the divine nature," 
but also to provide through this elect church, the 
spiritual seed of Abraham, a general salvation,— 

R3066 : page 261 

which, beginning with fleshly Israel, shall extend 
through the Millennial age to "all the families of the 
earth"— as God's promise reads.— Rom. 11:25-32; 
Gal. 3:29. 

In this time when Evolutionism and Higher 
Criticism are making void the Word of God we are 
trusting that the true believers who hold fast to the 
Word may get still more widely opened "the eyes of 
their understanding," that they and we may be thus 
enabled to see "eye to eye," by being enabled to comprehend 



with all saints the true dimensions of our 
gracious Father's wonderful plans. (Eph. 3:18.) We 
are trusting in the same Savior and in the same 
Father; but by their grace our eyes have been opened 
a little wider, a little sooner than those of some 
of our brethren whom we sincerely love and long to 
assist out of darkness into the wonderful light of the 
Millennial dawn, now streaming in upon all who are 
awake and looking in the right direction to see the 
glorious Sunrise of the new dispensation— now being 
ushered in by our Lord's parousia. 

THE RESULTS OF WORLD -REDEMPTION. 

(3) As degradation even unto death was the penalty 
of sin, so God's provision is that restitution even 
unto life is the remedy. As the penalty was world-wide 
through Adam, so the remedy is to be world-wide 
through Christ;— an opportunity for reconciliation 
to God has been secured for every member of 
Adam's race by the sacrifice of Christ, who did not 
go to eternal torment for our sins, because eternal 
torment was not the penalty for sin; but who did pay 
the full penalty against Adam (and incidentally 
against his race) in that "he died for our sins" he "died 
the just for the unjust."-I Cor. 15:3; I Pet. 3:18. 

"BELIEVE ON THE LORD JESUS CHRIST AND THOU 
SHALT BE SAVED." 

We agree to this: we are not arguing for a glorification 
of sinners: we are prepared to go with the 
Scriptures farther along this line than Dr. Henson 
may be willing to follow. We hold that the 
above quoted words of the Apostle (Acts 16:31) are 
meant to teach not only that none but believers in 
Christ can be saved, but that, beyond believing, full 
consecration to the Lord is necessary to eternal salvation 
—eternal life. Dare the Doctor go so far and 
interpret this Scripture at its face value, realizing as 
he does so that it would cut off from salvation the 
vast majority of Baptists and of all other denominations 
of Christendom and the heathen world almost 
entirely? Dare any do this, having in mind the 
"orthodox view" that all not saved now must spend 
eternity with demons and in torture? To their credit 
be it said that they cannot so apply this Scripture. 
To their credit be it noted that they hope there 
is some great blunder somewhere, and that it will 
not come true as it seems to them to teach. But their 
great danger is, that the Adversary will prejudice and 
blind them against the only interpretation of God's 
Word which can harmonize the Bible and satisfy 
reason, until they shall have rejected the Bible in toto, 
because viewed from their wrong standpoint its teachings 
must more and more appear unreasonable, 



nonsense. 

"THERE IS NO OTHER NAME GIVEN UNDER HEAVEN 
AND AMONGST MEN WHEREBY WE 
MUST BE SAVED." 

Accepting this declaration as inspired and true, 
wherein is the hope for the world, not one-twentieth 
of whom have ever heard of this only name? We 
answer in the Apostle's language that it is "The hope 
of the resurrection of the dead." Only the saints of 
this Gospel age may hope to have share in the "First 
Resurrection"— to "glory, honor and immortality" 
and to joint heirship with their Lord in the Kingdom; 
but there is hope for almost all others of our race 
in the after-resurrection, which our Lord calls "the 
resurrection by judgment." (John 5:28,29, see Revised 
Version.) That resurrection will be for all the 
"unjust" (unjustified by faith and obedience); it will 
be for all the "evil,"— all who have not been approved 
of God in Christ as "good"— all who have not escaped 
"the condemnation that is on the world." 

That resurrection, open to earth's billions, will 
require a thousand years for its accomplishment— the 
Millennium— and the attainment of it at the close of 
the Millennium will require the development of meekness, 
patience, perseverance, gentleness, brotherly 
kindness, love on the part of all who would receive 
its blessing; all others being hopelessly cut off in the 
Second Death. To participate in this grand resurrection 
privilege will necessitate the awakening of all 
who "sleep in the dust of the earth," or as our Lord 
expressed it, all that are in their graves shall hear his 
mandate and come forth before they can share in the 
privileges of the "resurrection by judgment." The 
expression "by judgment" signifies (harmoniously 
with other Scriptures), that the Millennial age arrangements 
will differ from those of the present and 
past ages, in that while now judgments (rewards and 
punishments) are deferred then they will follow immediately 
each act and word of obedience or disobedience. 
"When the judgments of the Lord are 
abroad in the earth (as they will then be) the inhabitants 
of the world will learn righteousness." And 
the Lord through the Prophet assures us that in that 
blessed day every sinner refusing for one hundred 
years to make progress shall be accounted irreconcilable 
and shall be cut off forever— even though 
as compared with the life privileges of that time he 
would be but an infant at one hundred years of age 
—as in the antediluvian age. Isa. 26:9; 65:20. 

The only exceptions to the privileges of that 
"resurrection by judgments" will be the few who in 
the present life commit the sin unto death— 
"Second Death." These as described by the Apostle 
can be only such as by faith and consecration as 



true Christians, have received the blessings of special 
knowledge and the holy spirit, and then fall away 
either by turning heartily into wilful sin or by rejecting 
the wedding garment of Christ's imputed righteousness. 

We long to assist all the true "brethren" and urge 
any reading this and still finding any obstacles 
to faith and obedience to the "only name" to correspond 
with us. We will take pleasure in lending 
you a helping hand to the Heavenly Kingdom, and 
will gladly loan you the "Bible Keys," through the 

R3066 : page 262 

faithful and prayerful use of which the Bible will 
become to you "a new book"— the best of all books. 

A LONELY VOICE OF PROTEST AGAINST EVOLUTION 
AND HIGHER CRITICISM HERESIES. 



The Chicago Record Herald recently devoted a 
column article to a farewell sermon of Rev. W. T. 
Euster at Wheadon M.E. Church, Evanston, Ind., 
exposing the religious teaching of professors at "Garrett 
Biblical Institute" in that city. Following are 
some extracts. 

"What I say about the results and influence of 'higher 
criticism' here in this field may startle some, but no one 
can adequately realize this without living here for some 
length of time. I have in my ministry here taken every 
occasion to converse and argue with every theological student 
I could get acquainted with. Many of them have 
lived on the same street with me, and many have attended 
on my ministry. I have asked them all sorts of questions. 
I have not found one who would say that he accepted the 
miracles of the Old Testament as declared there: only four 
have I found in all this number who had enough faith in 
the Bible as it is, to stand the test of the discipline; many 
of them I found Unitarian and infidel in belief; not one 
could I find that would say that Jesus Christ knew more or 
as much about the Old Testament as some of these Unitarian 
professors. 

"The saddest thing is the number of bright young men 
and women whose faith is utterly wrecked here each year. 
Many of these young men say they never would have taken 
any interest in destructive criticism of the Bible had it not 
been forced upon them by those who are employed to teach 
the doctrines of the church. 

"It is sad, indeed, when young men come to the place 
where they feel that modern infidel professors know more 
about the Old Testament than did Jesus Christ! I have not 
been able to find one theological student here that would 
contradict this. 

"I am not a pessimist. I believe God will bring order 
out of this confusion, and that many of these preachers who 



go out of here Unitarian and infidel will be honest enough 

R3067 : page 262 

to step out of the Methodist pulpits unless they can get back 
to faith and loyalty to the church which has educated them. 

ZIONISTS FAIL TO OBTAIN FROM THE SULTAN THE KIND 
OF CONCESSIONS IN PALESTINE THEY DESIRE. 



Vienna, Aug. 7.— Dr. Theodore Herzl, founder of the 
Zionist movement and head of the Palestine association 
and Dr. Wolffson, president of the Jewish colonial trust, 
have returned here from Constantinople. They report that 
their conference with representatives of the sultan with 
reference to the proposed settlement of Zionists in Palestine 
has been without result. 

In reply to Dr. Herzl's written statements on the subject 
the sultan expressed sympathy with the Jews in their 
purposes and named certain concessions which he would 
grant. These, however, did not meet the requirements of 
the Zionists. 

Dr. Herzl says he still has hopes of being able to convince 
the porte of the beneficial results which would result 
from the settlement of Jews in Palestine. 

This set-back is of course only a temporary one: 
prophecy must eventually be fulfilled. Jews are still 
(since 1892) deprived of permission to settle in the 
Holy Land, and may only visit it by special permit 
for from 30 to 90 days. Ere long it will be different. 



R3067 : page 262 

TOUCHED WITH THE FEELING OF OUR INFIRMITIES. 

"For we have not an high priest which cannot 
be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; 
but one who was in all points tempted like 
as we are yet without sin."— Heb. 4:15. 

WHILE in this our judgment day we find great 
comfort in this blessed assurance, realizing 
as we do our own weaknesses and shortcomings 
and manifold temptations, we call to mind this 
statement now for another purpose; viz., to remind 
the members of the elect Church of God who are to 
constitute the Royal Priesthood of the new dispensation, 
that they, like their Lord and Head, must also 
be touched with the feeling of the world's infirmities, 
else they would be totally unfit for so exalted and responsible 
a position. 
In the Royal Priesthood of that age the world is 



to have the same comfort in its priesthood that we 

in our present infirmities find in Christ. For this 

cause, chiefly, we apprehend that the priesthood is 

chosen from among men— that redeemed men who 

were once in the same plight with all the rest of humanity, 

being thus exalted to the divine nature with 

all its power to bless, might also, from their past experience 

and observations while they were men 

amongst men, be qualified to be very wise and merciful 

priests, knowing well how to deal with the poor 

sin-sick world; and that the world might find comfort 

and consolation in the realization of such sympathy. 

Such being the mission of the Church in the not 
far distant future, all who expect to be of its approved 
membership in glory should now be cultivating a 
broad and generous sympathy for all their fellows of 
the "groaning creation"— a sympathy which considers 
the weaknesses and temptations— mental, moral and 
physical,— of fallen men, and which is ready to forgive 
and to help the repentant erring; a sympathy 
illustrated by the verse— 

"A bending staff I would not break, 
A feeble faith I would not shake; 
Nor even rudely pluck away 
The error which some truth may stay, 
Whose sudden loss might leave without 
A shield against the shafts of doubt." 

It is not enough that we know the truth and rejoice 
in hope of a future personal exaltation: we 
must not forget the very object of that exaltation— the 
blessing of all the families of the earth— and the present 
duty of conformity to the word and example of 
our Lord, that thus by his Word and Providence he 
may fit us for the duties and honors to which he has 
called us. Only by so doing can we make our calling 
and election sure. 

If we turn our eyes to the pattern, we see in our 
Lord Jesus one who was deeply moved at the sight 
of human degradation, moral and physical. So must 

R3067 : page 263 

it be with all his followers. We must be in sympathy 
with every impulse of the world which is toward 
righteousness and reformation of character and life; 
we must rejoice at every movement that is made in 
this direction; and our sympathies should go out toward 
all who are laboring for the common uplifting 
as well as for all the oppressed everywhere. And so we 
trust they do. We sympathize with the temperance 
work and would not have one abandon the ranks of 
its laborers, except to engage in the higher work of 
this harvest time, to which the elect, consecrated sons 
of God are now specially called. And we say, God 



bless every truly philanthropic heart and hand that 
is trying to rescue the unfortunate victims of strong 
drink! We would have all such go on until the Master, 
noting their zeal, where it springs from love to 
him, shall say, "It is enough; come up higher"— to 
the higher work, the harvesting or gathering together 
of his elect from the four winds.— Matt. 24:31. 

We sympathize also with the social purity movement, 
which aims at the emancipation of woman and 
the elevation of man, and which eloquently appeals to 
the conscience of the present generation for the prenatal 
rights of the yet unborn generations of the 
twentieth century— their right to be well born and 
bred— with as little of the taint of hereditary evil as 
the present generation can give. It, however, grapples 
with an evil so deep-seated that little can be 
hoped for from it, except the creating of a more 
healthful sentiment on the part of thoughtful and well 
disposed people, and a greater realization on the part 
of many of the giant proportions and exceeding hatefulness 
of sin. 

We sympathize, too, with the demand of another 
class of reformers for a single standard of virtue for 
men and women alike— that public sentiment should 
be no more lenient toward the sins of men than toward 
the sins of women; and believe that a single 
standard of virtue, which would as completely ostracize 
a guilty man from society as a guilty woman, 
would be a safeguard to many a young man to whom 
the path of vice is made, alas! too easy. 

We sympathize with Law and Order Societies 
in their efforts to enforce laws, although their methods 
are not always the wisest. 

We have much sympathy with the Salvation 
Army in its attempts to rescue the submerged victims 
of the world's selfishness and wickedness. 

We are glad, too, to see the evidences of philanthropy 
and moral reform in some heathen lands, 
though we know how necessarily feeble must be the 
resistance to the mighty waves of corruption against 
which they battle. 

And so with every good work and with every 
noble sentiment our hearts are and should be in accord; 
and we rejoice with them over every victory 
they gain for righteousness and truth, however small, 
although we are not with them on the same plane of 
endeavor; for God has given us the higher commission. 
The priesthood may not despise the Levites, 
nor even the children of the camp. We rejoice that 
there are Levites— hewers of wood and drawers of 
water*, and that even in the world's great camp there 
are some who not only incline to righteousness, but 
who are bravely endeavoring to stem the overwhelming 
tide of evil. But we rejoice more in the fact that 
it will ere long be our privilege to take hold of all 
these much needed reforms with energy and power, 



and push them forward to glorious success, when in 
God's due time we shall be endued with power from 
on high.-Matt. 13:43; Gal. 3:29. 

Dearly beloved of the consecrated household, 
let us not forget to keep in touch with the groaning 
creation; to sympathize with its sorrows and its woes; 
to realize its deep degradation and misery; to remember 
its frailties, its awful burden of hereditary taints 
and consequent weaknesses; its present environments 
of ignorance and superstition; and its long established 
errors of public sentiment; remembering that we too 
are still in the sinful flesh, and that the motions of 
sin are still often painfully manifest in us, in some directions, 
at least, if not in many. And as the cries of 
the groaning creation come up into the ears of the 
Lord of hosts (Jas. 5:4) with strong and pathetic 
pleading to his loving heart, so let them come into 
our ears and gain our sympathies, and quicken our 
zeal to co-operate with our Heavenly Father's plan 
for the establishment of his Kingdom of righteousness 
and peace. 

But let us bear in mind that a real pity for the 
world, a full sympathy with every good work of reform, 
and an active co-operation with God in the 
necessary preparation for our great future work, imply 
also that we have no fellowship with the unfruitful 
works of darkness and that our lives be a standing 
rebuke to them. "How," says the Apostle, "shall we 
that are dead to sin live any longer therein?... 
Our old man [our justified human nature] is crucified 
with Christ that the body [organization] of Sin might 
be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve Sin"— 
nor in any sense recognize Sin as our master.— Rom. 6:2-6. 

It should be our constant effort, therefore, to seek 
to discern the course of righteousness on every question 
of moral obligation, and to see to it that our conduct, 
our sympathies and our influence, however 
small, are on the side of righteousness. In this day of 
searching judgment it should be observed that every 
principle of moral obligation is being brought forward 



*See "Tabernacle Shadows of Better Sacrifices." 

R3068 : page 263 

for searching examination. One cannot 
thoughtfully read the daily press without observing 
this tendency of the times in which we live. No matter 
how long and firmly established have been the old 
ideas, nothing can escape this scrutiny. And the 
principles of righteousness are being boldly set forth 
—here on one subject, and there on another; and that 
in defiance of the thundering anathemas from all the 
old fortresses of sin, iniquity and superstition. 



But right and truth must and shall prevail when 
our Kingdom has been established (Matt. 6:10; Luke 12:32; 
22:29), however feeble now may be the voices 
lifted in their defense. Let our sentiments and our 
course of action always be noble and pure, and on 
the right side of every subject that comes forward 
for ventilation and investigation; for we should be "a 
peculiar people, zealous of good works."— Titus 2:14. 



R3069 : page 264 

STRIVING LAWFULLY. 

"No soldier on service entangleth himself in the affairs of this life, 

that he may please him who enrolled him as a soldier. And also if a man 

contend in the games, he is not crowned except he have contended 

lawfully." "Know ye not that they who run in a race all 

run, but one receiveth the prize? So run that ye may 

obtain. And every man that striveth for the mastery is 

temperate in all things. Now they do it to obtain 

a corruptible crown; but we an incorruptible crown. 

I, therefore, so run, not as uncertainly; so fight 

I, not as one beateth the air: but I keep my 

body under and bring it into subjection, lest 

that by any means, when I have preached 

to others, I myself should be a castaway." 

2 Tim. 2:4,5; I Cor. 9:24-27. 

THESE EARNEST EXHORTATIONS of the 
faithful Apostle to the Gentiles were most 
clearly illustrated in his noble course of life. 
He shunned no danger, shrank from no labor or 
reproach or privation, and bravely and cheerfully 
endured hardness and suffered the loss of all things 
temporal that he might win Christ and be approved 
of him. As we look upon such a course and consider 
the fortitude and the strength of character necessary 
so to run, we may well conclude, that, except 
we be similarly supplied with the help of divine 
grace, we shall not be able to persevere to the end. 

Paul sped along in that race, not in his own 
strength, but in the strength which God supplied. 
And the promise of such aid is none the less ours 
than it was his. The divine grace is imparted to us 
through the exceeding great and precious promises 
of God inspiring us with new and glorious hopes beyond 
the wreck and ruin of the present order of 
things. Permitting our minds to dwell upon these we 
see in the now rapidly approaching dawn of the day 
of Christ a new heavens and a new earth; and by faith 
we sit together with Christ in the heavenly places of 
glory and honor, and together with him are crowned 
with immortality. By faith we see also the blessed 
privileges of such an exalted station, and the divinely 



appointed work in which we will be engaged together 
with Christ. 

A weary, groaning creation awaits our ministry 
of power; and in the proportion that we partake of the 
loving, pitiful spirit of our Master will we be able to 
appreciate such a privilege. If we are cold and selfish 
and untouched with the feeling of earth's infirmities; 
if the woes of our fellow-men awaken in us no feelings 
of sympathy and of desire to help, we can have no appreciation 
of the prize of our high calling. But if, on 
the contrary, we love our fellow-men as God and 
Christ loved them; if we pity their weakness and 
remember the hereditary cause, we will lay not all 

R3070 : page 264 

their sins and short-comings to their personal charge. 
We will be anxious to clear their minds from the 
mists of ignorance and superstition and the bias of 
prejudices; and to help them to more rational modes 
of thought and action, and to better ideas of life and 
its relationships and responsibilities. We will seek 
to gather out of their pathway all the stumbling 
stones whereby so many are now precipitated into a 
course of vice; and to cast up a highway of holiness 
upon which no lion of intemperance or other evil 
thing may be found. We will be ready to declare 
to them all the everlasting gospel of salvation, and 
to open their deaf ears to hear and their blind eyes to 
see the salvation of God. If such are our sympathies 
toward the world of sinners which God so loved, then 
we are able to appreciate to some extent the privileges 
of our high calling, when, as joint-heirs with 
Christ in His Kingdom and power, we shall be able 
to put into actual execution all our benevolent desires 
for the uplifting and healing of our sin-sick world. 

Any who have ever experienced the joy of converting 
even one sinner from the error of his ways, 
or of establishing the feet of one of Christ's little 
ones, may have some idea of the joy that 
will attend the ministry of the saints when they are 
fully endued with divine power for the great work 
of their Millennial reign; for they will not be hampered 
as now, but every effort put forth will be a 
success. 

The privilege of such a blessed work, even aside 
from the precious thought of association with Christ 
and of our blessed relationship to the Father, is a 
wonderful inspiration to every benevolent heart 
which, even now, would fain take upon itself the burdens 
which it sees oppressing others whom they love 
and pity. 

But though inspired with such a hope of benevolent 
service for the whole world in God's appointed 
time, and of blessed association with Christ in it, we 
must remember that we have yet to "strive" for the 



prize of our high calling; and not only so, but we 
must strive "lawfully." We must run our race, not 
only with diligence, energy, patience and perseverance, 
but we must run according to the prescribed 
rules, as otherwise our labor will be in vain. First 
of all we must enter into this course by the "strait 
gate"— by a full consecration of our all to the Lord, 
after exercising faith in the precious blood of Christ 
as our ransom price. If we do not enter by this door, 
we are not counted in the race for the prize, no matter 
how zealously we run. This is the first rule for 
those who would so run as to obtain. "Enter ye at 
the strait gate;. ..because strait is the gate 
and narrow is the way that leadeth unto life, and few 
there be that find it." 

Having so entered, the Apostle now urges that 
we be filled with the Spirit of Christ, that we may 
not be led by the desires of the flesh away from God 
and from the course which he has marked out. Then 
the body, the human nature, must be kept under the 
control of the new mind, the spirit of Christ in us. Its 
ambitions and hopes and desires must be kept down; 
and the only way to do this is to keep filled with the 
spirit. "Walk in the spirit, and ye shall not fulfil 
the desires of the flesh."— Gal. 5:16. 

If we are filled with the spirit— with the same 
mind that was in Jesus Christ— we will act from the 
same motives: it will be our meat and drink to do the 
Father's will. We will engage in his work because 
we love to do it, even aside from the inspiring prize 
at the end of our course. Christ was so full of sympathy 
with humanity, and so thoroughly of one mind 
with the Father, that he could not do otherwise than 
to devote his life to the good of others. Yet in all his 
labors he strictly observed the divine plan. Though, 
like the Father, he loved the whole world, he did not 
go beyond Israel to bless the Gentiles with his ministry, 

R3070 : page 265 

because the appointed time for that work had 
not yet come. 

He observed God's times and seasons and 
methods. He never recklessly exposed his life until 
from the prophets he recognized that his hour had 
come to be delivered into the hands of his enemies. 
He taught his disciples not to go into the way of the 
Gentiles until the due time; and then he sent them 
forth. He did not make long prayers on the street 
corners to be heard of men, nor exhort the multitude 
with noisy harangue; as the prophet indicated, he 
did not lift up his voice nor cry aloud in the streets. 
(Isa. 42:2.) He chose God's methods which are 
rational and wise, and which are effective in selecting 
out from among men the class which he desires to be 
heirs of the promised Kingdom. Let those who would 



so run as to obtain the prize, mark these footprints of 
the Master, and be filled more and more with his 
spirit. 

If so filled with the same mind that was in Christ 
Jesus, we, like him, will desire to be as free as possible 
from entangling earthly affairs, and to have our 
time as free as possible for the Lord's service, and 
then to devote all energy, ability and effort to that 
service. 

To have the mind of Christ is indeed the one requirement 
of lawful striving— a mind which humbly 
and faithfully submits itself to the will of God as 
expressed in his great plan of the ages, and which 
devotes all energy to the accomplishment of his will, 
because of an intelligent appreciation of the ends he 
has in view. 



R3070 : page 265 

THE CLAIMS OF LOVE AND JUSTICE. 

THERE IS NOTHING more necessary to the 
peace and prosperity of the Church of God 
than that its members should have a clear 
understanding and appreciation of moral principles, 
with a full determination to be controlled by them. 
Even among Christians there are often differences of 
opinion, with reference to principles of action, which 
greatly interfere with spiritual growth and prosperity. 
Such difficulties most frequently arise through a failure 
to rightly distinguish between the relative claims 
of love and justice. Therefore we deem it profitable 
briefly to consider these principles and their operation 
among the children of God. 

Justice is sometimes represented by a pair of 
evenly poised balances, and sometimes by the square 
and compass, both of which are fitting emblems of 
its character. Justice knows no compromise and no 
deviation from its fixed rule of action. It is mathematically 
precise. It gives nothing over for "good 
weight" or "good measure:" there is no grace in it, 
no heart, no love, no sympathy, no favor of any kind. 
It is the cold, calculating, exact measure of truth and 
righteousness. When justice is done, there is no 
thanks due to the one who metes it out: such a one 
has only done a duty, the neglect of which would have 
been culpable, and the doing of which merits no 
favor or praise. And yet, cold, firm and relentless as 
this principle is, it is declared to be the very foundation 
of God's throne. It is the principle which underlies 
all his dealings with all his creatures: it is his 
unchangeable business principle. And how firmly he 
adheres to it is manifest to every one acquainted with 
the plan of salvation, the first step of which was to 



satisfy the claims of justice against our race. Though 
it cost the life of his only begotten and well beloved 
Son to do this, so important was this principle that 
he freely gave him up for us all— to satisfy its legal 
claims against us. 

The principle of love, unlike that of justice, overflows 
with tenderness and longs to bless. It is full 
of grace, and delights in the bestowment of favor. 
It is manifest, however, that no action can be regarded 
as a favor or a manifestation of love, which 
has not underneath it the substantial foundation of 
justice. Thus, for instance, if one comes to you with 
a gift, and at the same time disregards a just debt 
to you, the gift falls far short of appreciation as an 
expression of love; and you say, We should be just 
before we attempt to be generous. 

And this is right: if justice is the foundation 
principle in all of God's dealings, it should be in ours 
also; and none the less so among brethren in Christ 
than among those of the world. As brethren in 
Christ, we have no right to presume upon the favor 
of one another. All that we have a right to claim 
from one another is simple justice— justice in the 
payment of our honest debts to each other, justice 
in our judgment one of another (which must make 
due allowance for frailties, etc., because we realize in 
ourselves some measure of similar imperfection), and 
justice in fair and friendly treatment one of another. 
This is all we have any right to claim; and we must 
also bear in mind that while we have a right to claim 
this for ourselves from others, we are just as fully 
obligated to render the same to them. 

But while we may claim justice— though there is 
no obligation to demand it for ourselves, and we may 
if we choose even suffer injustice uncomplainingly— 
we must, if we are Christ's, render it. In other words, 
we are not responsible for the actions of others in 
these respects, but we are responsible for our own. 
And, therefore, we must see to it that all our actions 
are squared by the exact rule of justice, before we 
ever present a single act as an expression of love. 

The principle of love is not an exact principle to 
be measured and weighed like that of justice. It is 
three-fold in its character, being pitiful, sympathetic 
or reverential, according to the object upon which it 
is centered. The love of pity is the lowest form of 
love: it takes cognizance of even the vile and degraded, 
and is active in measures of relief. The love 
of sympathy rises higher, and proffers fellowship. 
But the love of reverence rises above all these, and 
delights in the contemplation of the good, the pure 
and the beautiful. In this latter sense we may indeed 
love God supremely, as the personification of all that 
is truly worthy of admiration and reverence, and our 
fellow men in proportion as they bear his likeness. 



R3071 : page 266 

Although we owe to every man the duty of love 
in some one of these senses, we may not demand it 
one of another, as we may the principle of justice; 
for love is the overflow of justice. Justice fills the 
measure full, but love shakes it, presses it down, 
heaps it up and overflows justice. It is therefore 
something not to be demanded, nor its lack to be 
complained of, but to be gratefully appreciated as a 
favor and to be generously reciprocated. Every one 
who craves it at all should crave it in its highest 
sense— the sense of admiration and reverence. But 
this sort of love is the most costly, and the only way 
to secure it is to manifest that nobility of character 
which calls it forth from others who are truly noble. 

The love of sympathy and fellowship is also very 
precious; but, if it come merely in response to a 
demand, it comes robbed of its choicest aroma: therefore 
never demand it, but rather by manifestation of 
it toward others court its reciprocation. 

The love of pity is not called out by the nobility 
of the subject, but rather by the nobility of the bestower, 
who is so full of the principle of love that 
it overflows in its generous impulses toward even the 
unworthy. All of the objects of pity are not, however, 
unworthy of love in the higher senses; and 
some such often draw upon our love in all the senses. 

To demand love's overflow of blessing— which is 
beyond the claims of justice— is only an exhibition of 
covetousness. We may act on this principle of love 
ourselves, but we may not claim it from others. The 
reverse of this exhibits a manifest lack of love and 
a considerable measure of selfishness. 

Thus, for instance, two of the Lord's children 
were once rooming together and, through a failure 
to rightly consider the relative claims of love and 
justice, one presumed upon the brotherly love of the 
other to the extent of expecting him to pay the entire 
rent; and when the other urged the claims of 
justice, he pushed the claim of brotherly love, and 
the former reluctantly yielded to it, not knowing how 
to refute the claim, yet feeling that somehow some 
Christians had less principle than many worldly 
people. How strange that any of God's children 
should take so narrow and one-sided a view! Cannot 
all see that love and justice should work both ways 
and that it is the business of each not to oversee 
others in these respects, but to look well to his own 
course, and, if he would teach others, let it be rather 
by example than by precept? 

Let us beware of a disposition to covetousness, 
and let each remember that he is steward over his 
own goods, and not over his neighbor's, and that 
each is accountable to the Lord, and not to his 
brother, for the right use of that which the Master 



has entrusted to him. There is nothing much more 
unlovely and unbecoming to the children of God 
than a disposition to petty criticism of the individual 
affairs of one another. It is a business too small for 
the saints, and manifests a sad lack of that brotherly 
love which should be specially manifest in broad 
and generous consideration, which would rather 
cover a multitude of sins than magnify one. 

May love and justice find their proper and relative 
places in the hearts of all of God's people, that so 
the enemy may have no occasion to glory! The 
Psalmist says, "Oh, how love I thy law [the law of 
love, whose foundation is justice] ! it is my meditation 
all the day." (Psa. 1 19:97.) Surely, if it were 
the constant meditation of all, there would be fewer 
and less glaring mistakes than we often see. Let us 
watch and be sober, that the enemy may not gain an 
advantage over us. 

R3068 : page 266 

THAT I MAY KNOW HIM. 

-PHIL. 3:8-10.- 

"Lord, let me talk with Thee of all I do, 

All that I care for, all I wish for, too. 

Lord, let me prove Thy sympathy, Thy power, 

Thy loving oversight from hour to hour! 

When I need counsel, let me ask of Thee: 

Whatever my perplexity may be, 

It cannot be too trivial to bring, 

To one who marks the sparrow's drooping wing. 

Nor too terrestrial since Thou hast said 

The very hairs are numbered on our head. 

Tis through such loop-holes that the foe takes aim, 

And sparks unheeded, burst into a flame. 

Do money troubles press? Thou canst resolve 

The doubts and dangers such concerns involve. 

Are those I love the cause of anxious care? 

Thou canst unbind the burdens they may bear. 

Before the mysteries of Thy Word or will, 

Thy voice can gently bid my heart be still, 

Since all that now is hard to understand 

Shall be unraveled in yon heavenly land. 

Or do I mourn the oft-besetting sin, 

The tempter's wiles, that mar the peace within? 

Present Thyself, Lord, as the absolving priest, 

To whom confessing, I go forth released. 

Do weakness, weariness, disease, invade 

This earthly house, which Thou, Thyself, hast made? 

Thou, only, Lord, canst touch the hidden spring 

Of mischief, and attune the jarring string. 

Would I be taught what Thou wouldst have me give, 

The needs of those less favored to relieve? 

Thou canst so guide my hand that I shall be 



A liberal 'cheerful giver,' Lord like Thee. 

Of my life's mission do I stand in doubt? 

Thou knowest and canst clearly point it out. 

Whither I go, do Thou Thyself decide 

And choose the friends and servants at my side. 

The books I read, I would submit to Thee, 

Let them refresh, instruct and solace me. 

I would converse with Thee from day to day 

With heart intent on what Thou hast to say; 

And through my pilgrim walk, what e'er befall, 

Consult with Thee, O Lord, about it all. 

Since Thou art willing thus to condescend 

To be my intimate, familiar friend, 

Oh, let me to the great occasion rise, 

And count Thy friendship life's most glorious prize!" 



R3068 : page 267 

A PROPHET LIKE MOSES. 

--DEUT. 18:9-19.-SEPTEMBER7.- 

"This is of a truth that prophet that should 
come into the world."— John 6:14. 

AMONG THE GREAT ONES of earth, Moses 
stands out pre-eminent as a leader, lawgiver 
and ruler. He really combined in himself 
the three offices, prophet, priest and king. As a 
king, the representative of the great King, Jehovah, 
he would be classed as an autocrat whose meekness 
and gentleness, nevertheless, protected those under 
his care against any arbitrary use of his power and 
authority. Although Aaron was the high-priest 
proper, yet in a still larger sense he performed his 
services under, and as representative of Moses— and 
the latter had equal privilege of going into the Holy 
and Most Holy, and joined with Aaron at the close 
of the atonement day in giving the atonement blessing 
to the people. As a prophet, or teacher and lawgiver, 
he, under the instruction of the Lord, was far in 
advance, not only of others of his time but, of the 
many who have sought to copy and to improve upon 
the laws which he laid down. In all of this, however, 
he was merely a type of the great Prophet, Priest and 
King whom God purposed should in due time, accomplish 
a still greater deliverance for a still mightier 
host to a still better kingdom of promise,— the 
Millennial Kingdom. Moses did not take the title of 
king or priest, although the humbler title of prophet, 
teacher or representative of God, represented also in 
his case the kingly and priestly functions that we 
have seen. 
By this time Israel had reached the borders of 



Palestine on the east of the river Jordan, and had conquered 
the Amorites and the forces of Og, king of 
Bashan,— famous in the Psalms,— the giant of the 
noted iron bedstead. Moses, now one hundred and 
twenty years old, being forewarned of the Lord that 
his mission was at an end and that because of his 
transgression in the matter of striking the rock the 
second time he could not enter into the land of 
promise, had called the Israelites to deliver to them a 
closing message— a valedictory, as it were. 

Our lesson is a part of that valedictory address 
which, we may presume, was delivered in the great 
teacher's most impressive style, and represented his 
most solicitous thought in the interests of the people 
in whose behalf he had sacrificed the honors of Egypt 
and for whom he had spent his life. For forty years 
the people had been trained and disciplined in the 
ways of the Lord, and yet their great leader realized 
that they needed special guarding against the evils 
which had degraded the people of Canaan;— the besetments 
of Satan, and the fallen angels operating 
through human agents and mediums. Wherever we 
may look, amongst all the heathen nations, we find 
that the evil spirits have had much to do with the 
degradation of the human family. Operating along the 
lines of man's natural and religious instincts, they 
have perverted these to sensualities of various kinds 
and have diverted his worship from God, sometimes 
directly to themselves and devils, and sometimes to 
four-footed beasts and creeping things and idols of 
wood and stone, as the Apostle declare.— Rom. 1:23; 
Rev. 9:20; I Cor. 10:20. 

Those who investigate the matter will find no 
room, we believe, to doubt our statement that the 
fallen spirits are at the bottom of all the religious delusions 
of the world,— their ability to deceive and 
mislead being correspondingly less in proportion as 
the gospel of Christ has shined into a heart or a community 
or a nation.* 

The great lawgiver enumerates here eight different 
forms of spirit-deception and miracle-working; 
(1) Divination, the receiving of information from occult 
sources, from the spirits by means of omens, 
oracles, etc. (2) Augury, the fixing of lucky and unlucky 
periods and the observance of these which tends 
to bring the mind into bondage to the evil spirits. At 
the present time amongst many, Friday is considered 
an unlucky day, as also certain stages of the moon. 
(3) An enchanter, one able to exercise superior 
mental control, known to-day as hypnotism. (4) A 
witch or sorcerer, one who claims to be able to exercise 
a power over the affairs of others, and in many 
cases does so, though not to the degree he has frequently 
gotten credit for, and certainly never in opposition 
to divine power. (5) A charmer— serpent charmers, 
etc., including also those who claim to be able to 



put spells upon people and animals, to tie magic knots, 
etc., by a power something akin to hypnotism. (6) 
Consulters with familiar spirits, amongst spiritualists 
to-day there are mediums who claim to have their 
special familiar spirit while others claim a general 
intercourse with the spirits. (7) A wizard, one who 
claims to be wise in hidden or occult wisdom— possibly 
as some suggest, describing one who has general 
intercourse with the spirits as in contradistinction 
to one who has intercourse only with the "familiar 
spirit." (8) A necromancer, one who professes to 
hold communion with the dead— as do spirit mediums 
of to-day. Moses declared that all who take part in 
such proceedings are an abomination to the Lord 
and that the nations already inhabitating Canaan 
were being dispossessed and their land given to 
Israel, in large measure because they had gone over 
to these doctrines of devils and communion with 
devils. The Israelites in this respect were to be perfectly 
free from everything of this kind— were to obtain 
their information, not from fallen spirits personating 
the dead or otherwise, but from God 
through his appointed oracles, laws, commands, etc. 
We feel that we cannot too strongly impress upon 
spiritual Israelites everywhere the necessity of having 
nothing whatever to do with the present day representatives 
of these evils. It is not a light thing, 
therefore, for one who has heard the message of the 
Lord on this subject, to attend spiritualistic seances, 
to visit a fortune-teller, or to practice or be practiced 
upon in any manner by hypnotists, or any 
other representatives of Satan and the fallen angels 
and the black arts, or to use any of the various implements 
of divination now in vogue, such as 
planchets, etc. In olden times as well as now 
many of these villainies were practiced by the 
same individual, as for instance, the witch of 



*See pamphlet, "Proofs that Spiritism is Demonism."- 
This Office. 

R3068 : page 268 

Endor was also a necromancer. So stringent were 

the laws of ancient times that not only the practitioners 

of these wrongs were condemned to death, 

but also those who encouraged them by seeking their 

counsels, etc. Had it not been for these drastic laws 

no doubt Israel would have come under these debasing 

influences to a much larger extent than it did, 

and would have been correspondingly degraded like 

the heathen nations whose worship is, as the Apostle 

declares, divergent from the worship of God to the 

worship of devils, and their instructions instead of 



being from the Lord are from devils, evil spirits, "seducing 
spirits." 

We have no hesitation whatever in saying that 
these evil spirits which ever since the flood have been 
seeking to gain power over humanity through deceptions 
and through the operation of various occult 
powers, have enticed them, bewitched them, brought 
them under the influence of fear and superstition, 
and into mental slavery so that they can be and are 
guided by falsehood instead of by the truth. This is 
one of the ways in which, as the Apostle states, "The 
god of this world hath blinded the minds of them 
which believed not," and has hindered the light of the 
goodness of God in the face of Jesus Christ from shining 
into the hearts of men. As already intimated this 
same power is still at work even in Christendom, 
operating through spiritism, theosophy, hypnotism 
and Christian Science— yea, and we believe also operating 
deceptively in some who claim to be filled 
with, and moved by, the holy spirit, producing trance 
conditions, the vagaries of the "Holy Rollers" and 
various unseemly things done by people who mistakenly 
claim that they are filled with the holy spirit, 
but who are in fact, filled with and controlled by the 
evil spirits,— for their works they do. Our Lord 
Jesus and the Apostles were filled with the holy spirit 
and we may be sure that its character and its manifestations 
have not changed since their day: we may 
be sure, therefore, that spirits that cause people to behave 

R3069 : page 268 

themselves unseemly are "lying spirits." 

It was under the teaching of these evil spirits that 
the people of Canaan first established the valley of 
Hinnom as a place of torture. This valley outside 
the city of Jerusalem, now known in the Greek 
language as Gehenna, had erected in it a brass figure 
of the god Moloch which, being hollow was heated 
intensely and then into its outstretched arms were 
occasionally placed children offered thus in sacrifice. 
God forewarned his people against this and every 
form of cruelty and also against the evil spirits 
which would so seduce them and pervert their 
minds as to lead them to such horrible and insane 
practices and beliefs. With Israel, therefore, this 
valley instead of being a valley of sacrifice, became 
the symbol of the Second Death in that it was made a 
crematory for the carcasses of dead animals, and for 
the bodies of certain vile criminals not deemed 
worthy of honorable burial. Under the Lord's arrangement, 
however, no torture was permitted in this 
valley or elsewhere in Israel— not the living, but the 
dead were consumed in it. 

We are glad that we are living in a day when this 
Moloch torture is detested, a day in which civilized 



people, at least, look upon all such practices with 

abhorrence; nevertheless, the evil spirits operating 

upon the higher plane to suit the higher conditions 

of the spiritual Israel, have introduced false doctrines 

among them to such an extent that for centuries the 

masses of Christendom have attributed to the Almighty 

God of love a character and disposition far 

worse than that of Moloch. These false theories 

have cast into the fire not only a few sacrifices to 

satisfy Jehovah, but have made the whole human 

family to occupy this position, to be subjects of eternal 

torture— except a comparative few who with sincerity 

of heart and faith and obedience, lay hold upon 

Christ in this present life and are thus saved from an 

eternity of suffering. This doctrine of devils was introduced 

amongst spiritual Israel during the period 

which we denominate the Dark Ages; it finds no countenance 

whatever in the Word of God, neither in the 

Law nor in the prophets, nor in all the dissertations 

of the apostles of the New Testament; at very most 

it claims to base itself upon certain misunderstood 

parables of our Lord and upon certain misunderstood 

symbolical figures of speech in the Apocalypse. 

Yet, so completely have the evil spirits done their 

work, that the masses of Christendom thoroughly believe 

that the Bible is the authority and groundwork 

for that awful doctrine of eternal torment,— this 

Moloch cruelty ascribed to the God of Love, and now 

that their minds are becoming emancipated so that 

they can no longer believe such doctrines, they are 

disposed to reject the entire Bible, the Word of the 

Lord, because they think that it is the foundation for 

this awful, blasphemous error. Thus the fallen 

spirits again mislead many into new devices— Christian 

Science, Theosophy, Spiritism, etc., anything, 

everything to get them away from the simplicity, 

beauty and grandeur of the divine Word and plan. 

THE ANTITYPICAL PROPHET. 

Having thus forewarned the people, Moses reminds 
them that he is only a type of the greater 
Prophet whom the Lord had previously promised. 
The previous promise was at Mt. Sinai in Horeb, 
when God typically represented the giving of the 
New Covenant and when the people saw the lightnings, 
heard the thunderings, and felt the tremblings 
of the earth, which represented the great time of 
trouble in the end of this age; then they cried out 
unto the Lord entreating that instead of directly 
communicating with them he would do so 
through Moses as mediator. It was there that the 
Lord intimated that in the introduction of the antitypical 
New Covenant it would be at the hands of a 
still greater Mediator than Moses,— that great Prophet 
whom the Lord would raise up. 



Our Golden Text points us to the Man Christ 
Jesus as this great Prophet! but the people who made 
this declaration did not fully comprehend the situation. 
Had they done so they would not a few days after 
have crucified the Lord. As a matter of fact, Jesus in 
the flesh was not the great Prophet, though his work 
in the sealing of the New Covenant with his blood at 
Calvary was necessary before he could be made alive 
in the spirit— as the new creature, put to death in the 
flesh but quickened in the spirit; put to death in weakness 

R3069 : page 269 

but raised in power; put to death in dishonor, 

but raised in glory, put to death in the flesh, an animal 

or human body, but raised a spiritual body on a 

plane of glory, honor, immortality. This great 

Prophet that God has promised is not a man, not 

of the human nature; but is the Lord of glory who 

has bought the whole world at the cost of his own 

life and shortly is to be its great Prophet, Priest, 

and King, to lead, to direct, to rule, to correct, to uplift 

and to ultimately bring to perfection whosoever 

wills to be in harmony with God— and the remainder 

will be cut off in the Second Death. The Apostle 

Peter brings out this feature of the ultimate end of 

all who will not obey the great Prophet, in his discourse 

recorded in Acts 3:23, "It shall come to pass 

that every soul which will not hear [obey] that 

Prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people" 

—the Second Death. 

But still more wonderful than this is the divine 
plan: from the divine standpoint our glorified Lord 
Jesus is to be the Head, and the faithful of his Church 
are to constitute the members of this great Prophet. 
The Lord God raised up our Lord Jesus as the Head 
of this Prophet more than eighteen centuries ago, 
and since then he has been finding amongst the redeemed 
children of men, those who shall ultimately 
be counted worthy through him to be reckoned in as 
joint-heirs of the Kingdom, members of the body of 
this great Prophet. Although in all a little flock, 144,000, 
the calling has been so special and the testing or 
approving and disciplining, so thorough, that it requires 
the entire Gospel age to find and to perfect 
these members, and when all shall have been found, 
and all shall have been raised up by first resurrection 
power to glory, honor and immortality and join t-heirship 
with their Lord and Head, then the great 
Prophet shall have come and then his great work 
will be before him. Then will come the deliverance 
of all who are God's people, who desire to sacrifice 
to him, to worship him and to be separate from sin; 
all such will have an opportunity for deliverance and 
for leading and guidance into Millennial Canaan 
under this great Prophet. Praise God on behalf of 



the world for such a glorious outlook! praise God 
for the privilege of our present blessings of invitation 
and opportunity to become identified with this 
great Prophet, by faithfulness to him who bought 
us with his own precious blood! 



R3071 : page 269 

LOVE OF GOD IN MOUTH AND HEART. 

--DEUT. 11:20. --SEPTEMBER 14.- 

IN HIS VALEDICTORY Moses proceeded to 
rehearse to Israel the Law of the Lord in 
full, reciting the blessings that would come 
from obedience to this Law, and the curses which 
would surely follow a disobedient course. He even 
proceeded to prophesy, and in the same chapter, in 
verses preceding our lesson, he points out that Israel 
would experience both the blessings and the curses, 
and that as a result they would ultimately be scattered 
throughout the earth, but that God, in infinite mercy, 
would remember them and finally bring them back 
to himself, and circumcise their hearts, a type of 
which circumcision they already had in the flesh.— 
Compare Rom. 11:25-30. 

Here the words of our lesson come in and seem 
to apply specially to Israel restored under the new 
conditions of grace. Even the most faithful under 
the Law were obliged continually to say, "O wretched 
man that I am ! Who shall deliver me from this 
death-condemnation" in which I am, under this Law? 
—Behold the Law of God is just and good and right, 
and I approve the same with my heart, but am unable 
to comply with its conditions because of weakness, 
—death working in my mortal body! The time of 
Israel's return to divine favor at the close of the 
Gospel age is the period mentioned by the Lord 
through the Prophet Jeremiah; saying, 'After those 
days, saith the Lord, I will put my law in their inward 
parts, and write it in their hearts; and will be 
their God, and they shall be my people; and they 
shall teach no more every man his neighbor and 
every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord, for 
they shall all know me, from the least of them unto 
the greatest of them, saith the Lord, for I will forgive 
their iniquity, and I will remember their sin 
no more."— Jer. 31:33,34. 

Under that blessed arrangement of the New Covenant, 
established in the hands of the greater Mediator, 
the Christ, the great Prophet, the desires and 
intentions of the heart, accompanied with the best 
endeavors of the flesh, will be accepted, even tho the 
latter be imperfect for a time, and require the blessed 



influences of the "times of restitution" to bring 
them to perfection. Moses' prophecy looks down to 
this time, grasps the new situation, sees Israel 
turned to the Lord with new hearts, enabled to keep 
his Law perfectly; it will not be too difficult for them, 
but new and plain and possible. 

That this is the proper thought to be attached 
to this prophecy of Moses, is shown by the Apostle 
Paul. (Rom. 10:4-10.) He applies these words to 
the Church during this Gospel age, as in contrast to 
the conditions of the Jewish age, which had just 
closed. The Gospel Church enters into the privileges 
and opportunities of the New Covenant now, in advance 
of Israel and the world in general. It is the 
privilege of the spiritual Israelite now, beforehand, 
by the exercise of faith to realize 
in himself acceptance with God, justification 
by faith; to realize further that the 
merit of Christ covering all his imperfections, 
which are not of the heart, continues him in this justified 
relationship with God, notwithstanding 
the imperfections of his flesh and of 
his works— for we "are not under the Law 
but under grace." To those who can now 
exercise the faith, all the blessings that will 
come to the world in the Millennial age are possible 
—and more. To such these greater blessings are not 
hidden, but may be seen with the eye of faith. To 
such they are not far off— pertaining to another age- 
but are possibilities of the present time, through the 

R3071 : page 270 

operation of faith. Such, having the ear of faith, are 
not saying, We cannot know the mind of the Lord, 
for he is afar off in heaven; who shall bring us a 
clear, definite statement of his will? These already 
have this declaration of the divine will in the person 
of Christ, in his teachings, personally and through the 
apostles. Neither will such say, Christ indeed has 
come, has died, has gone into the sleep of death; 
who shall now bring him forth that he may instruct 
us? For with the same eye and ear of faith they 
both hear and see that he is no longer dead, but is 
risen, glorified, empowered of the Father, and that 
he ever lives to be the blesser and High-priest for all 
those who approach the Father through him. 

What then is this message which can thus be 
heard with the ear and recognized by the eye of 
faith? The prophet as well as the Apostle declares 
that it is possible for us to have this salvation, an 
ever-present power within us, in our hearts and in 
our mouths. The Apostle declares that this which 
Moses prophesied is the Gospel which he preached, 
which we have received; viz., the confession of the 
Lord with our mouths and faith in him in our hearts. 



It is noteworthy that both the Prophet Moses 
and the Apostle Paul state the matter in the same 
manner; first, the confession with the mouth; second, 
the belief in the heart. This form of statement is 
probably not of accident, either. The confession 
with the mouth is the first outward evidence given of 
a faith in the heart; and indeed it seems to be a part 
of the divine arrangement that all confession of the 
truth is necessary to a full appreciation of it. True, 
we cannot properly confess what we do not believe; 
hence a belief must have precedence to a confession; 
but the confession is necessary to the expanding, 
enlarging and completing of faith in the heart. Who 
ever thinks that the light he has received in his heart 
can be maintained without a public confession of it 
is deceived, and hence it is declared, "With the heart 
man believeth unto righteousness; and with the 
mouth confession is made unto salvation." The 
righteousness started by faith cannot go on and 
reach the completion which will mean eternal salvation, 

R3072 : page 270 

unless it be accompanied by acts of faith, 

most prominent of which is the confession of the 

lips. 

We would like to impress this feature of the 
divine truth upon all of the Lord's dear people everywhere; 
realizing that many are weak, puny, sickly, 
in their spiritual health, because of their failure to 
follow the Lord's direction— to declare courageously 

—and as wisely and lovingly as possible— 
what great things the Lord hath done for 
our souls. It is not sufficient that we 
confess the first blessing received, tho that 
is necessary before we can receive additional 
blessing. But each blessing as received should be 
promptly confessed, to the praise of him who has 
called us out of darkness into his marvelous light. 
This is the law of spiritual development. This is the 
command to the spiritual Israelite. If he is not 
obedient, that which was nigh, in his heart and in 
his mouth, will ere long become far off to him;— 
the eye of his understanding will cease to see 
clearly; the ear of faith will cease to distinguish 
plainly and he will gradually go further and further 
away from the glorious privileges which are ours, 
as new creatures in Christ under the New Covenant. 

LIFE AND GOOD; DEATH AND EVIL. 

To Spiritual Israelites, who have been begotten of 
the spirit, adopted into the family of sons of God, 
and made prospective joint-heirs with Jesus Christ 
their Lord, the message is the same that it will be 
during the Millennial age to the world of mankind; 



viz., choose life or death. Thank God we have gotten 

free from that horrible doctrine of Moloch which, 

perverting the plain Word of God, would declare 

to us that God has set before us eternal blessing or 

eternal torment! Not so; his Word is most explicit; 

the rewards are life or death. Thus our Lord 

positively announced, "He that hath the Son hath 

life; he that hath not the Son shall not see life" — 

and those not seeing life, of course could not experience 

eternal torment. Nevertheless, this proposition 

of life or death is a very serious one; much 

more potent in its influence than any other, because 

we can believe it; because we can see its reasonableness. 

How reasonable it is that God should declare 

to his spiritual Israel of this Gospel age that if, after 

they come to know him, taste of his good Word, experience 

the power of the age to come; after they 

have had the eyes of their understanding opened; 

after they have heard, seen, appreciated, the divine 

plan— if after all this they do not love the Lord 

their God, and trust him in their hearts, and sufficiently, 

too, to confess him with their mouths, they 

are unworthy of eternal blessing which he has to 

give— their lack of appreciation of divine mercy 

means their unworthiness of life! 

How reasonable, too, is this declaration as respects 
the world of mankind during the Millennial 
age! Life and death will be the alternatives set before 
them also. The great Prophet, the Christ, Head 
and body, as representative of the Father and of his 
Law, will make matters very clear, very plain, to all 
those who, when they know the Lord's goodness, 
have any desire or appreciation thereof. But they 
too must learn to acknowledge the Lord in their 
lives, in their hearts, and to confess him with their 
mouths, else they will be unworthy of the future 
life. The difference between the two classes,— we of 
the Gospel age, they of the Millennial age,— will not 
be as respects the question of life and death. The 
penalty in either case will be Second Death; the reward 
in either case will be eternal life. The difference 
in the reward will be that the faithful overcomers 
of spiritual Israel will be granted join t-heirship 
with their Lord on a higher plane of life, sharing 
with him his glory, honor, immortality; while the 
faithful of the world, tho blessed in lower degree 
with a restoration of human perfection and life, will, 
nevertheless, be blessed fully and completely up to 
their very highest ability to appreciate and desire. 

The essence of this command, now applicable to 
the Gospel Church, by and by to be applicable to restored 
Israel and all who, under the favorable conditions 

R3072: page 271 

of that Millennial age, will be accepted as the 



children of Abraham, is the Law of Love. "I command 
thee this day to observe the Law of the Lord 
thy God, to walk in his ways and keep his statutes, 
and his commandments and his judgements." It is 
the correct thought that love to God must be from 
the heart,— voluntary, in order to be of the kind 
which he desires and will appreciate. "He seeketh 
such to worship Him as worship Him in spirit and 
in truth." Why, then, does Moses say, "I command 
you"? Why does the Lord command love, through 
the Prophet, since a commanded love would not come 
up to the standard of voluntary love? 

We answer that the Lord sets before us the standard 
of love necessary to be attained if we would enjoy 
the blessings which he purposes to give. He 
commands, in the sense of laying before us plainly 
and distinctly His only terms for life eternal. As 
previously pointed out, love is a matter of development 
and begins with a kind of duty love, which 
gradually growing out as we grow in grace and in 
knowledge, expands into gratitude, then into admiration, 
and finally ridding itself of all dross and selfishness, 
becomes pure and fervent love. The Lord is 
pleased if in our hearts he sees this endeavor to approach 
in truth the way of life which he has opened 
through the death of his Son. He is pleased to note 
our expansion and development under the light of 
his favor. He is pleased to grant us the covering 
of the Lord Jesus' merit, and to reckon to us perfection, 
and to adopt us from the very beginning of 
our love and consecration; and he will be pleased 
when we have finished our course, when we have attained 
the mark, when we have come up to the standard 
he has set— perfect love— to grant us the blessing 
of life eternal, which He cannot grant upon any 
other condition. 

These things, really intended for spiritual Israelites, 
were spoken to natural Israel, as were all the 
prophecies of the Old Testament. Hearing, Israel 
heard but did not understand, as now it is our privilege 
to understand, because we are of the "house of 
sons," adopted and begotten of the spirit; whereas 
they were of the "house of servants," for "Moses 
verily, as a servant, was faithful over all his house; 
but Christ as a son, over his own house, whose house 
are we, if we hold fast the beginning of our confidence 
firm unto the end." To the extent that any 
natural Israelite comprehended even in part this Law 
of Love, and endeavored to grasp it, in that proportion 
he was blessed, notwithstanding the fact that he 
was under the Law and bound by the Law, and thus 
a servant and unable to become a Son. We see noble 
illustrations of these faithful ones of the past, in 
Moses himself, Joshua, Caleb, Samuel, David, and all 
the prophets, whose faithfulness the Apostle records, 
as having been pleasing to God, and who shall have 



corresponding rewards, altho they will not have 
the reward that is promised to the Church— "they 
without us shall not be made perfect."— 
Heb. 11:39,40. 

In the closing words of this grand oration, the 
Prophet cautioned his brethren again concerning any 
disposition to leave the Lord and accept instead other 
gods. His words are specially applicable to spiritual 
Israelites, and we do well to give them earnest heed. 
We are already by faith in this blessed condition; we 
have heard the words of eternal life. We already 
have entered the Canaan-rest condition by faith in 
our Lord. We, therefore, are in danger from the 
besetments of our own flesh and from the 
besetments of sin abounding and from the 
Adversary— in danger of making other gods, 
and turning our hearts away from the 
proper center of their affections, either to the god 
of wealth or the god of fame or the lesser gods of the 
family circle and home, or to the most ignoble of all, 
self. We are not to be drawn away by any of these 
from our loyalty to God, nor to render worship or 
service in any sense to any of these. To 
do so would mean to turn away from 
the hopes and joys and blessings now ours. 
To resist these temptations, and to abide 
in the Lord's favor, on the other hand, will mean to 
continue in the joys and blessings and rest of our 
present state of grace. Thus the Lord sets before us 
the blessings and the curses, the advantages and the 
disadvantages, the right course and the wrong course, 
life and death. 

Our choosing of life and blessing and righteousness 
and God are not merely the choice of a moment; 
the daily trials and testings of life prove whom we 
love and whom we serve. Let us examine our hearts 
and our daily course of life, and note for what we are 
spending life's energies, what fills our affections, what 
"satisfies our longings as nothing else could do." To 
the extent that we find the Lord the center of our 
lives, our hopes, our aims, and his will the ruling law 
in every affair of life, in that same proportion we find 
joy and peace and blessing and growth spiritually. If 
we thus, under present conditions and trials and oppositions 
of the world, the flesh and the devil, separate 
from them and cleave to the Lord, we are choosing 
the better part, the part of blessing, choosing life, and 
we shall live and shall inherit the goodly land of 
promise, the Millennial Canaan, and there be joint-participators 
with our Master in bringing God's 
promised blessing to the world, that they also may 
hear and know and obey his voice, and cleave to him 
and thus have life, and inherit the other, the earthly, 
features of the Abrahamic blessing. 

Our Golden Text is quite appropriate to this lesson. 
It is in vain that we say we love the Lord if we 



do not seek to do those things pleasing in his sight. 
He is not seeking those who merely give outward 
allegiance, but those who at heart love him and his 
righteous arrangements. He is satisfied, indeed, to 
accept us at the beginning, largely upon our professions 
of faith and devotion, under the robe of Christ's 
righteousness, knowing that in our imperfect development 

R3073 : page 271 

we could not love perfectly; but he expects us to 
grow in grace, knowledge and love, and only by so 
doing can we abide in his love, and only by abiding 
in his love can we hope to attain the glorious things 
which he has in reservation only for those who love 
him. 



page 273 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 