VOL. XXIV. FEBRUARY 1, 1903. No. 3 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 35 

A Further View of Socialism 35 

Conditions in Germany 36 

About Our Prosperity 36 

Catholicism in the Philippines 36 

Disestablishment in England 37 

The True Fold Not a Pen 37 

Paul at Corinth 38 

"Knowledge Puffeth Up, but Love 

Buildeth Up" 41 

"In My Name" (Poem) 45 

Interesting Letters 45 

page 34 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



CHARTS FOR OUR NEW BIBLES. 



The first lot of these Charts was spoiled by the printers, 
and only now are we prepared to supply them. We advertised 
them at 10c, but find that we can supply them at 5c 
each, postage included, without loss;— hence, that will be 



the price to all. Those who have already sent 10c will receive 
a second Chart. 

This Bible Chart is a reproduction of the 25c Chart of 
the Ages, reduced in size. It is printed on tough blue 
bond-paper, and can be fastened into the New Bible at the 
back. When wanted for reference it can be unfolded 
and studied with the open Bible. Each possessor of one 
of the New Bibles should have one of these Charts. We 
will accept stamps in payment, if more convenient to you; 
or you may order by postal card and include the small 
amount in some future remittance at your convenience. 



THE NEW LETTER PAPER. 



The price of letter paper, mentioned in our last issue, is 
25c per lb., postage 15c extra. This does not include envelopes, 
which we still sell at 25c per 100, postpaid. 



R3141 : page 35 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 

WE LEARN with regret that our reports of the 
progress of Socialism at home and abroad 
have been misunderstood by some to signify 
expectation that Socialism may be the Lord's way of 
bringing in the blessings of the Millennial Kingdom. 
Our position seems difficult for some to understand. 
We believe that many of the ideals of Socialism are 
good;— more than this, that many of those ideals will 
be realized in the Kingdom as they are now realized 
in heaven. But, we dispute the ability of Socialists 
to put those ideals into effect and make them continuously 
operative. 

Why so? Because of sin;— because selfishness, 
the reverse of love, is born with all men;— and because 
nothing but a thorough conversion (such as few experience) 
and subsequent instruction in the School of 
Christ (such as few now enjoy) could possibly so correct 
the natural heart as to make love— the golden 
rule— its law. 

No doubt many Socialists believe that their desires 
for Socialism are actuated by love, and not by 
selfishness; but such should not forget the Scriptural 
declaration that "the heart is deceitful above all 
things." Those clamoring for Socialism are generally 
such as believe that their temporal interests would 
be improved, or, at least, not injured, by Socialism. 
Remarkably few are advocating Socialism or anything 
else to their own disadvantage. We are not finding 



fault with this natural condition; only God's saints 
love to the extent of self-sacrifice for the good of others. 
We are merely pointing to this evidence that the 
advocates of Socialism cannot claim to be actuated by 
love, but by selfishness;— we are merely proving our 
position, that even if Socialism were established it 
could not last, because selfishness would continually 
prompt each to work either for his own advantage, or 
else to work as little as possible. 

Possibly a very few may be found working for 
Socialism and against their own interest: it is not for 
us to decide; but it is possible that ambition or combativeness 
have as much, or more, to do with their 
sacrifices than has love of mankind. The point we 
make is that Socialism is not practicable under selfish 
conditions; and that the voluntary Socialism which 
the Lord will introduce will not be attained until the 
close of the Millennium, when the selfishness of the 
fallen condition will have given place to perfect love 
and the full image of God;— all the incorrigibly selfish 
being destroyed in the Second Death. The Socialism 
of the Millennium will not be voluntary, but 
enforced by the rule of the "rod of iron."— 
Rev. 2:27. 

Our reason for keeping track of the progress of 
Socialism now is, that we expect that it, or something 
akin to it, is about to deceive the world into looking 
for a Millennium of its own, and lead them unconsciously 
to, and then over the brink into the anarchy 
and "time of trouble such as was not since there was 
a nation." We cannot wonder that this "will o' the 
wisp" should attract and ensnare many of "the groaning 
creation" who long for better things for themselves 
and neighbors; and we should and do sympathize 
with such very keenly; but for any one who has 
had his eyes opened to the divine plan for the blessing 
of the world, through Christ and his Church, in the 
Millennial Kingdom (invisible to the world), to be 
attracted to Socialism would be a distinct evidence of 
his going into the "outer darkness" of the world— 
away from the inner light of divine revelation given 
to the Church. 

R3141 : page 36 

CONDITIONS IN GERMANY. 



The London Spectator editorially reviews the German 
situation, and the evidences seen there of a political 
or a social revolution— all, be it marked, based on 
selfishness. It says:— 

"Professor Mommsen, whose opinion has great 
weight in Germany, has issued a remarkable manifesto. 
He says that 'the overthrow of the Imperial 



Constitution is rapidly progressing.' The Reichstag 

and the Emperor alike are being subjected to the absolutism 

of an alliance between the Tory landlords and 

the priests. That is revolution and worse than personal 

government, because the autocrat would be 

impartial. All parties, in fact, are becoming revolutionary. 

The Liberals would like to convert the 

supreme head of the state into a 'first official,' after 

the English pattern, and 'that is revolution.' So is 

the desire of the Centre to reconvert Germany to Catholicism. 

So is the desire of the German squirearchy 

to restore aristocratic rule, and degrade the Emperor 

to be only first among his peers. And finally, so is 

the desire of the Social Democrats that every workman, 

without regard to his work, should receive out 

of a general pot the same quantity of soup as his 

neighbors. The only remedy is for Liberals and Social 

Democrats to unite in resistance; but that requires 

a modification in the ideas of each, which the Social 

Democrats in particular, who seem bent on 'political 

suicide,' will be slow to concede. We are not so hopeless 

as the Professor; but certainly the trend of events 

in Germany is towards Caesarism in the hands of a 

Caesar whose considerable powers of mind are rendered 

partially useless by perpetual hurry." 

ABOUT OUR PROSPERITY. 



The Pittsburg Gazette editorially says:— 
"While the United States is enjoying unexampled 
prosperity, England is feeling the pinch of hard 
times. Accounts agree that in the poorer parts of 
London and in some of the industrial centers in the 
provinces there is an exceptional amount of distress. 
It is admitted that the year now closing has been 
marked by a decline of industrial prosperity and 
that there is an unusually large per centage of unemployed 
workmen, for whose relief during the winter 
special exertions will have to be made. Similar 
news comes from Russia. Famine prevails in the 
province of Finland, and in all industrial centers there 
is great suffering owing to lack of work. It is reported 
that workmen in important towns are glad to get 
work for 35 copecks a day, equal to 23 cents. The 
depression in England is largely a reaction from artificial 
stimulus of war expenditure, and in Russia it is a 
recoil from over production and over trading in connection 
with the rapid expansion of the empire. Germany 
is beginning to emerge from the depression that overtook 
her industries some years ago, but the recent tariff 
legislation hostile to the commercial treaties which 
stimulated her industrial progress, has clouded the 
prospect again. The industrial prosperity of the 
United States is the admiration and envy of the 



world." 



We receive many queries respecting the probable 
duration of present prosperity. That question no 
human being can answer satisfactorily. The world's 
wars being over and the great war expenditures stopped, 
would naturally mean that prosperity has already 
crested and is on the decline. But who knows what 
may come of the Venezuelan trouble or similar difficulties 
with other states, through the new program of 
the great powers that the claims of private bondholders 
against the smaller nations may be collected by 
force? Who knows that this program and the "Monroe 
Doctrine" may not clash so as to bring about one 
of the greatest sea wars of modern times? Or something 
else, of which we as yet have not a surmise, 
may come forward suddenly to give business a fresh 
spurt. 

So far as the Scriptures guide us, we expect the 
climax of the great time of anarchous trouble in October, 
1914. Our opinion is that so great a trouble 
would necessarily last in violent form at least three or 
four years before reaching that climax. Hence, we 
expect strenuous times by or before October, 1910. 
And this agrees well with the corresponding and typical 
trouble with which the Jewish age ended. 

Reasoning backward from 1910 A.D. we are 
bound to assume that the conditions leading up to such 
violence as we then expect would include great financial 
depression which probably would last some years 
before reaching so disheartening a stage. We could not, 
therefore, expect that depression to begin later than, 
say, 1908. Our reasoning is that a depression beginning 
now would culminate too quickly for the dates we 
consider fixed by Scripture, and that there is not sufficient 
time for a depression and then another boom 
and another depression before 1910,— notwithstanding 
the rapid changes of our day. These reasons incline 
us to expect a prolongation of present prosperity for 
a couple of years more. It is because we see no 
other cause than war likely to sustain present prosperity, 
that we are on the lookout for one;— and not 
that we favor or sympathize with wars. 

CATHOLICISM IN THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS. 



Recent reports indicate that the movement among 
the Filipinos to throw off the yoke of the Roman 
Catholic Church is progressing rapidly. They have 
established the "National Filipino Church" modeled 
after the pattern of the Church of England. They 
have chosen as its archbishop "Father Aglipay," an 



excommunicate Catholic priest, and the movement is 
taking well with the people who for so many years 
have been under the oppression of the monks and 
friars, both socially and financially. The latter have 
gotten into their control vast estates and many of the 
most profitable plantations, as well as all the church 
property, schools, etc., with money wrested from the 

R3142:page37 

people for performing funeral and wedding and christening 
services, and for masses and penances, under 
the pretext of saving them from untellable torture in 
the future. 

The people have seized many of the church buildings, 
claiming (we think, properly) that they were 
built with their and their fathers' money and labor 
and belong properly to them; and they are holding 
these by armed force and using them for worship according 
to their lights. Both parties— the people and 
the friars— are appealing to the American Governor 
Taft to decide for them. Neither party seems able to 
understand how church and state are distinctly separate 
with us. The Governor advises both parties that 
he can and will do no deciding of the question— that 
the courts of justice must settle the dispute. Bloodshed 
is feared. 

DISESTABLISHMENT MOVEMENT IN ENGLAND. 



The "Society for the Liberation of Religion from 
State Patronage" is making itself heard. Its Secretary 
recently said:— 

"The education bill and the rapid drift of the 
Anglican church Romeward are the pivotal points of 
the campaign. We contend that the bill is the creation 
of the state-maintained clergy and that it mulcts 
the people for the benefit of a limited class. We also 
contend that such an act would be impossible were the 
religious system independent of the state. The bishop 
of London's vehement protest against Romanist ritualism 
in several Anglican churches comes opportunely 
to aid our agitation. We hold that such 
evils are inherent in an official church which relieves 
the clergy of responsibility to the people and 
insures them life tenure. Unless guilty of gross 
breaches of immorality, Anglican ministers can teach 
anything, from agnosticism to transubstantiation, and 
remain perfectly secure in their clerical strongholds. 
The majority of them are deeply Romanists, but the 
English masses are thoroughly Protestant. When the 
people and not the state have control of the clergy 
the Romeward tendency will cease." 



STATESMEN'S VIEWS ON ZIONISM. 



Lord Salisbury: "Zionism is destined to succeed, 
in spite of the opposition it encounters. The Jews 
are capable of establishing a model government at 
Palestine, and raising the commerce of Asia Minor to 
an unprecedented height. If but forty per cent, of 
the Jews were converted to the project, it would become 
an assured reality. There is no reason why the 
Sultan should object to the establishment of an autonomous 
Jewish government within his dominions. 
There is enough energy and perseverance in the race 
that has resisted oppression for 2,500 years to accomplish 
the purposes pursued by Zionism." 

Ex-Premier Bourgeois: "The Jewish nation is 
too individual, too dissimilar, to other nations, to lose 
itself in assimilation. Zionism is essentially war upon 
Antisemitism— a phenomenon even more injurious to 
the dominant nations than to the Jews themselves, 
for it has a demoralizing effect, fostering hatred and 
checking the growth of the liberal spirit. The Jews 
are now reasserting themselves as a new-born nation 
and vigorously proclaiming their status as one. We 
may expect much from them, as they possess much 
intellectual power. Zionism is to be hailed as the 
solvent of Antisemitism, which will lose its raison 
d'etre with the unification and rehabilitation of the 
scattered and oppressed race." 



R3142:page37 

THE TRUE FOLD NOT A PEN. 

MANY OF THE LORD'S SHEEP are penned 

in behind various creeds of men and thus 

hindered from obtaining the food and exercising 

the liberty which Christ, the great Shepherd of 

the sheep, intended they should have. It is contrary 

to the will of the great Chief Shepherd that his sheep 

should be separated from each other by pens, and hindered 

from the proper liberties of the fold. There is 

one general enclosure behind which all the true sheep 

of this age and flock will be found; and to it the Lord 

informs us there is but the one door— himself. 

We might assume that all know something about 
this one fold and its one door; but this would be a mistake; 
many are so confused by the numerous man-made 
folds of Christendom that they confound these 
with the true. Some "wolves" are disappointed to 
find that the Good Shepherd who gave his life for the 
"sheep" has provided certain limitations beyond which 
the sheep cannot go if they obey his voice (his Word), 



and beyond which they do not desire to go if they are 
actually his sheep. 

Let those who like call this true fold, with its 
well-defined walls, "a man-made pen";— those who 
enjoy its security, enjoy also its liberty. It has one 
and only one wall, great and high, which so far has 
kept out the "wolves," except such as pretend to be 
sheep— who come arrayed in sheep's clothing. This 
wall is faith in Christ as man's ransom-sacrifice— finished 
at Calvary. 

None whom that fence excludes are "sheep." 
And behind that simple, yet strong, creed-fence there 
is all the liberty proper for the Lord's "sheep;"— 
though probably not nearly enough for the "goats." 

Further, while it is wrong for under-shepherds or 
anyone else to erect denominational fences inside this 
true fold, or to entice the "sheep" into them, and thus 
to restrain their liberties within the fold,— it is not 
only proper, but a part of the true under-shepherd's 
duty to protect the flock within the true enclosure 
of the true fold, from the "wolves in sheep's clothing" 
wherever found. No doubt it was as a type of the true 
Shepherd of the Lord's flock, that David [i.e., the Beloved], 
while defending his flocks, slew a lion, and a 
bear, and delivered the sheep of his charge. 

Our Lord, the great Chief Shepherd, set an example 
to the under-shepherds; and all true ones of 
his appointment must needs have the same spirit or 
soon lose their office. It was he who forewarned the 

R3142:page38 

true sheep, saying, "Beware of false prophets [teachers], 
which come to you in sheep's clothing [professing 
to be of the Lord's flock, but in reality not such, 
because they do not trust in the great sacrifice offered 
once for all for their sins], but inwardly they are ravening 
wolves [who would destroy your faith in the 
ransom, and thus destroy you as "sheep"]. But he 
that is a hireling and not the shepherd,. ..seeth 
the wolf [the false teacher] coming, and leaveth the 
sheep, and fleeth; and the wolf [the false teacher] 
catcheth them and scattereth the sheep.... I lay 
down my life for the sheep."— Matt. 7:15; 
John 10:12-15. 

It is not the approval of the "wolves," in sheep's 
clothing or without it, that is to be courted by the 
true under-shepherd. He will, however, have the 
approval of the Chief Shepherd, and of all the developed 
sheep who have their senses exercised by reason 
of use. The Apostle Paul battled hard against 
such false teachers, who affected to be believers, 
"sheep," while they were not such. Speaking on this 
subject he said to the Elders (under-shepherds) of the 
Church at Ephesus:— 

"I take you to record this day that I am pure 



from the blood of all.... Take heed, therefore, 
unto yourselves and to all the flock, over which the 
holy Spirit hath made you overseers [shepherds], to 
feed the Church of God which he hath purchased with 
his own blood [—faith in which purchase constitutes 
them 'sheep']. For I know this, that after my departing 
grievous wolves shall enter in among you [in 
sheep's clothing, of course, otherwise they would not 
be received], not sparing the flock. Also of your own 
selves shall men arise speaking contrary things 
[things different from what I, Paul, have taught] to 
draw away disciples [followers] after themselves. 
Therefore watch, and remember that by the space of 
three years I ceased not to warn every one night and 
day with tears."— Acts 20:26-31. 

The Apostle Peter, too, made a similar appeal 
to the under-shepherds, saying, "The elders which are 
among you I exhort.... Feed the flock of God, as 
much as in you is, taking oversight thereof, not by 
constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of 
a willing mind." "But as there were false prophets 
[in the past— 'wolves in sheep's clothing'] even so 
there shall be false teachers among you, who privily 
[deceptively, covering the real purport of their 
teachings] shall bring in [to the fold] damnable 
heresies [errors leading to condemnation and rejection] 
even denying the Lord that bought them.... 
And many shall follow their pernicious ways; by reason 
of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken 
of."-l Pet. 5:1-4; 2 Pet. 2:1,2. 

The Apostle John also cautions us, saying: 
"Look to yourselves, that we lose not those things 
which we have wrought, but that we receive a full 
reward. ...He that abideth in the doctrine of Christ 
[that the Son of Man came to give himself a ransom 
for all-Matt. 20:28; 1 Tim. 2:6] he hath both the 
Father and the Son. If there come any unto you [as 
a would-be teacher of the 'sheep'] and bring not this 
doctrine [of the ransom, taught by Christ], receive him 
not into your house, neither bid him God speed; for 
he that biddeth him God-speed [or who even indirectly 
helps to spread the 'damnable heresy' that we 
were not bought by the Lord] is partaker of the evil 
work [of him who publicly and openly does so]."— 
2 John 8-11. 

Thus we see that the duty of under-shepherds 
to protect the flock from deceptive wolves, as well 
as to feed them meat in due season, has been recognized 
from the start;— because from the start there 
have been such wolves. And since the holy Spirit 
gave special warnings that in the end of the age "evil 
men and leaders astray" would wax more and more 
bold, and that through their instrumentality Satan 
would propagate error, and affect to be a messenger 
of light, is it not due time for all the sheep to recognise 
these facts, and not to be deceived by "feigned 



words" and "fair speeches"? The true sheep must 
not judge of fellow sheep by the pelt; for a wolf can 
wear a sheep's pelt: they must learn to note the Shepherd's 
voice and manner— directly through his Word, 
and indirectly through those whom he shall use as 
his representatives to "feed the flock over which the 

R3143 : page 38 

holy Spirit hath made them overseers [shepherds]." 

Not only did the Apostle Paul thus direct the 
under-shepherds, but he points out the advisability 
of this to the flock, since it is thus that the Chief 
Shepherd leads and feeds and keeps his flock.— Heb. 13:17; 
Eph. 4:11-16; 1 Cor. 12:27-31; Psa. 91:11,12. 

Let us stand fast, therefore, in that liberty wherewith 
Christ hath made us free;— allowing no one to 
pen us up by human creeds;— neither allowing any 
to lead us out beyond the bounds fixed for us by the 
Chief-Shepherd, into liberties, licenses and speculations 
that he never authorized. Let us abide in Him, 
keeping ourselves in the love of God, as saith the 
Apostle. 



R3143 : page 38 

PAUL AT CORINTH. 

-ACTS 18:1-11-FEBRUARY 8.- 

"Other foundation can no man lay than is 
laid, which is Jesus Christ."— 1 Cor. 3:11. 

ATHENS did not prove to be a very successful 

field for the Apostle Paul's labors. He quickly 

perceived that, although its citizens were 

chiefly engaged in hearing new things and in philosophizing 

on every subject, including religion, nevertheless, 

the tendency of science and philosophy, falsely 

so-called, so occupied their attention and so satisfied 

their minds that they were not as ready for the truth 

as some others less highly educated and less philosophical. 

The Apostle's experience in this respect coincides 

with that of all who, in sincerity, preach the gospel 

of Christ stripped of all human invention and philosophy. 

R3143 : page 39 

His experience illustrates his declaration that 
God does not choose many great or wise or learned, 
according to the course or standard of this world, but 
chiefly the poor of this world, socially, philosophically 
and financially, to be heirs of the Kingdom; because this 
class is more inclined to receive the faith and to become 



rich therein. 

Leaving Athens, the Apostle journeyed about 
forty miles to Corinth, a prominent city of Greece, 
though very different from Athens. It was a commercial 
city, noted for its manufactures, architecture, paintings, 
Corinthian brass, or bronze, etc. It was much 
less moral than Athens, much less refined, much less 
given to the study of religious themes, but, nevertheless, 
a better field for the gospel. Where religious forms 
and ceremonies become popular they are apt to have 
correspondingly the less weight and force. Where sin, 
immorality and irreligion are popular, those minds 
which have a religious trend are apt to be freer, more 
open for the truth, because unsatisfied by formalism, 
and because they more keenly recognize righteousness 
by its sharp contrast with the sin abounding. Similarly 
today, the truth is likely to receive a cooler reception 
amongst those whose religious sensibilities are to 
some extent satisfied by forms and ceremonies: truth 
usually makes better progress today in places where to 
some extent irreligion seems to have the upper hand 
(as in Corinth), and where, therefore, virtue is at a 
higher premium. The heart most ready for the truth 
is the one which is not satiated and stupefied with religious 
formalism; but which realizes to some extent 
the exceeding sinfulness of sin and longs for the righteousness 
which is of God. Hungering and thirsting after 
righteousness is induced by such conditions. Like the 
Apostle, we are to discern the most fruitful fields, and 
spend our energies upon them, leaving the other fields 
for a more convenient season, whether it shall come 
during the present age or during the Millennium. The 
Apostle apparently stayed but a few days at Athens, 
but abode a year and a half at Corinth— the irreligious 
city, where he found many honest-hearted people, to 
whom the Lord directed the gospel through him. 

The Emperor Claudius Caesar was reigning at this 
time, and the historian says that he "drove the Jews 
from Rome, because they were incessantly raising tumults 
at the instigation of a certain Chrestus." This 
was about the year A.D. 52, about twenty years after 
Pentecost, and it is surmised by some that the historian 
wrote Chrestus instead of Christus, a less common 
name, and that his reference was to dissensions 
among the Jews respecting the principles of Christianity, 
which by this time had doubtless reached Rome. 
That Christianity was already established in Rome before 
Paul's going there seems to be implied by his expression, 
"I am ready to preach the gospel to you who 
are at Rome also." (Rom. 1:8-15.) The supposition 
is that Aquila, a Jew, with his wife, Priscilla, a Gentile, 
who were amongst those driven from Rome, had received 
the message of the gospel, and that the Apostle 
going to Corinth found Aquila readily by reason of their 
being of the same craft or trade— tent-makers. 

It was customary at that time that the sons of all 



the upper class of people should learn a trade, however 
well educated otherwise. St. Paul's trade as a tent-maker 
stood him now in good place, enabling him to 
provide for his necessities, while preaching the gospel 
of Christ. From his own explanation of the matter we 
learn that even after a considerable number of believers 
had been gathered at Corinth as a Church, the Apostle 
maintained himself by his trade— not because it would 
have been a sin for him to have received money and 
support from the believers there, but because he hoped 
that the gospel would commend itself more to many if 
its chief expounder were seen to be laboring not for the 
meat that perisheth, nor for wealth, but preaching the gospel 
without charge— laying down his life for the brethren. 
There is a lesson in this for all of the Lord's people 
who have talent as ministers of the Word. Our 
object, like that of the Apostle, should be seen to be 
that "we seek not yours, but you. "—2 Cor. 12:14. 

The Apostle evidently lost no time in showing his 
colors— engaging with as much wisdom as possible in 
the preaching of the gospel to the Jews and Jewish 
proselytes from amongst the Greeks in their synagogue. 
He was not in this an intruder, for such was the custom 
of the synagogue;— that any person of ability had the 
privilege of giving an exposition of the teachings of the 
Law and the Prophets. The Apostle was a man of 
some ability, and apparently in every city he at first 
was welcomed; the subsequent hatred of himself and 
his theme being the logical result of the wrong condition 
of heart on the part of those who heard— their unwillingness 
to receive the truth in the love of it— their 
preference for the traditions of the elders, with their 
more or less error, rejecting the light of the truth as it 
came to them. We find similar conditions today in 
Christendom, and are following the Scriptural precedent 
when we approach as closely as we can to the 
synagogues of our time, and as nearly as possible do as 
the Apostle did,— reasoning with and persuading the 
attendants at divine worship. Under the usages of our 
time it would be improper for us now to attempt such 
a discussion or reasoning inside church buildings. The 
nearest approach we have is through the printed page, 
on the pavement, near the churches,— but far enough 
away to avoid reasonable prejudice and opposition. 
Let it be noticed also that the proper method of presenting 
the truth today, as in the Apostle's time, is not 

R3143 : page 40 

by haranguing, but by reasonable presentation— appealing 
to the testimony of the Word of God in a logical 
and a reasonable manner. Let us rejoice that we find 
ourselves in such good accord with apostolic methods, 
and resolve that we will refrain from any other methods, 
however popular they may be with those who follow 
not with us. 



How long the Apostle continued in this way is not 
distinctly declared, but in his first letter to that church, 
written some time after, he remarks, "I was with you 
in weakness and in fear and in much trembling; and 
my preaching was not with enticing words of man's 
wisdom, but in the demonstration of the spirit, and 
with power, that your faith should not stand in the 
wisdom of men, but in the power of God." The word 
"weakness" in this text may be properly understood 
to imply that the Apostle was physically weak, possibly 
for a time ailing to such an extent as to be unable 
to work at his trade, because, referring again to the 
matter (2 Cor. 1 1:9) he intimates that for a time he 
was in want. This noble soldier of the cross was evidently 
permitted of the Lord to have a little season of 
measurable discouragement, when the sunshine of divine 
favor was to some extent beclouded by temporal 
difficulties: probably his physical weakness to some 
extent produced melancholy— "trembling with fear." 
He had no thought of abandoning the warfare in which 
he had enlisted himself even unto death, but apparently 
his recent experiences at Thessalonica, at Berea and at 
Athens, were causing him to wonder whether or not he 
was too aggressive in the presentation of the gospel— 
whether or not he was inclined needlessly to bring 
upon himself persecution, and was thus perhaps interfering 
with the Lord's work, rather than helping it forward, 
as he desired. Now he was, for the time, at 
least, disposed to be extremely careful how he presented 
the message,— how that, as our Golden Text expresses 
it, there is no salvation, no harmony with God, 
no eternal life by the law, nor by any other means 
than through the Lord Jesus Christ. 

It was about this time that the Lord comforted and 
encouraged the Apostle by the arrival of Silas and Timothy, 
whom he had left in Berea. They brought with 
them not only the comfort and encouragement of a good 
report of the work behind them, the fruitage of his labors, 
but additionally brought presents from the brethren, 
which supplied his necessities, and caused his 
heart to rejoice because of the evidence of their brotherly 
love, and that the gospel had reached their hearts 

R3144:page40 

and even down into their pocket-books. The presence 

of these two fellow-helpers, in whom he had so much 

confidence, was a refreshment of spirit to the Apostle. 

Their coming not only brought physical strength, but 

an energy of spirit— an increased earnestness and force 

to his preaching: he no longer felt so timid, trembling, 

fearful. This is still true amongst the Lord's people— 

the strongest of the brethren need the help, the encouragement, 

the assistance of others. The Lord has so 

arranged it that we may not feel ourselves entirely self-sufficient, 

and that even our proper leaning upon the 



Lord shall seem to require also the co-operation, encouragement, 
sympathy and love of the fellow-laborers in 
the vineyard. 

Who that has borne any measure of labor and heat 
of the day in the gospel service cannot sympathize 
with this thought? Here, then, is a way in which 
many of the Lord's dear people who have not themselves 
the largest amount of talent or opportunity for 
service may be co-laborers and assistants in the gospel 
work. The Apostle mentions these helpers in the 
same breath with the more able servants of the truth, 
saying, "Ye endured a great fight of afflictions, partly 
whilst ye were made a gazing-stock, both by reproaches 
and afflictions, and partly whilst ye became the companions 
of them that were so used."— Heb. 10:32,33. 

Encouraged, revived in spirit, the Apostle was 
bolder now to tell the Jews and Greek proselytes plainly 
that there is no salvation except through Christ. 
The effect of this plain declaration was that he was no 
longer made welcome in the synagogue, and the opposition 
becoming violent, he shook his raiment, as an 
indication that he had nothing further to present, and 
would discontinue the discussion, declaring that their 
responsibility rested with themselves; that he had done 
all in his power to preach the good tidings to them 
first, as was proper; but that now henceforth, according 
to the scriptural declaration, the message should be 
proclaimed outside the synagogue, to any who had ears 
to hear it and hearts to receive it. The new meeting 
was started close to the synagogue, to the intent that 
the message he had already delivered might be impressed 
more and more upon those who had heard it— 
that they should not forget his declaration that the 
promise made to the fathers was in process of fulfilment 
in Christ, and those who accept him. 

One of the chief men of the synagogue, and various 
of the people at Corinth were favorably impressed by 
the gospel message, and the Church of Corinth thus 
took its start in the house of Justus. The believers 
testified their acceptance by baptism— the true baptism 
of consecration, we may be sure, first, but also the outward 
symbolic water baptism, which would be a testimony 
to others and which is referred to in this lesson. 

The Apostle, still meditating the propriety of greater 
moderation in preaching Jesus and the resurrection, 
was by this time, perhaps, feeling fearful of further difficulties 
with the Jews, and the trouble they could stir up 
with the authorities. Doubtless he had in mind previous 

R3144:page41 

experiences, and was debating mentally whether 
or not he should leave before the persecution set in,— 
whether or not it was the Lord's will that he should be 
so courageous in the presentations of the truth as to 
awaken further hostilities against himself and all the 



brethren. The Lord came to the assistance of his faithful 
servant, and instructed him in a dream that he should neither 
leave nor hold his peace— that there were many people 
there of right condition of heart to receive the truth. 

It is an encouragement to us to note this, another 
evidence that the Lord himself has supervision of his 
own work, and guides those who are truly his servants, 
—who seek not their own will nor their own honor, but 
to glorify him in their bodies and spirits which are his. 
The necessity for such admonishing by dreams is less 
today than in the Apostle's day, because the Word of 
the Lord is now complete, and in the hands of his people 
in convenient form, that they can, through the experience 
and instruction of the apostles, know what 
to expect and how to do;— whereas the Apostle was 
treading a new path and needed to be guided therein. 
We of today may know assuredly that it is the Lord's 
will that we should exercise wisdom in the presentation 
of his Word, and that grace should be poured upon our 
lips, that they may minister blessing to the hearers; 
but that we shall not hold our peace nor flee to another 
city until persecution has come to such a pitch as to 
almost necessitate removal. 

We should not dare to say that the Lord might not 
use a dream today to instruct and guide his people, as 
he did the Apostle, but we do say that there is less necessity 
for such special direction, since the general 
directions of his Word are now explicit and amplified. 
We do suggest, however, that as the Apostle says, 
"Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits," 
so we may well say to ourselves, Believe not every 
dream, but test the dream— whether it be of God or not. 
A dream must never lead us in opposition to the written 
Word of God, but if it can be understood in harmony 
with the Word and its reasonable interpretation, 
we should rejoice in it and be thereby encouraged to 
follow the Word. If the dream agree not with this 
Word it is because there is no light in it. (Isa. 8:20.) 
We are confident that many dreams are not of God, the 
majority probably being of indigestion, and some quite 
probably of the evil one. Hence, we have the more 
need of care that we follow not a dream, because it is a 
dream, but at very most permit it to direct us to the 
plain instruction of the Lord's Word. 

The Lord's promise that no man should set on the 
Apostle to hurt was fulfilled; for, although a disturbance 
was created and he was taken before the magistracy, 
no violence was done him, and the case was dismissed 
by the Roman governor. As with the Apostle, 
so with us; in the Lord's wisdom varying experiences 
may be to our advantage. Sometimes it may be advantageous 
to us and the cause that we should seem to be 
defeated and forced to flight. We may rely, however, 
that the Lord understands the situation fully, and will 
not permit his work to be disconcerted and interrupted 
to its real disadvantage. Long ago some one said, "I 



am immortal until my work is finished;" and we may 
rely upon it that this is practically true of all engaged in 
the Lord's service— that "Precious in the sight of the 
Lord is the death of his saints." He will use and protect 
and guide them in their affairs, in ways that will be 
to his pleasement, and eventually to their highest welfare, 
—to the intent that all of his good purposes shall 
be accomplished. 

Why, then, should we fear what man may do unto 
us, or be distressed in regard to the Lord's work, as 
though Satan or any other evil power could prevail 
against it? Nevertheless, it is for us to show our devotion, 
not only by our zeal, but also by our prudence. 
While God knows what will prosper, he declares of us, 
"Thou knowest not which shall prosper, this or that" 
—therefore, we are to proceed in the Lord's work as 
though the entire responsibility rested upon us, but 
in our hearts are to recognize that the entire weight and 
responsibility rests with the Lord. 

Our Golden Text gives us the central theme of the 
Apostle's preaching on every occasion. It would be a 
poor text for Higher Critics, for Evolutionists, for Theosophists, 
for Christian Scientists, and for most other of 
the new gospels so numerous in our day. Let us hold 
fast to the same message which the Apostle preached, 
which recognizes no other foundation than Christ, and 
no other Church and no other salvation than that built 
upon that foundation. Other structures, built upon 
other foundations, are anti-Christian, however smooth 
their philosophy, however arrayed in a garment of 
light to deceive, if possible, the very elect. 



R3144:page41 

"KNOWLEDGE PUFFETH UP; BUT LOVE BUILDETH UP. 

-1 CORINTHIANS 8:1-13-FEBRUARY 15.- 

"Let us, therefore, follow after the things 
which make for peace."— Rom. 14:19. 

ABOUT three and a half years after the Apostle 

Paul left Corinth he wrote to the Church there 

the first Epistle to the Corinthians, and our 

present lesson concerns one of its important topics. 

The question of religious liberty, and the propriety or 

impropriety of eating meat which had been offered to 

idols, might at first seem unnecessary to discuss; but, 

as the Apostle handles the subject in our lesson, he develops 

R3144:page42 

from it a valuable lesson along general principles, 
valuable to the Church now, as well as then, in 



connection with various other matters. 

Some of the Corinthian Church had evidently 
made considerable progress in knowledge, and heartily 
appreciated the fact that since an idol is nothing, meat 
offered to the idol cannot in any sense of the word be 
injured. Nevertheless, in the conference of the apostles 
at Jerusalem it had been specially recommended 
to the Church at Antioch and to all Christian converts 
from the Gentiles "that they should abstain from meats 
offered to idols." Some of the brethren at Corinth 
perceived that there could be no sin in the eating of 
such meat where their consciences were not violated, 
and concluded that the admonitions of the Apostles 
were not a law to the Church, but a recommendation, 
and had proceeded to use their liberties— to eat meat 
offered to idols, thinking, perhaps, thus to show not 
only their Christian liberty, but also that they entirely 
disregarded an idol. 

R3145 : page 42 

It will help us to sympathize with them to remember 
that they were in daily contact with heathen neighbors 
who would repeatedly invite them to feasts, entertainments, 
weddings, etc., at which they were sure to 
be served with food that had been offered to idols, and 
which was supposed to be the better therefor. To abstain, 
under such circumstances, would mean more or 
less of an insult to their friends, and the practical ostracism 
of themselves. Some of the brethren took the 
view that they could partake of such refreshments without 
the least injury to their consciences, and at the 
same time show their heathen neighbors that they 
were not narrow and bigoted, but broad-minded;— or 
perhaps explain the matter by saying, "Your god is 
nothing anyway, and could not injure the meat." 

The Apostle intimates that the majority of the 
Church had such knowledge as enabled them to discern 
that an image of wood or stone, being no god, could 
neither improve nor injure the food in any sense or degree; 
but that this knowledge did not necessarily mean 
a great growth in spirituality. A very small mite of 
soap will make a large air bubble; and so, a comparatively 
little knowledge might puff one up greatly, without 
any solidity of character. He points out the advantage, 
therefore, of measuring oneself by growth in love, rather 
than by growth merely in knowledge— though, of 
course, to be great in both knowledge and love would 
be the ideal condition. The same lesson the Apostle 
inculcates further on (1 Cor. 13:2) asserting "though I 
have all knowledge and have not love I am nothing." 
Knowledge without love would be an injury, and to 
consider it otherwise would imply that real knowledge 
has not yet been secured; but, says the Apostle, to the 
contrary of this, "If any man love God, the same is 
known to him,"— acquainted with him. We might 



have a great deal of knowledge, and yet not know God, 

and not be known or recognized by him; but no man 

can have a large development of true love in his character 

without personally knowing the Lord and obtaining 

the spirit of love through fellowship with him. 

Hence, the getting of love is sure to build us up substantially 

(avoiding the inflation of pride) in all the 

various graces of the spirit, including meekness, gentleness, 

patience, long-suffering, brotherly kindness, 

knowledge, wisdom from above and the spirit of a sound 

mind. 

Having laid down this premise, the Apostle proceeds 
to build his argument thereon, and to show 
that although it is true, as claimed, that the idol could 
do no injury to the food, nevertheless with Christians 
love must have the last word on the matter. Love, 
after securing knowledge and liberty, will look about 
to see what effect the use of liberty might have upon 
others; and would perceive that by reason of differing 
conditions of mental strength, perception, reasoning faculties, 
etc., all could not have exactly the same standpoint 
of knowledge and appreciation of principles. Love, 
therefore, would forbid the use of knowledge and liberty 
if it perceived that their exercise might work injury 
to another. 

True, there is only one God, and idols, therefore, 
are nothing as gods; nevertheless, the appreciation of 
idols as gods had become so ingrained in the thought 
of many that it would be impossible for them fully to 
divest themselves of some respect for the idols— impossible 
for them to eat meat that had been offered to 
idols without the feeling that in some sense of the word 
they had done wrong— had been contaminated or injured 
by the unholy associations. This would be true 
also of food offered to the heavenly bodies worshiped 
as gods— the sun, moon and stars. 

Knowledge is beneficial;— "To us there is but one 
God, the Father;" of, or from whom, as the first cause 
or Creator, all things came, including ourselves; and 
there is one Lord, Jesus Christ, by, or through whom 
all things, including ourselves, have been brought 
into existence. The knowledge which would enable us 
to discern this matter clearly would assuredly be of 
advantage. But some dear brethren did not possess 
ability to reason clearly from this premise, and they 
had a claim upon their stronger brethren under the Law 
of Love. 

We must pause a moment in our consideration of 
vs. 6, not because the Apostle's language is in any measure 
obscure; but because the Adversary seeks continually 
to wrest the Scriptures, and to misrepresent their 
plain teachings, and thus to mislead the Lord's flock. 
We refer to the false teaching abroad today, that this 

R3145 : page 43 



statement, "Of whom are all things," signifies that all 

the sin, all the wickedness, etc., of the world are from 

God; are his direct work, traceable to him as their 

author or fountain. Surely it is nothing short of blasphemy 

for anyone who has first tasted of the good Word 

of God, and been made a partaker of the holy spirit, 

thus to attribute to God the various evils which, throughout 

the Scriptures are uniformly condemned, and which 

God declares he will ultimately— "in due time"— destroy! 

The Scriptures are clear in their statement 

that "all his work is perfect;" that "God is not the 

author of confusion;" that "God tempteth no man," 

and is not in accord with any suggestion to the effect 

that evil may be done so that good results may follow. 

(Deut. 32:4; Rom. 3:8; 1 Cor. 14:33; Jas. 1:13; 1 Pet. 3:11.) 

It is in full agreement with the declaration 

that "all his work is perfect," that having made 

Satan a perfect being, as also he made our race perfect, 

representatively in Adam, God has not hindered his 

free moral agents from taking a course of sin in violation 

of his commands. His wisdom and power are 

such that he will eventually bring a blessing out of 

these evils to those who are not in sympathy with them, 

but the evils themselves, yea, and "all the wicked, will 

he destroy."— Psa. 145:20. 

The Apostle proceeds in his argument to show that 
it is not the food that we eat that makes us acceptable 
to God, neither our abstaining from any particular 
food. Our relationship to God is that of the New Creation, 
a heart relationship; and the blessing which the 
Lord gives us is as newly begotten children,— not along 
the lines of the flesh, but along the lines of the spiritual 
and heart development, which shall ultimately be 
perfected in the resurrection. 

True, "whom the Son makes free is free indeed," 
and we all should "seek to stand fast in the liberty 
wherewith Christ makes free;" but it is also true that 
we need to be on guard lest we use our liberty in such 
a manner as would stumble others more weak than ourselves, 
—not so able to use the liberty of Christ discriminatingly. 
The liberty wherewith Christ makes free 
may be viewed from two standpoints: if it gives us 
liberty to eat without restraint, in a manner that the 
Jews were not at liberty to eat, it gives us liberty also 
to abstain;— and whoever has the spirit of Christ and 
is seeking to follow in his steps has already covenanted 
to the Lord to use his liberty, not in the promotion of 
his fleshly desires, ambitions and appetites; but in self-sacrifice, 
following in the footsteps of the Master, seeking 
to lay down his life, even, on behalf of the brethren 
—for their assistance. How different are these two 
uses of liberty! Its selfish use would mean self-gratification, 
regardless of the interests of others; its loving use 
would prompt to self-sacrifice in the interests of others. 

But why?— what principle is involved that would 
make it incumbent upon one whose conscience is clear 



to consider the conscience of another? Why not let the 

person of the weak conscience take care of his own conscience, 

and eat or abstain from eating as he felt disposed? 

The Apostle explains that this would be all 

right if it were possible; but that the person of weaker 

mind, feebler reasoning powers, is likely to be weaker 

in every respect and, hence, more susceptible to the 

leadings of others— into paths which his conscience 

could not approve, because of his weaker reasoning 

powers or inferior knowledge. One might, without 

violation of conscience, eat meat that had been offered 

to idols, or even sit at a feast in an idol temple, without 

injury to his conscience; but the other, feeling that 

such a course was wrong, might endeavor to follow the 

example of his stronger brother, and thus might violate 

his conscience, which would make it a sin to him. 

Every violation of conscience, whether the thing itself 

be right or wrong, is a step in the direction of wilful 

sin— it is a downward course, leading further and further 

away from the communion and fellowship with 

the Lord, and into grosser and grosser transgressions 

of conscience and, hence, possibly leading to the Second 

Death. Thus the Apostle presents the matter: 

"For through thy knowledge he that is weak perisheth, 

—the brother for whose sake Christ died." 

The question is not, Would it be a sin to eat the 
meat offered to idols? but, Would it be sin against the 
spirit of love, the law of the New Creation, to do anything 
which could reasonably prove a cause of stumbling 
to our brother;— not only to the brethren in Christ, 
the Church, but even to a fellow-creature according to 
the flesh?— for Christ died for the sins of the whole 
world. It is a very serious crime against the law of 
love and against the Lord's injunction, to cause one of 
his brethren to stumble (Rom. 14:13,21; Matt. 18:6), 
but it would also be a crime in his sight for us to stumble 
others,— to hinder them from becoming brethren, 
and of the household of faith. Hence, it is clear that 
although knowledge might remove all prohibition of 
our consciences and all restraints of our liberty, yet 
love must first come in and approve the liberty before 
we can exercise it. Love places a firm command upon 
us, saying,— Thou shalt love the Lord with all thine 
heart, and thy neighbor as thyself. Love, therefore, 
and not knowledge, not liberty, must finally decide 
every question. 

Let us take our stand with the Lord, and determine 
that so far from using our liberties in any manner 
that might do injury to others we will refuse so to use 
them; and will rather sacrifice them for the benefit of 
others;— even as our Master, as our Redeemer, gave 
all that he had. Let us adopt the words of the Apostle 

R3146 : page 44 

in the last verse of this lesson, and determine once for 



all that anything that would injure a brother we will 
not do— any liberty of ours, however reasonable in itself, 
that would work our brother's injury, that liberty 
we will not exercise; we will surrender it in his interest; 
we will sacrifice it; we will to that extent, on his 
behalf, lay down our life for him. 

There is, perhaps, occasionally a danger of misapplication 
of this principle; as, for instance, the Doukhobors 
might say to us, We regard that it is wrong to eat any meat 
and wrong even to use the skins of animals for shoes, 
and you are to condescend to our weak consciences in 
this matter, and ought not to eat meat or wear shoes 
either. We answer that that is not a similar question to 
the one which the Apostle has explained in which we 
should surrender our liberties. On the contrary, the 
Word of the Lord and the customs of society are all 
opposed to these bewildered people, and to yield to 
their mental unbalance on this question would be to 
assist them in a wrong direction. Our abstaining from 
eating meat or from the wearing of shoes would in no 
sense of the word help them to better views; nor does 
our eating of meat or wearing of leather in any sense of 
the word interfere with their consciences. Other brethren 
have an antipathy to the use of instrumental music in 
the worship of God, as there used to be people who objected 
to having meeting places heated and provided 
with comfortable seats. These may sometimes abuse 
the Apostle's argument, claiming that their consciences 
are injured by the liberties of the brethren; and that 
such liberties should be abridged in their interest. Our 
answer to them must also be,— that they misapply the 
Apostle's argument: it is not his meaning that the 
Lord's people are to favor the mental crotchets of each 
other in such a manner as would be to the general injury 
of the Church. Superstitions are not to be encouraged 
in the Church, nor its spiritual advantages and 
liberties sacrificed on account of them. Nevertheless, 
love must always have a voice in all of the affairs of 
the Lord's people; and even such as would mistakenly 
impose upon their brethren upon the score of 
weakness, should be treated with love, and their objections, 
etc., should be reasoned upon. They should see 
that they have full liberty to do any and everything 
that the Lord requires of them, abstaining from every 
appearance of evil, and that their brethren should be 
accorded the same privileges. If they cannot conscientiously 
sing with instrumental music or sing hymns, 
let them keep silence, or for the time do their singing 
at home. Praising God with instruments is a very different 
question from eating in an idol's temple. 

A somewhat similar question to this one which the 
Apostle decided, may come before us today in respect 
to attendance at public worship in the nominal churches, 
Protestant and Catholic— including the propriety of partaking 
of the "sacrament" or the "Mass." On such a 
question each has personal liberty; each should be fully 



persuaded in his own mind, and follow the direction of 

his own conscience. In our judgment it would be a 

much more serious offense to partake of the Mass in 

Roman Catholic, Greek Catholic or High Episcopal 

Church services, than to sit in an idol temple and partake 

of the foods offered to the idols; because the Mass 

is particularly an abomination before the Lord. (Heb. 7:25; 

10:14.) As respects participation in the Lord's 

Supper, as observed by the majority of Protestants: 

We could see no harm in this of itself;— those participating 

might intelligently reverence and worship God 

in such a manner, even though realizing the inappropriateness, 

according to the Scriptures, of such a celebration. 

We would, however, think that a regular 

participation in the services of Babylon and in her misinterpretation 

of the Lord's Supper would be reprehensible; 

—injurious to our own spiritual progress, and 

dangerous also in the stumbling of some weaker in their 

discernments. Our advice, therefore, would be that 

on the one hand we do not feel such a restraint that we 

would fear to enter a nominal church building to hear 

a service there; and on the other hand that we do not 

seem to give our assent to their errors by regular attendance 

and participation— except at such meetings 

as would afford us full opportunity for the presentation 

of the truth. 

Another illustration of this principle in our times, 
is found in the liquor question. There will be no dispute 
that it would be wrong for any man to get drunk 
—to lose his senses, and additionally to render himself 
liable to do injury to others, and surely to dishonor his 
Creator. The question of liberty comes in only in respect 
to the use of liquors in such a manner as would 
work no dishonor to God and no injury either to ourselves 
or to our neighbors. All recognize the fact that 
intoxicating liquors are a dangerous temptation to the 
world in general, and our suggestion to the brethren 
who feel that they have full power of self-control in the 
use of liquors, is that they apply the argument of the 
Apostle in this lesson, and determine whether they could 
not more honor the Lord and help those who are weaker 
than themselves by using their liberty in the direction 
of total abstinence,— sacrifice of rights,— rather 
than by using it in moderate drinking. 

So far as we are able to discern, intoxication is one 
of the most terrible evils scourging our race at the 
present time. Many are so weak through the fall, by 
heredity, that they are totally unable to resist the control 
of intoxicants, if once they yield to them. Is it 
too much to ask of those who have consecrated their 
lives to the Lord, to righteousness and to the blessing 

R3146 : page 45 

of others, that they should deny themselves in this 
matter, and thus lay down some liberties and privileges 



in the interest of the brethren, and in the interest 
of the world in general? 

Similar arguments might be urged respecting the 
use of tobacco, cards and the various implements which 
the Adversary uses in luring mankind into sin. The 
whole, be it noted, is the argument of love. In proportion 
as we grow in the graces of our Lord, in his 
spirit of love, we will be glad, not only to put away all 
filthiness of the flesh for our own sakes, and to be more 
like the Lord, but also, at the instance of love, we 
would desire to put away from us everything that 
might have an evil influence upon others, whatever we 
might consider our personal liberties to be in respect 
to them. 

Our Golden Text is in place here— it appeals to all 
who have become new creatures in Christ Jesus. "Let 
us, therefore, follow after the things which make for 
peace"— for the blessing of others and for our own 
blessing and upbuilding as new creatures in Christ, 
members of his body. 

R3146 : page 45 

"IN MY NAME." 

"There were only two or three of us 

Who came to the place of prayer- 
Came in the teeth of a driving storm; 

But for that we did not care, 
Since after our hymns of praise had risen, 

And our earnest prayers were said, 
The Master Himself was present there 

And gave us the living bread. 

"We noted his look in each other's face, 

So loving, and glad, and free: 
We felt his touch when our heads were bowed, 

We heard his 'Come to Me!' 
Nobody saw him lift the latch, 

And none unbarred the door; 
But 'Peace' was his token in every heart, 

And how could we ask for more? 

"Each of us felt the relief from sin, 

Christ's purchase for one and all; 
Each of us dropped his load of care, 

And heard the heavenly call; 
And over our spirits a blessed calm 

Swept in from the Jasper Sea, 
And strength was ours for the toil of life 

In the days that were yet to be. 

"It was only a handful gathered in 

To that little place of prayer. 
Outside were struggle and strife and sin, 

But the Lord himself was there. 



He came to redeem the pledge he gave- 
Wherever his loved ones be, 

To give his comfort and joy to them, 
Though they count but two or three.' 



page 45 

LETTERS OF INTEREST. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:- 

Greetings! Peace be unto you and to all the dear 
coworkers in the Bible House! We praise God more 
and more for the great privilege of being engaged in 
the colporteur work. We often say that we believe if 
the brethren in England who are able to enter this 
branch of the harvest work could only realize how 
sweet is the work there would be more in it. We can 
live well and cheaply, and can much more than make 
a living, so that we are able to give to him that needeth, 
as well as to give a little to the Tract Fund. But, 
of course, the sweetest joy is singing the song of Moses 
and the Lamb from door to door, day by day. Even 
if at times we do not do so well it is a great satisfaction 
to us in having such a good supply of tracts to 
leave one at each house. They are tracts, too, full 
of good clean provender, food for thinking Christians. 
Praise God for such a good supply! 

We have just been in Bristol three weeks today, and 
already we have found hungry souls. One gentleman 
got tract No. 21 and has sent for more food; he now 
has Vol. I. and has become a subscriber to the TOWER. 
As a result of the first Sunday morning's volunteer 
work, a merchant sent for Vol. I. and tracts, and has 
since sent in several orders and contributions. In his 
last letter he writes, "I am reading Vol. I. with intense 
interest and wish all to enter into its joys. Mr. 
Russell has explained things that have troubled me 
for many years." 

We have been doing very well indeed here in 
Bristol. We were never better received anywhere. 
In Manchester a little mission has, with its three 
leaders (two now TOWER subscribers), heartily accepted 
the truth, and will not have anything but the 
truth spoken from the platform. Before leaving, we 
gave them three talks on the chart, and one of the 
leaders offered us money, which of course we thanked 
him for, and suggested that he send it to the Tract 
Fund, which they did. When they begin to send 
money to the Tract Fund, to our mind, it looks well. 
Another dear soul, a sister, to whom we lent the DAWN 
months ago, called to see us some weeks before we left 

M . She said, "I had been praying for more light, 

and when you came that morning I would not buy or 
order, but I thank God you were patient with me, 



and lent me the book. I promised to read it within a 
month, which I did, and now I have come to encourage 
you, for I believe it to be the truth with all my 
heart." She now has all the DAWNS, is also a subscriber, 
and has bought more DAWNS to send away. 

We praise the dear Lord for these things and take 
courage. There are many other interesting cases in 

M , and we believe that in the Lord's due time 

there will be good results from the spread of the truth 
there. We know that you pray for us that God will 
keep us humble and help us to grow more like him. 
Oh, to be nothing, nothing, and Christ all! We long 
for the time when we shall see him as he is. The 
Lord bless you and keep you in the secret of his presence. 

page 46 

With kindest love from us both to you and all 

the dear ones, we are, Your affectionate and grateful 

brethren in our dear Redeemer, 

ALBERT E. LLOYD and FRANK KITTRIDGE,--England. 



R3146 : page 46 

DEAR AND HONORED SERVANT OF CHRIST:- 

You may recollect having received a letter from 
me about a year ago, when I was in India; also, how, 
after ordering a copy of the MILLENNIAL DAWN, I 
returned it, having given up as darkness what had 
seemed light to me. 

Your kind letter of January 9th, 1902, expressing 
your sorrow that I had turned aside "to the husks, theories 
and creeds of men," caused conflicting thoughts 
to arise in my mind again. Former Scriptures that had 
taken hold of me, revealing the utter destruction of 
the wicked in the Second Death, came with power to 
my soul, and I found myself in doubt concerning the 
"orthodox" view. In this state of conflict I cried to 
the Lord for light. The following verse of Scripture 
caused me to know that God would in his own time 
show me clearly which was truth:— "All Scripture is 
given by inspiration of God and is profitable for doctrine." 
I decided that when I had leisure I would study the 
Scriptures on this point of doctrine, using Dr. Young's 
Concordance only to help me find all verses treating 
on the subject. Just then I was busy preparing to 
return to Ireland for a rest. After searching and 
comparing Scripture with Scripture, I became fully 
convinced of the truth of the Second Death; and of the 
non-existence of the soul of either saint or sinner from 
death till the resurrection. 

I confessed this to the elders of the assembly with 
which I was in fellowship, and to other friends and 
evangelists. They expressed their deep sorrow, and 



some denounced me as a heretic, saying they "believed 
all would accept this doctrine of the devil ere 
the Man of Sin would be revealed." 

The elders (known as "Open Brethren") assembled 
to examine me, and decided that I should be 
excommunicated— delivered over to Satan! 1 Cor. 5:4,5; 
2 John 7-11, were the Scriptures read to exclude 
me from their fellowship. Some were in tears, 
but were obliged to submit to the authority of the 
Brethren, which is equal to the authority of the Church 
of Rome. 

In the midst of these trials the Lord filled my 
heart with his own perfect peace, and saved me from 
having a bitter thought against those whom I knew 
were walking in darkness and therefore did not know 
what they were doing. Since being excluded I have 
met a few Christians who are like-minded, so I am not 
so isolated here as I was in India. One of my sisters, 
a brother and a brother-in-law see the Truth and are 
suffering for it. There are some who are seeking 
more light and in many ways the Lord is opening up 
doors of service. 

The missionary friends had hoped that after a 

rest I would return to N next year. But as I 

have written to these, they also will exclude me from 

R3147 : page 46 

their circle. Still, knowing that I am not the servant 
of man, I am confident that if the Lord wants 
me to go to India again, he can and will prepare the 
way for me. 

I regret having returned the MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
and am now ordering a few books. 

With grateful thanks, yours in the patience of 
Jesus Christ, (MISS) M. A. McBRIDE,-Ireland. 



page 46 

DEAR MR. RUSSELL:- 

On leaving Church (of England) one Sunday 
morning, I met one of my fellow workmen at the top 
of the road, and I asked him what he was doing there, 
to which he answered that he was distributing literature 
belonging to the Watch Tower Bible and Tract 
Society, handing me at the same time a tract on Evolution. 
This I read with interest and asked for more 
reading. I next got the DAWN, VOL. I., and had not 
got far before I saw that was the very thing I was in 
need of, as I was quite puzzled with orthodoxy on 
several important doctrines, which you have made so 
clear to me, so much so that the Bible is now a new 
book. I find it the most interesting study which I 
have yet entered into. I am of a studious nature, and 



after reading Vol. I., I got the remaining four volumes, 
which I have just finished, and there are no 
books in my limited library which I prize more than 
your five volumes. The object of this letter is to 
express to you my feelings of gratitude for the great 
help which you have been able to render me by your 
deep insight and clear reasoning of the Scriptures. I 
need hardly say that I am interesting my friends in 
them. 

The plan that you have set forth in the DAWNS 
is one that appeals to one's reason as being rational 
and in harmony with one's conception of a God. 
Apart from such a plan existence remains a riddle. 

With feelings of gratitude to you, I remain, yours 
affectionately, E. WORSNOP,-England. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:- 

I was one of those interested ones who asked 
questions when you were in our city last summer. I 
felt so grateful to you for your explanations, and all the 
time I am growing to love this pure gospel more and 
more. Oh, how I do praise the Lord that he has let 
me hear some of the good things that are untainted 
with the world! I was so weary and heart sore to 
see a color of sin in everything, even in the loudest 
religion! I thought death would be the only relief. 
But when divine love touched me I revived and had 
strength enough to rise and be fed of the Lord, like 
Elijah under the juniper tree. And now I am glad 
that the world was not pleasant to me, else I might 
have been satisfied with it. I used to think that I 
was unfortunate, but now I know that it was just a 
working out of his plan. 

Your fifth volume has been such a blessing to me 
in connection with the Scriptures which it unfolds. 
The Bible grows more beautiful to me all the time. 
Now to me it is the Book of all books. I have seen 
the time when I believe I really preferred Shakespeare 
or Goethe or Darwin or Plato. I say it with 
shame. I do not know what that experience was for, 
unless it was to find out that there is nothing in what 
the world calls great. 

I was brought up religiously and taught to regard 
the Word as sacred and to believe in a personal God 

page 47 

and a personal Savior. I had a natural tendency for 

religion, too, and loved church and Sunday school 

work and Bible study from a child until grown. Then 

Evolution and Higher Criticism played havoc with 

my belief and I came to think I had been greatly imposed 

upon by pretentious theologians, and after 

all the whole thing was only a fraud. This darkness 



in which I was for several years, was great, and so 
I appreciated the light and the truth more when it 
dawned upon me. What a relief! what a joy! I had 
never experienced such previously. Your "Plan of 
the Ages" comes in like a great search-light turned 
upon the Word of God and the Truth is illuminated, 
—there can be no mistake. But why am I so highly 
favored? Others right around me and close to me do 
not see it. That is so distressing ! I can seldom talk 
of these things, but can only pray and wait. The 
Spirit of God does not seem to approve of talking 
very much. I am willing to be patient, as I have put 
myself entirely on the altar, that my death may be as 
absolute as his. 

Yours in the bonds of "peace and good will toward 
men." ALICE M. TAIT,-Indiana. 



R3147 : page 47 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:- 

It has been a long time since I have written you, 
and so I thought to drop you a few lines, just to let 
you know that I am still in the "race," striving to 
reach the "mark." Glory to God! 

Acting upon suggestions received from you previously, 
I have now for the second time refused to 
sign petitions for dram-shop license. I wish to state 
first, that I know you instructed me rightly and Scripturally, 
for which I thank you. Added to this, the 
churches here organized quite a temperance movement, 
with which I also would have no connection, but have 
endeavored to occupy neutral ground; and the same 
in regard to politics; seeing that I am an "alien," I 
would not vote. In consequence there is a disposition 
to persecute me— from all sides, seemingly; because 
formerly I was interested in church work, took part 
in politics and signed petitions for dram-shop 
license. But do not think, dear brother, that I am 
complaining. Nay, "I rejoice in the Lord alway!" 
Formerly I was a member of a fraternal organization, 
and because I refused to accept suggestions from any 
of the Masonic fraternity (which includes all men of 
any prominence in our town) to become a member, 
they likewise have transferred their patronage, generally, 
to a competitor. 

I am realizing how, by taking part in a political 
campaign, or other movement, it would be possible that 
I might be found fighting against the Lord, "who maketh 
even the wrath of men to praise him." I am 
realizing more and more the import of our dear Savior's 
words, while praying to the Father, "They are 
in the world, but not of it." Ah, yes ! This means 
much to any consecrated believer. While we are in 
the world, yet we should keep separate from the 



world— not have our robe "spotted" by contact. If 
we would not be worldly minded, it is necessary that 
we have great care how we act in regard to those 
things which at this present time engage the attention 
of the world generally,— reform movements, matters 
of finance, etc. For inasmuch as we give of our time to 
such things (no, not our time, seeing that we have 
consecrated our all unto the Lord) in so much the 
world has a claim upon us, so that while we are in the 
world, we would also be of the world, seeing that that 
which interests the world would also interest us. "The 
natural (worldly minded) man perceiveth not the 
things that are spiritual," and consequently is not 
interested in them; how much more, then, we that 
do see should not mind the things natural or worldly. 
All such movements which are the absorbing topics of 
the day, merely engender "strife, malice, anger, hatred," 
etc., causing all who have connection therewith 
to foster and cultivate an evil disposition, wholly contrary 
to the law of love. 

Praying the Lord's continued blessings upon you 
and all with you, Yours in the one blessed hope, 
A. W. KRUEGER.-Missouri. 



DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

The many spiritual blessings we have enjoyed 
throughout the year increases our gratitude to and 
love for ZION'S WATCH TOWER. We will not be able 
to comprehend, dear brother, how much we owe the 
Lord this side of the "golden city." Until that glorious 
day when we reach the glad home-land,— the fruition 
of all our hopes,— we take much pleasure in manifesting 
the appreciation of which we are now capable. 

The Society's Annual Report filled my heart with 
thanksgiving. There was only one sad note, for 
which I am grieved, and that was the reference to the 
fact that some of the letters received at the TOWER 
office were filled with acrimony. Truly, this must be 
very painful to you. 

Looking back over the old year I can truthfully 
state it has been a blessed year for me. Enclosed 

find money order for $ ; please credit $ 1 .00 on 

TOWER subscription, and balance in Good Hopes for 
1902. You will also find herewith my Good Hopes 
filled out for 1903. 

Wishing you a very merry Christmas and a happy, 
profitable New Year, with much Christian love, I 
remain, yours in the service of our King, 

CARRIE CROWLEY-Missouri. 



The eight-year old daughter of a sister in the 
truth writes the following herself:— 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I had my choice to go to Eden Musee or have the 
50 cents and I want to consecrate it to the Lord. 
Mamma has told me all about how many different 
ways I could give it to the Lord, and I would rather 
have a part in sending the truth to some one; so you 
will please put it in the Tract Fund. I will send it with 
mamma's. 

I send my love to you and hope I shall see you 
some day. God bless and keep you all. 

Your loving friend, RUTH SNOW,-New Jersey. 



From another of the little ones:— 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

As we children have sold our pony, enclosed 
please find eight dollars, which is my share, to be 
used in the spreading of the truth. 

Your sister in Christ, HATTIE E. HUYCK,-Iowa. 



page 49 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 