From Our Readers
Mormons  I could not believe my eyes when I read the article “The Mormon Church—A Restoration of All Things?” (November 8, 1995) You call yourselves true Christians because you refuse to engage in wars. But I am proud of the Mormons who fought in World War II and helped the Jews, who were being persecuted by Hitler. What were Jehovah’s Witnesses doing at this time besides sitting back and watching six million Jews die?
G. D., Germany
It is true that Mormons in the United States and Britain fought against Nazism. But not so in Germany itself. The book “The Nazi State and the New Religions,” by historian Christine King, vice-chancellor of Staffordshire University in England, reports: “Mormons joined the armed services and there were six hundred Mormons in the German army by 1940. . . . Mormons continued to stress the ‘parallel goals’ of Mormonism and National Socialism. . . . Some Mormon leaders began to instruct their congregations in elements of National Socialism, conducting prayers for the Führer, speaking of him as ‘divinely called.’ . . . There are only two reported cases of Mormons offering resistance to the Nazis.” However, as a group Jehovah’s Witnesses refused to support the Nazi regime. Thus, they became the targets of vicious persecution by Hitler’s government. Thousands suffered imprisonment in concentration camps, and many died there. See our August 22, 1995, issue.—ED.
Photo Mix-Up  The series “Science Fiction—A Glimpse Into Our Future?” (December 8, 1995) was thoroughly enjoyable. However, the picture of Jules Verne on page 3 would seem to be that of William Morris, a 19th-century artist and writer.
R. G., United States
A number of readers caught this mistake. A clerical error was made, and our file photo of William Morris was mislabeled. We apologize for the mix-up.—ED.
Awesome Universe  After reading your series “The Awesome Universe—Where Did It Come From?” (January 22, 1996), I came away with a much clearer understanding of current scientific thought on the universe. Your presentation was highlighted by the skillful use of a plethora of data, sources, and references. As a teacher, I will make good use of the material you presented.
M. P., United States
I have often read similar articles in magazines, but they always failed to give credit to a Designer for such wonders. Your articles provided what was needed to fill that void.
P. B., Italy
Not only was the material factual but it was faith strengthening. It built up our appreciation for our God—the Originator of our wonderful, awesome universe!
C. S., Greece
It was really exciting to read the articles. I am 14 years old, and I have always had an enormous admiration for the universe. These articles made me aware of the insignificance of humans in comparison with the complexity of this creation.
M. D., Portugal
I read the articles with extraordinary interest. I am glad that Awake! deals with such issues. It gave me further insight into the mysteries of the universe, particularly the information regarding the evidence of “bubbles” that are 100 million light-years in size, with numerous galaxies outside and voids inside. This poses a problem for the modern big bang theory! I am impressed by how little we really know about the universe.
D. K., Czech Republic

