R142 : page 1 

VOL. II. 

PITTSBURGH, PA., OCTOBER, 1880. 

NO. 4. 



page 1 

ZION'S 

Watch Tower 

AND 

HERALD OF CHRIST'S 
PRESENCE. 



PUBLISHED MONTHLY. 101 Fifth Ave., PITTSBURGH, PA. 
C. T. RUSSELL, Editor and Publisher. 



REGULAR CONTRIBUTORS. 

J. H PATON, .... ALMONT, MICH. 
W. I. MANN, .... SWISSVALE, PA. 
B. W. KEITH, . . . DANSVILLE, N.Y. 
A. D. JONES, . . . PITTSBURGH, PA. 
L. A. ALLEN, .... HONEOYE, N.Y. 



In no case will the Editor be responsible for all sentiments 
expressed by correspondents, nor is he to be understood as 
indorsing every expression in articles selected from other 
periodicals. 



TERMS, 50 CENTS PER YEAR, In Advance-includes 
postage. 



All communications should be addressed to "ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER," as above, and drafts, money orders, etc., made 
payable to the Editor. 



R142 : page 1 



THE NARROW WAY TO LIFE. 

"Enter ye in at the strait gate, because strait is the gate and 
narrow is the way that leadeth unto life, and few there be that 
find it; for wide is the gate and broad is the way that leadeth to 
destruction, and many there be which go in thereat." Matt. 7:14. 

All life is the same. It all issues from the same fountain. God is 
that fountain. In him, and in him only, is life unlimited, 
exhaustless, ever-continuous and uncontrolled by any 
circumstances. The name which describes this perfection of life 
is Immortal. It signifies death-proof, consequently disease and 
pain-proof. Many, who have not closely noted the scriptural use 
of the word immortal, have used it with reference to man and to 
angels, but scripture ascribes it to God, the Father, only, as we 
will prove shortly. 

The sun is the great fountain of light to earth, illuminating all 
things, yet it causes many varieties of color and shades of light, 
according to the nature of the object upon which it shines. The 
same sunlight shining upon a diamond, a brick, and upon 
various colored glasses, produces strikingly different effects. 
The light is the same, but the objects upon which it shines differ 
in their capacity to receive and transmit it. So, too, with life. It 
all flows from the one inexhaustible fountain, and it is all of the 
same kind. The oyster has life, but its organism is such that it 
cannot make use of much life, just as the brick cannot reflect 
much of the light of the sun. So with each of the higher grades 
of life in beast, fish and fowl. Like the various colored glasses 
under the sunlight, so these various creatures show forth 
differently the various qualities and powers they possess when 
life comes in and animates their bodily powers. And as the 
diamond is so perfect in its nature, and so adapted that it can 
receive fully and reflect so as to look as though it possessed 
within itself the light, and were itself a miniature sun, so with 
mankind, one of the master-pieces of God's creation, made only 
"a little lower than the angels." This perfect creature was made 
so complete in his organism (before sin marred it) as to be able 
to receive and retain life, and never grow dim. 

Adam was formed grandly and perfectly, and filled with life. He 
was more grand than any other earthly creature, because of the 
grander organism, mental and physical. Yet let us remember that 
as the diamond could reflect no light except when shone upon 
by the sun, so man could possess and enjoy the life given him 
only so long as he was supplied from the fountain-God. Man is 
no more a fount of life than a diamond is a fount of light, and 
one of the very strongest reasons for knowing that we have no 
exhaustless supply of life in ourselves is that, since sin entered 
our race, it has lost life. Millions have gone and are going down 
into death. God had arranged that man should have access to life 
giving trees, and that, by continually partaking of their fruit, he 
should continually live,- "eat, and live forever." In this respect, 



also, he was like the diamond, for it must have the light supplied 
every moment. Sin entering, our race lost its right to life, and 
was shut away from the trees of life [plural], and so "in Adam, 
all die. " But God has provided Christ a ransom for sin, and soon 
in, or by Christ, shall all be made alive, or be brought back to 
the original perfection of the race. As the diamond loses its 
beauty and brilliancy when the light is withdrawn, but is lighted 
up again with the sunrise, so mankind loses life when God 
withdraws life from him. "Yea, man giveth up the ghost [life], 
and where is he?" Job 14:10. "His sons come to honor, and he 
knoweth it not, and they are brought low, but he perceiveth it 
not of them. Vs. 21. "For there is no work, nor device, nor 
knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave whither thou goest. " Eccl. 
9:10. Because of the sin-offering and sacrifice of Christ, all shall 
go forth from this condition of death. "All that are in their 
graves shall come forth. " There shall be a restitution of all 
things, a restoring to the condition [as at first] in which man can 
receive back again, and richly enjoy life as it is provided for him 
in full measure from the fountain— God. 

But we asserted that we would prove scripturally that Divinity is 
the only fountain of life, and that all other forms of life-angels, 
men, fish, birds, beasts, etc.— are only vessels which hold, each 
its full, all differing in capacity and quality, according to the will 
of the Maker. First, then, we read that God "only hath 
immortality. " [The fullness of life which could not cease under 
any circumstances.] 1 Tim. 6:16, and 1:17. Secondly, the Son, 
"the first-born of every creature," "the only begotten," "the 
express image of His [the Father's] person," he who was "in the 
form of God," and was "made so much better than the angels;" 
"for unto which of the angels said he [the Father]: "Thou art my 
Son, this day have I begotten thee." Heb. 1:4,5. This one, we are 
told, partakes of the Father's nature, and consequently of the 
same principle of immortal life. So we read-" As the Father hath 
life in himself [God's life is in himself, and not drawn from 
other sources, or dependent upon other things], so hath he given 
to the Son to have life in himself." Thus, we see that immortality 
is possessed only by Father and Son. But amazing news ! God 
purposed to call out of the human race a few, "a little flock," 
who, by obedience to certain conditions, shall become "sons of 
God," and these, instead of remaining men and continuing of the 
human nature, shall become "new creatures," "partakers of the 
Divine nature," receiving a Divine form (body) being made "like 
unto Christ's glorious body;" not a natural body, but a spiritual 
body, for "it is raised a spiritual body, and that which is born of 
the Spirit is Spirit. " "We shall be changed but "it doth not yet 
appear what we shall be, but we know that when he shall appear, 
we shall be like Him" who is "the express image of the Father's 
person" and share in the "glory to be revealed." Nay more, not 
only will they be in the Divine form and nature, but being of that 
nature, they will possess the same kind of life— immortal life. 



Hence we read: "And this is the record that God hath given unto 
us [believers] eternal life and this life is in His Son" -"He that 
hath the Son hath life; he that hath not the Son hath not life. " 1 
John 5:11. 

Again it is written: "Thou hast given Him (Jesus) power over all 
flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou (the 
Father) hast given him" (John 17:2.) "And as many as were 
ordained to eternal life believed" (Acts 13:48.) "God hath called 
us unto eternal glory"- "And this is the promise which he hath 
promised us even eternal life." (1 John 2:25.) And though it is 
promised as a gift, yet it is only to a certain class that he ever 
agreed to give it, viz: to those believers in Jesus "who by patient 
continuance in well doing seek for glory, honor and 
IMMORTALITY." Rom. 2:7. To those who flee from iniquity 
and "follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, 
meekness -who "fight the good fight of faith (and thus) lay hold 
on eternal life, whereunto thou art also called." 1 Tim. 6:12. 

But the way is a difficult one, hard to walk in "because strait is 
the gate and narrow is the way that leadeth unto life and few 
there be that find it (life)." Just how difficult the way is may be 
judged from Jesus' words: It is not only to believe on him, but to 
follow him, and obey his voice— "My sheep hear (obey) my 
voice and I know them and they follow me, ('take up their cross 
and follow me') and I give unto them eternal life." John 10:27. 
Yes dearly beloved, if we would be of those who would receive 
immortality, let us seek it earnestly. Let us have our "fruit unto 
holiness (entire consecration) and the end thereof [will be] 
everlasting life." Rom. 6:22. 

The new, Divine nature begins with us here, when we believe on 
Jesus as the ransom from sin, and covenant with God that we 
will "die with Him that we may also live with Him"- 
[conversion]. From that moment we are recognized as God's 
children and "he sends forth His Spirit into our hearts," 
"whereby [we] are sealed [marked off as separate from the 
world] unto the day of redemption. " This is our new life begun. 
By this new life we are to crucify the old will— our will as 
natural men-and while in the world to "live according to God in 
the Spirit. " The Spirit in us is the germ of immortality. Thus we 
even now are partakers of the Divine nature but the fullness is to 
be reached when we enter into life. We are now begotten of the 
Spirit by the word of truth that we should be a kind of first 
fruits, but we do not reach birth until we are raised [from the 
dead] spiritual bodies. Our new nature lives in these mortal 
bodies as in a house— "But we know that if our earthly house of 
this [building] were destroyed we have a building of God, &c.~ 
our spiritual, immortal body. 

But beloved, the new life would be easily choked and Paul 
assures us that when thus begotten of the truth, "if [we] live after 
the flesh [we] shall die [lose our life principle] but if [we] 



through the Spirit do mortify [put to death] the deeds of the 
body [human nature] we shall live; " for the sons of God are all 
those led by the Spirit of God. Rom. 8:13-14. The work of 
crucifying must take hold upon all our actions- "For he 
[begotten of the 

R142 : page 2 

Spirit] that soweth to the flesh [lives in willful sin] shall of the 
flesh reap corruption; but he that soweth to the spirit, shall of the 
spirit reap life everlasting." Gal. 6:8. It is a rugged, steep, 
narrow way that leads to life, and were it not that strength is 
furnished us for each successive 

R143 : page 2 

step of the journey, we never could reach the goal; but His word 
encourages us— "Be of good cheer I have overcome;" "my grace 
is sufficient for thee. " The whole world is in the broad road and 
going down to destruction —death. Jesus opened the narrow way 
bringing life and immortality to light through the gospel; i.e. he 
made it possible for us to reach it by paying our ransom on the 
cross and making us free from sin and becoming also our 
example and leader into the Divine life. 

The balance of our race now thronging the broad road to death, 
are to be restored because their guilt and sin are atoned for and 
will be permitted. As through the disobedience of one man all 
were placed upon the broad road and swallowed up of death, so 
through the obedience of one [Christ] all will be forgiven and 
brought back to life. But when brought back to "their former 
estate"— the perfection of the original -they will not have life in 
the same sense that the Divine family will have it. 

The restored race will no doubt live eternally. God will supply 
the means of continuing their life as long as they are obedient 
and that we are told will be forever. Doubtless their present 
experiences with sin will prove a blessing throughout eternity. 
The words incorruptible, incorruption, immortal and immortality 
are translations of the Greek words athanasia, aphtharsia and 
aphthartos which occur in all only 1 8 times and are always used 
in connection with God or the saints, and are never associated in 
any way with angels, mankind or lower orders of creation. With 
a glimpse of this "crown of life" and the honor and glory 
associated with it, who will say that our all- wise Father has 
made the pathway too difficult. Its difficulties will act as a 
separating principle to separate and refine a "peculiar people, " 
"a little flock" to be "heirs of the kingdom," "heirs of glory," 
heirs of God and joint heirs of Jesus Christ our Lord-if so be 
that we suffer [death] with him. 

As we toil upward on the narrow way, Angels look on amazed at 
the grandeur of the plan which is able not only to rescue a fallen 
race from death but to display "the exceeding riches of God's 



grace and loving kindness toward us who are in Christ Jesus. 
Eph. 2:7. And it will yet be more clearly seen in the ages to 
come. Yes, when the plan was first foretold through the 
Prophets, Angels desired to look into it and to know concerning 
the time, and manner of time of their fulfillment, (See 1 Pet. 
1:12.) and an "innumerable company of Angels" still watch our 
progress and gladly become "ministering spirits, sent forth to 
minister for those who shall be heirs of salvation" [Heb. 1:14,] 
and soon be their rulers: For, "know ye not that ye shall judge 
[govern] Angels?" [1 Cor. 6:3.] The Father, too, who has called 
us with so high a calling looks upon us with loving sympathy 
and desires that we make our calling and election sure by 
complying with the conditions. And there is another who 
watches us with intense interest; it is He who redeemed us from 
death by his own precious blood and invited us to become his 
Bride and joint heir. If he loved us with such love while we were 
yet sinners, judge of his love now that we are his betrothed. He 
knows all about the narrow way— was tempted in all points as we 
are, without yielding, and now he stands ready to succor and 
strengthen us as we need and ask his help. 

In view of all these things, let us brethren and sisters, "come 
boldly to the throne of heavenly grace that we may obtain mercy 
and find grace to help in every time of need, " while we fight the 
good fight of faith [warfare of new and old nature] and lay hold 
on eternal life. 



R143 : page 2 



ANTI-CHRIST. 



This word occurs five times, and is found only in John's 
epistles. Anti signifies against; hence, anti-Christ means against 
Christ. It will readily be seen, then, that the term will apply to 
anything or any person opposing Christ. Peter was anti-Christ 
when he endeavored to dissuade Jesus from dying on the cross, 
and Jesus so indicated, when, turning to him, He said: "Get thee 
behind me, Satan" (adversary). He was Jesus' enemy, because he 
sought to prevent His doing the Father's will. Paul, also, was at 
one time anti-Christ, when persecuting the body of Christ (the 
church), as Jesus said to him when stricken down on the road to 
Damascus: "I am Jesus, whom thou persecutest (oppose, injure). 
All who, like Paul, persecute the church, or, like Peter, attempt 
to dissuade from duty and sacrifice, and put hindrances in the 
way to prevent the body from taking up the cross and following 
the head (Jesus)-all such are evidently anti-Christ. The 
adversaries of the body of Christ are more especially the latter, 
who, claiming to belong to the same family, cast a stumbling- 
block before the weak ones. 



In this sense Anti-Christs have been numerous since the days of 
Jesus, and we are assured that the closing of the gospel age will 
be a time above all others in which the principles and doctrines 
of Jesus Christ will be antagonized and opposed by many Anti- 
Christs (opposition from many sources). 

We should recognize a difference between false Christs 
(pseudo-kristos) and anti-Christs (anti-kristos). Jesus tells us 
(Matt. 24:24) that in the end of the age there shall arise many 
false prophets [teachers of error] and false christs. As all true 
believers in Jesus, obedient to their head, constitute the body of 
the true Christ [anointed], so, the various churches which 
recognize the authority of another head than Jesus constitute the 
body of a false Christ. Thus, the Roman church recognizes the 
Pope [papa; father] as the head of that church. The church of 
England recognizes its Government as its head, protector and 
"defender of the faith;" so, also, do the churches of Germany 
and Russia. These are false Christs, and the basis upon which 
they were established was false teachings of false prophets 
[teachers]. Of these, Papacy is especially noted as the chief in 
scripture, and is sometimes spoken of as "The Man of Sin," who 
ensnared and seduced so many of Jesus' virgin church with the 
delusion that the kingdoms of this world had become the 
kingdom of God, and that the time to suffer with Christ was 
over, and the time to reign begun. Thus was the church 
corrupted by the "Man of Sin," and so became the "harlot" and 
the "mother of harlots." [Rev. 17.] Many are her offspring. [See 
Z.W.T., vol. 1, Nos. 6 and 7]. 

But we must draw the line more closely, and suggest that every 
company of religious people who recognize as a head and 
authority any man or set of men, is in that proportion, false to 
the real head. 

We know that the various Christian sects claim to recognize 
Jesus as their head and director, but by their works they deny it; 
for let an occasion arise for a church trial, and the condemned 
will be tried, not by the teachings and words of Jesus, but by the 
"Standards of the Presbyterian Church," or by the "Authorities 
of the Methodist Church," or otherwise according to the 
denomination in which it occurs. Thus they acknowledge other 
heads and authorities than Christ. 

Again, as there is only one true Head, so there is only one true 
body of Christ. Jesus is the true head, and every follower and 
disciple united to that head by living faith is reckoned a member 
of the body, having his "name written in heaven." Whence, then, 
are these numerous so-called churches, or bodies of Christ, and 
their various heads? They are the offspring of error; false 
systems; false Christs; and give a confused idea to the world, 
who might well inquire, with Paul: "Is Christ divided?" No, but 
there are many false Christs, and we are glad to know that those 
Christians in various churches who most honor Jesus as the only 



Head, are earnestly inquiring whether the reason Christians are 
unable to have "one Lord (ruler), one faith, one baptism," is not, 
in great measure, due to their each "teaching for doctrines the 
[creeds or] commandments of men. " 

And among these we must, to some extent, class many religious 
denominations who worship the tenets and laws of their church- 
their body, over which they have appointed a head, or 
controlling power. Let us lay aside every such yoke of bondage, 
and be most fully Christ's freemen, receiving assistance in our 
pathway to the divine likeness from whomsoever and whatever 
we can, but never looking to any man or men as our leader, nor 
depending on any but "The Great Shepherd of the Sheep" and 
"Captain of our Salvation." 

Now these false Christs (churches) are to a certain extent Anti- 
christs. Also, in proportion as their teachings and systems are 
untrue, they are upholding error, and consequently are opposed 
to Christ and the truth. It is for this reason that "The Man of Sin" 
(Papacy) is said to oppose all that is called God. Attempting to 
gain the homage of mankind to itself as the head of all, it of 
course, in that proportion, antagonizes and opposes the true head 
of the true church. 

But are these the only Anti-Christs, the only ones opposing 
Christ? By no means. The world is still opposed to the Christ of 
God, both head and body because it knoweth Him not. Infidels 
in common with Jews deny the man Christ Jesus— deny that 
Jesus is come in the flesh. In the early days of the church before 
false christs and false systems had come in, it was more easy to 
define a Christian than now. So we read: (2 John 7.) "many 
deceivers are entered into the world who confess not that Jesus 
Christ is come in the flesh. This is a deceiver and an anti-christ. 
It has been suggested to us that the word rendered is come in 
this text, might be rendered is coming and thus be made to apply 
to the second coming of Jesus. We have examined carefully the 
word he translated, is come. It comes from the Greek— erkomai 
and is generally 

R144 : page 2 

used to indicate presence as of one who has come. It is 
translated coming only 26 times, and in many of these it, in our 
judgment could have been better translated otherwise: for 
instance (Matt. 25:27.) "at my coming, I should have received 
my own with usury. " Evidently a master would not expect a 
settlement until he had come, not while on the journey coming. 
We should therefore translate- "on my arrival." The same word- 
-erkomai —while rendered 26 times, coming, is rendered came 
182 times, and this usual translation agrees with its use in the 
scripture under consideration -"who confess not that Jesus 
Christ is come in the flesh; this is Anti-Christ. 



We know that it could not mean that Jesus is coming in the 
flesh. This he did once when he came as a sin-offering in a flesh 
body prepared for the purpose-"A body hast thou prepared me, 
etc. " But he comes not again to death and consequently would 
have no use for a body of flesh: "Yea, though we have known 
Christ after the flesh, yet, now henceforth know we Him (so) no 
more." The same apostle continues the same subject saying: (1 
John 4:3.) "Every spirit that confesseth not that Jesus Christ is 
come (erkomai— came) in the flesh is not of God; and this is that 
spirit of Anti-Christ, whereof ye have heard that it should 
come. " Here again John is not discussing the second coming of 
Jesus but is endeavoring to prove his having come once. (See 
verses 14 and 15.) This was the only thing necessary to combat 
in that day. People believed that Jesus had lived, but denied his 
being-the Christ, the sent of God, as the same class of anti- 
christs do to-day who deny that "Jesus is the Son of God. " 

The same thought is expressed again (1 John 2:18.) "Ye have 
heard that Anti-Christ shall come; even now there are many 
anti-christs. Now he proceeds to describe as before whom he 
meant by Anti-Christ, using the same argument as before, vs. 
22. "Who is the liar but he who denies that Jesus is the 
ANOINTED? This is the anti-christ-he who denies the Father 
and Son; no one who denies the son has the Father." (Diaglott). 

Thus we have seen from various standpoints what constitutes 
Anti-Christ. Those against which we most guard are the power 
and influence of the various false heads and so called bodies of 
Christ, seeing to it that we recognize but one fold and one 
shepherd and that we heed not the voice of strangers but flee 
from them. And let us take heed lest we become adversaries of 
our Lord and Master as beloved brother Peter once did and 
thereby deserve the reproof- "Get thee behind me Satan." Let us 
not hinder by word or act any who are seeking to crucify the 
flesh— the human nature— and to thus abide as members of the 
body of Christ, branches in the vine, else we shall to that extent 
be opposed to Christ or anti-christ. 



R144 : page 3 



MOUNTAIN OF THE LORD. 

Yes ! a brighter morn is breaking, 
Better days are coming on; 
All the world will be awaking 
In the new and golden dawn. 

In the day of coming glory, 
Men will show fraternal hand; 
Each will tell to each the story, 
Till it spreads to every land. 



On the top of Zion's mountain, 
God prepares His house again; 
At its threshold springs a fountain, 
Flowing for the souls of men. 

From the earth's remotest stations, 
Men will come to hear the word; 
And, in all the world, the nations 
Shall be nations of the Lord. 



--Pure Gold. 



R144 : page 3 

Why did Christ Come in the Flesh? 

There can be no doubt that all that Christ has done or will do 
are proofs of Divine Love towards our fallen humanity. It is safe 
to assume that man's necessities are all taken into account in the 
gospel. More than man needs would not be gospel; less than he 
needs would be an imperfect provision; neither is possible to an 
Infinite Provider. 

That Christ as an intelligent person had a glorious existence with 
the Father before the creation of the world seems clearly the 
teaching of the Bible. Proofs of His preexistence have been 
given. In this article we regard it as proved. From this stand- 
point we proceed. 

When He left the glory He had with the Father, He did not die. 
The glory of that life and the life itself should not be 
confounded. There are some who regard Christ, while on Earth, 
as a mere man with a fallen nature. Others regard Him, during 
the same period, as a mere man with an unfallen or perfect 
human nature. Of the two we believe the latter view is nearer the 
truth. But we believe the Bible teaches that He was more than 
human. 

That He was a mere man, whether with a fallen or a perfect 
nature, seems inconsistent with the idea of His preexistence; and 
yet both the classes referred to above believe in His 
preexistence. If He was Divine, and ceased to be Divine when 
He came in the flesh, where is the security that we will not lose 
our Divinity when we are made like Him? 

It seems clear that His Divinity was retained in humanity 
because He repeatedly spoke of Himself as having come down 
from heaven, and because He, though passing through trial and 
sorrow as a man, was yet possessed of the authority and 
exercised the prerogatives of a God. He was the object of 
unreproved worship even when a babe, by the wise men who 
came to see the new-born King. Matt. 2:2-1 1. Even the angels 
delighted to do Him honor. "When He bringeth the first- 



begotten into the world, He saith, "And let all the angels of God 
worship Him." Heb. 1:6. 

He never reproved any one for acts of worship offered to 
Himself, but when Cornelius offered such service to Peter-the 
leading apostle— "he took him up, saying, stand up; I myself 
also am a man." Acts 10:26. The great apostle of the Gentiles 
scarcely restrained the idolatry of the people in sacrifice offered 
to himself and his fellows, giving as a reason why it should not 
be done: "We also are men, of like passions with yourselves." 
Acts 14:15. Had Christ not been more than man the same reason 
should have prevented Him from receiving worship. This is 
emphasized by the fact that even a heavenly being sent to John 
on the isle of Patmos would not permit that mortal man to 
worship him, "See thou do it not, I am thy fellow-servant, and of 
thy brethren that have the testimony of Jesus: worship God." 
Rev. 19:10. 

Christ spoke "as one having authority, and not as the Scribes." 
Matt. 7:29. The Fountain of truth was in Himself. The Creator 
could regulate and heal both moral and physical difficulties; so 
he forgave sins, and healed all manner of diseases. That He 
could do the latter He urged as proof that He had power to do 
the former. Matt. 9:6. Had he been only a man, strange indeed 
would have been the fact "That even the winds and the sea obey 
Him." 

But the object of the present writing is not so much to give 
evidence of the blending of the Divine and human natures in 
Christ, as to present some thoughts as to the importance of such 
a combination. That such a union was a necessity, we regard, 
however, as the best evidence of its reality. This subject of the 
Incarnation and double nature of Christ, has received our 
attention to a greater or less extent, for quite a number of years, 
as is well known by many of our readers. It cannot then truly be 
said that we are taking such ground for the purpose of opposing 
positions that are of later date. We freely confess that the subject 
appears more important now than ever before, and as the 
Scriptures are examined more and more, it seems necessary to 
modify even our own former ideas on this and kindred subjects. 
No fallible man should "drive his stakes so deep as not to be 
able to pull them up when necessary. " 

In harmony with the idea of the two natures in Christ, as we now 
see it, is the fact that Christ was both Priest and Sacrifice, and so 
offered Himself- "gave Himself a ransom for all." 1 Tim. 2:6. 
This fact of the New Testament, is clearly illustrated, by the 
high priest under the law offering the beast-a lower nature -as 
a sacrifice for sin. The high priest, without a beast to offer, 
would have been an imperfect type of Christ. Paul reasons that 
as the high priest was ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices, it is 
necessary that Christ should also have something to offer. Heb. 
8:3. And in the tenth chapter he tells us what Christ took for the 



purpose of making an offering, or sacrifice. The sacrifices and 
offerings which were offered according to the law being types 
only, were insufficient, "For it is not possible that the blood of 
bulls and of goats should take away sins." Ver. 4. Instead of 
these beasts which the typical high priests offered, our High 
Priest had a body prepared for Him, and this body He offered. 
See verses 5 and 10. 

This body He took, or assumed, so that it became a part of 
Himself. 

R145 : page 3 

This change in His condition is what the apostle had in mind 
when he said of Christ: "Who being in the form of God... took 
upon Him the form of a servant, and [so] was made in the 
likeness of men: and being found in fashion as a man He 
humbled Himself and became obedient unto death, even the 
death of the cross." Phil. 2:6-8. It will be observed that the death 
was the last act of his humiliation and not the first. 

It is necessary to discriminate between Him and the body which 
He assumed. If as seems clearly taught, the body was the sin 
offering, or that which He as our High Priest sacrificed, then 
surely the sacrifice did not consist in taking the body. He took 
the body to sacrifice it, and His death closed that work. The 
body clearly refers to the humanity of Christ, and it was 
sacrificed by its life being taken away. 

We fully believe the purpose of Christ taking our nature, or 
coming in the flesh was manifold, and we will consider different 
phases of the subject and their relation to one another. 

The first we notice is that of a Ransom. This means to recover 
by paying an equivalent, or to buy back what was lost. He tasted 
death for every man. Heb. 2:9. "He gave His life a ransom for 
[the] many"- "a ransom for all." Matt. 20:28 and 1 Tim. 2:6. 
"Forasmuch as the children are partakers of flesh and blood He 
also Himself likewise took part of the same"— [For what 
purpose?] -that through death He might destroy him that had 
the power [keys] of death, that is the devil, and deliver them 
who through fear of death were all their lifetime subject to 
bondage. Heb. 2:14-15. 

The above is an important passage because it distinctly states 
that Christ took our nature for the purpose of delivering from 
death those under its power, by destroying that power. That it 
refers to natural death is clear because that is what flesh and 
blood are subject to. Had it been some other kind of death, it 
would not have been necessary to assume flesh and blood in 
order to suffer it, and so taste death for every man. This question 
involves the whole subject of our loss in Adam and gain in 
Christ, so far as pertains to all men regardless of their 
responsibility. "As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be 



made alive." 1 Cor. 15:22. As all men were counted sinners and 
condemned to death on account of Adam, even so, in the same 
sense, and to the same extent, all men are counted righteous and 
justified to life on account of Christ. Rom. 5:12,18,19. It is not 
possible for us to limit one side of this statement, only by the 
other side- and both are unlimited. Here is stated the "sin of the 
world, (Adam's sin was the world's sin because he was the 
world-the race of natural men being in him)— and Christ is the 
"Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the world. " This is 
the atonement for what men sometimes call "original sin," and 
all its results. 

Adam was a perfect natural man, and God dealt with him 
accordingly. He gave him a law adapted to that life, and gave 
him, until after he sinned, access to a tree that could preserve 
that life. The curse or penalty of his sin was "Dying thou shalt 
die," (Gen. 2:17, margin) and all that was necessary, in order to 
the execution of that penalty, was to shut him away from the 
life-preserving tree. This was done, and the consequence is that 
the whole race of mankind are either dead or doomed to death, 
and passing down. 

Now if to ransom means to buy back by paying an equivalent 
(and we think no unprejudiced English reader will deny it) then 
Christ must of necessity assume a perfect humanity and lay 
down that life as a voluntary sacrifice. If it be asked, how could 
Christ be tempted if he had a perfect humanity? We answer by 
asking how could Adam be tempted if he had a perfect 
humanity? A fallen humanity is not the result of temptation but 
the result of sin, and a perfect nature could not have fallen if 
such a nature could not have been tempted. All that we claim on 
this point is that Christ as a ransom was as perfect as what Adam 
lost. 

It does not appear from the record that Adam was created 
perfect in the sense of being strong and incorruptible. The 
opposite of this is true, for he sinned at the very first temptation, 
and corruption was the result. That which is incorruptible cannot 
be corrupted. Jesus, when speaking of those who have passed 
from corruption to incorruption, says of them "Neither can they 
die any more." Luke 20:36. 

But if Adam sinned so easily, thus proving his weakness, why, if 
Christ was only as perfect as Adam, did not He sin? We answer: 
It seems clear to us that if Christ was only a fallen man He 
would have been as sure to sin as all other fallen men; and if 
Christ had been only a perfect man He could have sinned as well 
as Adam. We believe that the reason He did not sin, was not 
because of the innate strength of His humanity, but because of 
the all-sustaining indwelling Divinity. 

Then why does He deserve credit? We answer, no credit is due 
to the humanity, or to the flesh, in the work of saving man. It is 



all of God, and the strength of all overcomers, whether it was 
Jesus or any of His followers, is due to the indwelling Divine 
Spirit. This brings us to consider another necessary use of the 
double nature of Christ. 

The coming of the Divine One; into the flesh was necessary in 
order to ingraft, so to speak, Divinity into humanity. Some see 
one of these reasons and not the other. Like the two natures they 
are blended but not to be confounded. 

Christ as a Redeemer, paid the ransom, but the object for which 
men are redeemed is that they may be regenerated. And Christ is 
not only a Redeemer but also a Second Adam— i.e. the head of a 
new and spiritual race. 

First the natural and afterward the spiritual, is applicable to the 
relation between the two Adams, as well as to other features of 
the plan. Because the type was an earth man, does not set aside 
the truth that the antitype is a spiritual man- "the Lord from 
heaven." 1 Cor. 15:47. 

All that a ransom secures is a recovery of what was lost— natural 
life— hence the ransom is the basis of restitution; and therefore if 
men ever receive more than they lost, it will be because Divinity 
is ingrafted into their restored humanity. It is God's plan for the 
race in general to save them by resurrection from the Adamic 
curse first, and afterward bring them to the knowledge of the 
truth, thus placing within their reach all that obedience to the 
truth can secure them; but He deals with us-Christians-as 
exceptions to the rule. As we are counted dead in Adam before 
we die, so we are counted alive in Christ beforehand, and 
brought to the knowledge of the truth. Being begotten by the 
Spirit, by the word of truth, through the exceeding great and 
precious promises, we become partakers of the Divine nature. 2 
Pet. 1:4. This is 

R145 : page 4 

called Christ, in us the hope of glory. 

The Christian, like his Lord when He was in the flesh, has two 
natures, and this gives us the basis of the warfare between the 
Old Man and the New Man; between the flesh and the Spirit. On 
account of this fact, Christ is our Head— our example in 
suffering, in patience and in loyalty. He is also our Leader, our 
Commander and Forerunner. We follow Him not only as a 
pattern of life, but also in the order of development from the 
natural to the spiritual. 

He is also our Leader in sacrifice, for the flesh nature must be 
destroyed. As He was both Priest and Sacrifice, so are we. "If ye 
through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall 
live." Rom. 8:13. Nothing seems more clearly taught in the New 
Testament than that the possession of, and being controlled by 
the Divine Spirit, is the only means of success in keeping the 



body under, and of bringing the members under obedience to 
our Lord. 

The necessary condition of the higher life is the death of the 
lower one, by the crucifixion of its evil affections and desires. 
Thus it is we are to have fellowship with His sufferings and be 
made conformable to His death. Phil. 3:10. "For in that He died, 
He died unto sin once; but in that He liveth, He liveth unto God. 
Likewise reckon ye also yourselves to be dead indeed unto sin, 
but alive unto God, through Jesus Christ, our Lord. " Rom. 
6:10,11. 

This death and resurrection is that which is represented by 
baptism; that is, the real baptism involves the death to sin and 
mortality, and the resurrection to holiness and immortality, and 
water baptism is the appropriate symbol. Water baptism is not 
on that account less important, but rather more so, because of its 
depth of meaning. But if any see no further than the form or 
symbol, their faith will not lay hold on the reality, as expressed 
by the apostle: "Know ye not that so many of us as were 
baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into His death. 
Therefore we are buried with Him by baptism into death; that 
like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the 
Father [Divinity], even so we also should walk in newness of 
life," Rom. 6:3,4. 

The Divine Spirit, or new nature, imparted to us, is the priest by 
which our bodies are to be made a living sacrifice. The object of 
this sacrifice is that sin should not reign in our mortal bodies, 
but that these same members of these mortal bodies should yield 
themselves "as instruments of righteousness unto God." Should 
there be in any mind a doubt of the correctness of this 
application, let him carefully read the whole sixth chapter of 
Romans. 

Precisely the same thought in regard to killing and making alive 
these bodies of ours, by the indwelling Spirit of Christ, is 
expressed by the apostle in the eighth chapter. "But ye are not in 
the flesh [the old nature], but in the Spirit [new nature], if so be 
that the Spirit of God dwell in you. Now, if any man have not 
this Spirit of Christ he is none of His. And if Christ be in you, 
the body is dead [put to death by the Spirit] because of sin, but 
the Spirit is life because of righteousness. [But the body is not to 
remain dead; only its old sinful nature or life was to be 

R146 : page 4 

destroyed]. But if the Spirit of Him that raised up Christ from 
the dead dwell in you, He that raised up Christ from the dead 
shall also quicken [make alive] your mortal bodies by His Spirit 
which dwelleth in you." Rom. 8:9-1 1. It is the Spirit that 
mortifies or puts to death the deeds of the body, and the same 
Spirit that gives the new life. 



Whoever will read the sixth, seventh and eighth chapters of 
Romans may see that the apostle is seeking to teach them and us 
a great lesson for this life, of death to sin and resurrection to 
holiness, and that the work can only be accomplished by the 
Spirit in-dwelling, and overcoming the old nature which dwells 
in these members. Was not this then the great practical object of 
the Incarnation, to ingraft the Divine Spirit into humanity and 
thus save humanity? 

The same principle of death and life holds good throughout the 
plan, whether in symbol or reality. All may see that the old 
nature or corrupt life is not to be restored to those who have the 
Spirit of Christ in them. The life it imparts is a new and spiritual 
life. The body is to be raised, but by "a process of Divine 
Chemistry which we may not fully understand" will be changed 
"according to the working whereby He is able even to subdue all 
things to Himself." Phil. 3:21. 

One more reason for the double nature of Christ we would 
notice is this: That He might both be able to sympathize with 
and help us. "For in that He Himself hath suffered, being 
tempted, He is able to succor them that are tempted." Heb. 2:18. 
"Seeing, then, that we have a great High Priest that is passed 
into the heavens, Jesus, the Son of God, let us hold fast our 
profession. For we have not an High Priest who cannot be 
touched by a feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points 
tempted like as we are and yet without sin. Let us therefore 
come boldly unto the throne of grace that we may obtain mercy, 
and find grace to help in time of need." Heb. 4:14-16. 

Two persons in the same weak and helpless condition might 
sympathize with each other, and yet perish together; but one 
standing on a rock can help the other out. Mere humanity, fallen 
or unfallen, is unable to rise into spiritual life. In Christ, both 
natures being combined, we have the sympathy which 
experience gave Him and also the power to help. He first lifted 
His own humanity ("Destroy this temple and in three days I will 
raise it up," and "He spake of the temple of His body." This is 
true of His own person and also of His body, the church), and 
from the standpoint of His perfect spiritual life He beckons us, 
and there He will meet us. What He is, we may well expect to 
be. "I shall behold thy face in righteousness; I shall be satisfied 
when I awake in thy likeness. 

J. H P. 



R146 : page 4 



THE TWO NATURES. 



Jesus' "being in the form of God," implies Divine powers, etc.; 
this on our account he left, taking "not the nature of angels," 



(which would have implied angelic powers and qualities) but he 
took the nature of men, which implies the qualities and powers 
of man, (before man sinned). He undoubtedly knew of His own 
pre-existence as he frequently referred to it as glory had with the 
Father before the world was; and "For this cause (death) came I 
unto this hour." (John 12:27.) and "For this cause came I into the 
world that I should bear witness to the truth. (John 18:37.) In a 
word we understand that the man Jesus up to his 30th year was 
in every respect like Adam except that he knew what sin and 
death meant and had seen their destructive operation on the 
human family for 4000 years while Adam did not "know good 
and evil. " Adam had never seen a sinner nor a sinner's 
punishment-death; therefore while created sinless and perfectly 
able to abstain from sin, yet not realizing "the exceeding 
sinfulness of sin" and its destructive effects, he sinned as God 
had foreseen and fore-arranged he should do. 

This knowledge which Adam lacked Jesus possessed as we read: 
"By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many." 
Isa. 53:11. The man Adam was created by the operation of 
God's spirit (Gen. 1:2.) The child Jesus was formed equally by 
miraculous power of the same spirit. Both were holy [pure 
sinless]. Jesus grew in wisdom and in stature until he reached 
his thirtieth year. Now the work for which He came into the 
world must begin. What was the work for which this body was 
prepared? Paul answers -"for the suffering of death." And now 
He is represented as saying: "Lo I come [as] in the volume of 
the book [Bible] it is written of me, to do thy will O God." Heb. 
10:7. Thus Jesus covenanted at 30 years to do the Father's will 
[the special work for which he came] and going to John at 
Jordan he made the same outward sign of His covenant which he 
asks us to make, of our covenant, when he was immersed. Thus 
he expressed his determination to die for our sins by being 
buried in water, and His trust in the promise of the Father to 
raise him again to the Divine life. 

But even a perfect human being could not crucify himself so the 
Father imparted the Divine Spirit to the man Jesus and from that 
moment he is the anointed [the Christ] "The man Christ Jesus." 
And he went up out of Jordan in the power of the Spirit," filled 
with the Spirit for "the Father giveth not the Spirit by measure 
(in limited quantity) unto Him. " Now He is different from Adam 
for Adam never partook of the Divine Spirit and nature. We saw 
in article on BAPTISM in last issue [a second reading of which 
we suggest,] that our baptism represents a similar covenant to 
die; to be "conformed to His death:" to be "Baptized into His 
death. " And as Jesus could not crucify the flesh until anointed 
with the Spirit so with us; He is our pattern and fore-runner. We 
follow "in His footsteps" in every particular. Now, let us closely 
examine his death, for unto it we are to be conformed. 



In our own view, it is a mistake to suppose that our giving of 
ourselves "living sacrifices, wholly acceptable unto God," is the 
giving up of the sinful desires of our human nature. Not so. It is 
the giving up of things that are right and proper enough for men. 
Let us look unto Jesus: As a man (tempted in all points like as 
we are, yet never yielding) with a human nature, He had to 
withstand the same temptations of the devil, and to avoid the use 
of His perfect human power for self-exaltation. 

As the only perfect man, he could have placed himself speedily 
at the head of all earthly governments; could have inaugurated 
wise and beneficial reforms and laws, and could have had the 
respect and homage of all the fallen race. But instead of doing 
according to the desires of his earthly nature and will, he did as 
he had covenanted: "Lo, I come to do thy will, O, God." And so 
he did. Wherever he went, and whatever he did, he ascribed all 
the honor to the Father. "The Father that dwelleth in me, he 
doeth the works." As the spirit in Jesus was the miracle working 
power, yet never used by him as a means of gratifying the 
human appetite, or of exalting self (see Matt. 4:3-7), so we, who 
possess a measure of the same spirit, would find it powerful to- 
day, if we could but have faith to exercise it. But it would be sin 
to use this spiritual power for the gratifying of our human nature 
when it was given us wherewith to crucify it. When the 
multitudes hung on his words, and said, "Never man spake like 
this man," he declared: "As I hear, I speak." (John 12:49.) 
Again, when the people, perceiving his real human greatness 
and perfection, desired to bestow earthly power upon him, we 
read: "Jesus, perceiving that they would take him by force and 
make him a king, withdrew himself to a desert place, alone. " 

These things were lawful to his human nature, but they were not 
expedient; for by so doing he could neither redeem the race from 
death, nor bring "many sons to glory and immortality. And often 
the conflict between the human and divine natures in Jesus was 
so great that he needed and spent whole nights in prayer. He 
came to the same "throne of heavenly grace" (not to obtain 
mercy, for he needed not mercy, being without sin), but to "find 
grace to help in every time of need. " And when, at the close of 
his three and a half years of self-sacrifice for the good of others, 
the hour of death came, it was the severest trial to his human 
nature. To permit himself, pure and sinless and benevolent, to be 
crucified as a vile criminal, and open not his mouth in self- 
defense; to be regarded as an impostor, in some degree at least, 
by his followers; to permit the soldiers to mock and scourge and 
kill him, while having done no sin, he had a right to live. He 
could have asked the Father, and he would have given him more 
than twelve legions of angels to defend him. These things, one 
and all, were severe trials to the human nature, and he must have 
failed without the aid of the Divine nature. 



No wonder he said: "Now is my soul troubled, and what shall I 
say? Father, save me from this hour! But for this cause came I 
unto this hour: Father, glorify thy name." (John 12:27). No 
wonder if when he came to Gethsemane, he again found it 
needful to go to the Father for help to do his will, saying: "If 
thou be willing, remove this cup (death) from me. " Then he 
obtains strength, and continues, "Nevertheless, not my (human) 
will, but thine be done." Luke 22:42. (Vss. 43 and 44 are 
omitted in old MSS.) 

Now, we can readily see that to be conformed to his death does 
not mean that we should give up only sinful things to which we 
never had a right. Many things are proper enough to us as 
human beings, that 

R146 : page 5 

we covenanted to give up if we might have the Divine nature. 
To illustrate: It is proper enough for a 

R147 : page 5 

worldly man to seek the honor and respect of his fellow men by 
such lawful use of his talents as would commend him to their 
esteem. It would be right enough for him to participate in 
worldly governments, both by voting and holding office. It is 
right for him to seek all uninjurious pleasures; operas, concerts, 
games, &c; to seek wealth and ease and human happiness. It is 
not wrong for earthly women to engage in the same pleasures, 
and to wear braided hair, jewelry and costly apparel, if rightly 
and honestly obtained. But if any man or woman be in Christ a 
new creature, these should remember that their covenant was to 
crucify the natural will and mind of the flesh, and to develop the 
new nature, and they will find that every such natural pleasure 
permitted in their hearts fills a place consecrated to God, and 
excludes a measure of the joys of the Spirit, as well as requiring 
some of the time which they have consecrated wholly to God. 

A mistake is made by Christians in trying to apply to the world 
rules and laws given only to saints. The worldly man does not 
covenant to make his body a living sacrifice. We do. True, we 
must, as long as we abide in the flesh, eat, drink and wear, but 
the amount of time which we shall give for these necessary 
things should be decided according to our understanding of 
God's will as expressed by his word, and the example of Jesus. 
Our earth life should, like Jesus' life, be spent more for others 
than for self- "Doing good to all men, as we have opportunity, 
especially to the household of faith. " Each one has opportunity 
to carry out this principle of self sacrifice in the everyday affairs 
of life. The mother may spend her life and sacrifice her comfort 
for her children; the father for his family; the teacher for his 
pupils; the editor for his readers, &c; for charity should begin at 
home, though it should not end there. 



In our judgment, the common habit of speaking and thinking of 
the new nature as being an engrafting of a spiritual element into 
a natural man and of the blending in us of the human and divine 
natures, are serious and hurtful errors. There is no league, no 
blending or uniting of the two natures. When we receive the new 
nature, it is not that we may blend and unite it with our old 
human nature, but that we may crucify and put to death the 
human. Not my will and God's will, my plans and God's plans, 
my work and God's work, blended. They will not blend. Like oil 
and water, they are of different natures. My will, plan, work, 
&c, must all be lost. Though our wills were perfect human 
wills, as Jesus' was, we must ignore them, and say with him— 
"Not my will, but thine, be done. " We can see no blending of 
two natures in our Master, but a complete control by the Divine, 
and a crucifying of the human. "Let us walk in his footsteps as 
he hath set us an example. " 



WHAT peace He bringeth to my heart, 
Deep as the soundless sea, 
How sweetly singeth the soul that clingeth, 
My loving Lord to Thee. 



R166 : page 5 

IN most situations of life the consciousness of innocence is our 
best shield, and our firmest security. 



R147 : page 5 

AND AFTER DEATH THE JUDGMENT. 

"As it was appointed unto men once to die, but after this the 
judgment, so Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many; 
and unto them that look for him, shall he appear the second time 
without sin unto salvation." Heb. 9:27-28. 

Perhaps no text of scripture has ever been more widely 
misapplied than the above; it is generally supposed to refer to 
mankind in general, and to mean that there comes a judgment to 
them after death. But by reading this 27th verse in connection 
with vss. 26 and 28, it will be seen that the "men" referred to 
were the various high priests of Israel. Paul is trying to show us 
that these "men" in the sacrifices which they "offered year by 
year continually, " were but types of Christ; that though they 
offered and went into the Holy place every year, Christ as the 
antitype needed only to go in once. Christ's sacrifice was that of 
his own life, while that of these typical men was the blood of 
others, that is to say, these typical priests instead of laying down 
their lives and then being given a new, or spiritual life (as in the 



case with Jesus) were told to kill "a bullock" which was for, or 
instead of their own, natural lives; thus in figure the priest died, 
every time he slew the bullock. Now after thus killing the 
bullock it remained for the high priest to take the blood into the 
holy place and see whether it would be accepted. This was the 
judgment— trial. If the work had been all properly done, it was 
accepted of God and was the basis of at-one-ment for the people 
and the after blessing. Now notice that, "As it was appointed 
unto (those) men once to die, (as represented by the bullock) and 
after that the judgment, (to see if their sacrifice was acceptable) 
so Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many. " 

Our head, Jesus, having given himself for us-the church (Eph. 
5:25-27.) presented the evidences of his death in the flesh, 
(typified by the bullock.) Then came the trial- Was it a perfect 
sacrifice? If so it would be accepted. It was perfect and was 
accepted of God and while the Head remained in glory, the spirit 
of the Head came upon all believers (at pentecost) anointing 
them as His body, to have share in His sufferings and to be 
made conformable unto His death, as represented in the goat 
sacrifice. Lev. 16. 

Soon the body will have finished its work of "filling up that 
which is behind of the afflictions of Christ. " Col. 1 :24. Then the 
Head comes to the body and takes it into the Most Holy, the 
sacrifice of the body being accepted through the merit of its 
Head. Then the appearing to bless all the people takes place. 
(Lev. 9:23.) When he thus appears to bless, is it the head alone 
which appears think you? No, "when he shall appear we also 
shall appear with him IN GLORY." "We know that when He 
shall appear we shall be like Him." 1 John 3:2. We will be like 
him when he appears not after he appears. Will he appear in the 
flesh and we in the flesh? No, that would not be "in glory. " 
Besides if you will examine the context you will readily see that 
the spiritual body is meant. 

He took a flesh body only as a sacrifice— "A body hast thou 
prepared me" (for sacrifice). "He took upon him the form of a 
servant for the suffering of death. " But when he comes forth the 
second time (head and body complete) it will not be to repeat 
the work of sacrifice, "for this he did once" but he comes forth 
unto salvation and he comes "IN GLORY." 

Thus the prophets foresaw and foretold "the sufferings of Christ 
(head and body) and the glory that should follow:" "For verily 
when we were with you we told you before that we should 
suffer tribulations. No man should be moved by these 
afflictions, for yourselves know that we are appointed 
thereunto." 1 Thes. 3:3-4. 

Take joyfully then dear brethren the sufferings of the present, 
that when they are ended, we may be joined to, and "appear with 



Him in glory," for then "ye shall be glad also with exceeding 
joy." 

TO WHOM DO WE APPEAR? 

is a question of interest. The type (Lev. 9:23.) shows that the 
appearing is to "all the people." Their typical priest so appeared 
and so blessed "all the people" for whom the sin offerings had 
been made. Israel being the type of the world as the house of 
Aaron (type of Levi) had before been used as a type of the 
household of faith," from which the "little flock" of priests are 
selected: So our appearing will be to bless the people-the world 
of mankind; to raise up and bless the race fallen in death and 
sickness and degradation; to raise them up to perfect manhood 
as at first-"the restitution of all things which God hath spoken." 

Throughout the "Day of atonement" -typical of the 6,000 years 
of sin's reign, in the latter part of which 1900 years the sacrifices 
have been offering—during that "day of atonement" the people 
were instructed (Lev. 16:29) that they should "afflict their souls" 
etc., typical of the world's painful and afflicted condition during 
sin's dominion and until their sins are blotted out and their at- 
one-ment with God completed. Theirs was only the type; the 
real atonement is almost finished and soon the blessing will 
begin. 

Now it is these waiting multitudes —the people, who are 
awaiting the coming forth of the Great Prophet, Priest and King- 
-"The Christ," "The Seed." Paul says so: "The whole creation 
groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now. " "For the 
earnest expectation of the creature waiteth for the manifestation 
of the SONS of God." The human family will not see Jesus the 
head or bridegroom when he comes to get His "Jewels," "His 
body," "His bride." He comes as he went away— quietly, 
unknown to the world. (But not again in the flesh for though we 
have known Christ after the flesh yet now henceforth know we 
him (so) no more. ") Earth's millions are groaning for deliverance 
from "the bondage of corruption" and though they may not have 
clear ideas of how it comes, yet in due time the deliverance shall 
come and they will recognize it as being the work of the "sons 
of God." "And it shall come to pass that every soul that will not 
hear (obey) that prophet (teacher) shall be cut off [die] from 
among his people. " And all who do obey him shall be delivered 
from the bondage of corruption [sickness, pain and death] into 
the glorious liberty of the sons of God. As redeemed human 
children they shall 

R148:page5 

come again into the same freedom from sickness and death as 
that enjoyed by angels, by Adam before he sinned, etc. Pain, 
corruption and death are only the accompaniment and bondage 
resulting from sin. 



Though "every eye shall see Him, and they also which pierced 
Him, " we do not believe He will appear (and we with Him) to 
all at once, but that, as indicated in our text, it will be to those 
that "look for Him." The seeing will not be that of the natural 
eye, for "without holiness no man shall see the Lord. " The holy 
ones are the saints. "We shall see Him as He is," for we shall be 
like Him. " There are other ways of seeing than by the natural 
eye. To see means to recognize; to perceive. When Jesus was 
present in the flesh, many saw Him with the natural eye. Few 
saw Him really. Eyes had they, but they saw not. 

Again: "a blind man could truthfully say, "Wonderful things in 
the Bible I see." Paul says we are to watch and "see the day 
approaching, " &c. We thus use the word see as meaning to 
recognize. Now we understand that Jesus, our head, is now 
present as our "Morning Star" (day-bringer), preparing a "little 
flock." (We don't claim to know them all). The world and many 
of the virgins (pure ones; saints), are asleep, and know not of the 
"day star's" having risen. Soon the few prepared ones are caught 
away unknown, and, with the dead of the same class, constitute 
"the prophets and saints" of Rev. 11:18— the bride -the 
overcomers, who, under and in their leader and head, Jesus, are 
to "inherit all things "-be members of the "first-born"— therefore, 
"heirs of God, joint heirs with Jesus," of whom He spake, 
saying: "Fear not, little flock; it is your Father's good pleasure to 
give you the kingdom. " 

"Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom 
of their Father," whose kingdom, prayed for 1800 years, will 
then have come: "Thy kingdom come," and following gradually 
comes the next clause, "Thy will be done on earth as in heaven. " 
It requires all of the millennial age to fully accomplish God's 
will on earth as in heaven, and to utterly wipe away sin and its 
results: corruption, pain and death. 

Those who will first recognize this millennial day as begun, and 
its sun of righteousness as having risen, the kingdom of God as 
having been "set up," or commenced its reign, will be the "great 
company who go through the coming time of trouble and come 
up (to the family condition, as partakers of the Divine nature), 
but not being the overcomers -the bride— they do not sit in the 
throne, but therefore are they before the throne. " We say that 
this class, the left of the church when the bride is taken, will be 
the first to recognize the kingdom as being established. As we 
see by Rev. 19:5-9, "A voice came out of the throne, saying, 
'Praise our God, all ye, His servants, and ye that fear Him, both 
small and great.' And I heard, as it were, the voice of a great 
multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of 
mighty thunderings, saying, 'Allelulia! for the Lord God 
omnipotent reigneth.'" They realize the reign as commenced, 
and the bride as being taken, and that they are left out of that 
little flock. But the plan of God begins to open out before them, 



and they find Him much more loving and kind than they had 
ever 

R147 : page 6 

supposed while they were bound in and to Babylon; at whose 
overthrow they rejoice. They begin to praise God, saying: "We 
may rejoice and exult, and give glory to Him, because the 
marriage of the Lamb came, and his wife prepared herself. " 
[Diaglott]. 

Then (vs. 9,) a promise is made to this second company, viz,: 
that they come to the "marriage feast," when they, the "palm- 
bearers," shall be ushered into the presence and joyous and 
eternal fellowship of "the crown-wearers, the kings and priests 
unto God, and thus the entire family or "first-born" and many 
brethren be complete, and together unite in showing forth the 
praises of the King of Kings and Lord of Lords to the world. 

The second class who will recognize the kingdom as "set up" 
will be fleshly Israel. When toward or at the close of "the time 
of trouble" they shall have been gathered in great numbers and 
wealth to Palestine, and when the "nations shall come up to take 
a spoil and prey," etc., (Ezek. 38:11.) For "the day of the Lord 
cometh, and thy spoil shall be divided in the midst of thee. For I 
will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle,... and half of 
the city shall go into captivity, &c....Then shall the Lord go forth 
and fight against those nations as when He fought in the day of 
battle. And His feet shall stand in that day upon the Mount of 
Olives," &c. (Zech 14:1-4). This, apparently the first realization 
Israel will have of the kingdom's having come (Chap. 12:2,3,7- 
10), seems to discuss the same topic and describe the effect 
upon them of their marked deliverance. They recognize (look 
upon) Him whom they have pierced. They seem to be able to 
establish the identity of the Deliverer as the one they had once 
despised, crucified. 

Our understanding is, not that they will see Jesus or any one 
with their eyes, nor that Jesus and His church will appear in their 
midst and fight and kill their enemies (we war not with carnal 
weapons), but that after they have been badly beaten by the 
great multitudes of their enemies, the Lord will appear and show 
Himself and fight for them "as when he fought in the day of 
battle." But how was that? Think of it! How he overthrew great 
kings and strong nations before them; nations so much stronger 
than they that it was a miracle. Thus God was in the midst of 
Israel, and delivered them from all their enemies round about. 
As then, so again he will reveal himself as their deliverer, and 
they shall say: "Lo, this is our God: We have waited for him, 
and he will save us." So the work of revealing progresses until 
"all shall know him, from the least to the greatest," and "all 
nations shall come and worship before him, and thus every eye 



shall see (recognize) him, while only the holy shall see him as 
he is. 

Thus, too, we see how "he will be revealed in flaming fire." 
[Judgments.] The judgments which come upon "Babylon" and 
cause her overthrow open the eyes of the first mentioned class to 
recognize the kingdom power. The overthrow (judgments) on 
the attacking nations open the eyes of the Israelites similarly 
while the balance of mankind, living and resurrected nations, 
will find abundant proof of the rulings of the spiritual kingdom 
in the crushing and destroying of their enemies, sin and death, 
for "when the judgments ["flaming fire"] of the Lord are abroad 
in the land, the inhabitants of the world will learn 
righteousness." 

Thus each class, as they become interested and awakened to 
"look for him," shall see him. "To them that look for him, he 
shall appear," and we "also shall appear with him," and thus "the 
desire of all nations shall come. " 



R148 : page 6 

WHEN AND HOW WILL CHRIST COME? 

We have just read, in a contemporary which is seen by many of 
our readers, an article entitled "Christ, and Anti-Christ," in 
which the writer seeks to prove that Jesus, at his second advent, 
will come in the flesh. The proof of his position he bases mainly 
on, 1 John 4:2,3. He quotes the verses thus: "Every spirit that 
confesseth that Jesus Christ erkomai [cometh] in the flesh is of 
God, and every spirit that confesseth not that Jesus Christ 
erkomai in the flesh is not of God. " "For many deceivers are 
entered into the world who confess not that Jesus Christ cometh 
in the flesh. This is a deceiver and an Anti-Christ." 1 John 4:2,3, 
and 2 John 7. 

He continues: "The rendering of erkomai, as it is given by the 
translators in these special texts, was merely because of the 
theology of these Episcopalian ministers. It is the word 
invariably used [mark!] by the apostles when speaking of his 
future coming." Then follows a list of texts, in which he asserts 
erkomai occurs, putting them all in the future tense. 

We are obliged to say that he has made a very serious mistake, 
and one calculated to lead into error any one not familiar with 
the Greek of the New Testament. Yet it is but just to say that it 
was a mistake easily made. Not being familiar with the original, 
he evidently depended upon a Greek Concordance in making his 
quotations. The error probably crept in this way. In such 
Concordances, each word is given usually in its generic 
[general] form only, without reference to the changes it 
undergoes in passing through the various grammatical forms 



which distinguish its moods, tenses, &c. Thus, under the general 
head of "Erkomai" [come] he would find references to passages 
containing such combinations as these: have come, is come, will 
come, may come, also cometh, came, &c. 

If unfamiliar with the Greek forms and without an examination 
of the Greek text he would be totally unable to distinguish 
between the tenses. 

Looking in the concordance then under "Erkomai" he finds 
references to some passages which he knows speak of Christ's 
second advent. If he fails to look further he may conclude that 
"it is the word invariably used when speaking of his future 
coming. " Of course a more thorough search would soon have 
revealed the error. Having thus reached a conclusion — 
unfortunately a wrong one -it is apparent that on finding other 
texts which his theory required to be in the future tense-that 
were translated in the past-he would at once jump to the 
conclusion that they were mistranslated. 

This he has done. Both in his proof texts, and in his list which he 
has given to support his translation of the proof texts, he has 
been thus deceived. His argument briefly but fairly stated is this. 
"Erkomai meaning cometh," is the word invariably used by the 
apostles when speaking of his (Christ's) future coming. " Proof: a 
list of texts referring to the future in which he asserts erkomai 
occurs. Now says he (we are using 

R149 : page 6 

our own words for brevity's sake.) Erkomai is the word used in 1 
John 4:2-3, in which it speaks of a coming of Christ in the flesh, 
therefore the coming in the flesh spoken of, is in the future, at 
his second advent; and all who deny this are by the same 
authority called Anti-Christ -those who are in harmony with the 
WATCH TOWER particularly included. 

Well, we can pardon his allusion to the WATCH TOWER, and 
even excuse his mistake, but we cannot pass it by unnoticed; and 
now let us give briefly the facts in the case- First then: In the 
texts he has quoted the words in dispute are not confined to the 
future, but are in various tenses. Secondly: The word erkomai 
(on which he hangs the whole argument) does not occur in any 
of them. 

We will now quote the texts, and give the original words as they 
really appear: 

"Every spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come 
[eleeluthota] in the flesh is of God, and every spirit that 
confesseth not Jesus Christ is not of God." 1 John 4:2,3. The 
word does not occur in third verse "This same Jesus, who is 
taken up from you into heaven, shall so come [eleusetai] in like 
manner, " &c. Acts 1:11. "When the Son of Man shall come 
[elthee] in his glory," &c. Matt. 25:31. "Behold, the Bridegroom 



erketail" [Word omitted in best authorities.] Matt. 25:6. 
"Behold, he cometh [erketai] with clouds." Rev. 1:7. "There 
shall come, [eleusantai] in the last days, scoffers." 2 Pet. 3:3. 
"Behold, the Lord cometh." [Eelthe-came; prophetic; like Isa. 
9:6.] Jude 14. "Which is and which was, and which is to come." 
[Erkomenas.] Rev. 1:14. 

A portion of an article from the WATCH TOWER on the latter 
part of Matt. 24, was rather sharply criticized in our 
contemporary's article, in which he also claimed to find erkomai 
again where it does not occur. The scripture reads thus: "Who, 
then, is a faithful and wise servant, whom his lord hath made 
ruler over his household, to give them meat in due season? 
Blessed is that servant whom his lord, when he cometh, shall 
find so doing." Brother Russell claimed, in WATCH TOWER, 
that the time spoken of was not at the instant of Christ's arrival, 
as generally believed, but after he has come. The Greek word 
here is Elthon, and it undoubtedly has this meaning. It signifies 
an arrival accomplished; a period after the coming, and during 
the presence of the Lord. It is a participle form of the word, and 
should be rendered "having come. " We might quote a multitude 
of texts in which it occurs, but must be satisfied with a few. That 
we may not be charged with picking up scattered and stray texts, 
we will take a few in succession as we found them at the 
beginning of the book. "The star which they saw in the east, 
went before them, till, having come (elthon), it stood over where 
the young child was." Matt. 2:9. Notice, the star had been going 
before them, but at the period covered by elthon, it had ceased to 
go. Its arrival was accomplished: it stood. 

"And when Jesus was come (elthon) into Peter's house, he saw 
his wife's mother laid, and sick of a fever." 8:14. 

Tell us, was not Jesus PRESENT? We do not know how long he 
was in the house till he saw the sick one, but we know that he 
had arrived, whether she knew it or not. His coming had been 
accomplished. He was present. 

"And when Jesus came into the ruler's house, and saw the 
minstrels," &c. 9:23. We might read, "And Jesus, having come 
into the ruler's house," &c. He had arrived. "And when he was 
come (elthon) into his own country, he taught them in their 
synagogues," &c. 13:54. Surely he was present in this case. 
"Then he (the evil spirit) saith, "I will return into my house from 
whence I came out; and when he is come (elthon), he findeth it 
empty, swept and garnished." 12:44. He had returned, and made 
search, and found this condition of things. "Blessed are those 
servants, whom, the Lord having come, shall find watching. 
Verily, I say unto you, that he shall gird himself, and make them 
sit down to meat, and will come forth and serve them. " Luke 
12:37. 



Have we been astonished at the wonderful feast of love and truth 
that has been placed before us, without any effort on our part? 
Marvel not; the Master has come, and has made us sit down, and 
with his own blessed hands is serving us a bountiful supply. 
"Behold, I stand at the door, and knock. If any man hear my 
voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup 
with him, and he with me." Rev. 3:20. Some have supposed that 
this text had an application all the way down the gospel age. It 
cannot be so. It was given only to those living in the Laodicean 
period of the church. The spirit so directed. We know that we 
have been feasting with him. Could we do so until he had come 
in to us? Nay, more: Could we have heard the knock until he 
first had arrived, and stood, waiting and knocking for 
admittance? 

And now, dear brethren and sisters, let us look very carefully at 
Matt. 24:44-51 in the light that has been given us, viz.: that our 
Lord has come. 

"Therefore, be ye (ye brethren) also ready; for in such an hour as 
ye think not the Son of Man comes." This was fulfilled. It was 
months after Christ came (in Fall of 74) before the company 
realized it. "Who, then, is a faithful and wise servant, whom his 
lord hath made ruler over his household, to give meat in due 
season? Blessed is that servant, whom his lord, HAVING 
COME (elthon), shall find so doing." Was there such a servant? 
Of course, we do not understand that it means one individual, 
but evidently a small company, best symbolized by a single 
servant. There was such a one, giving meat in due season, and 
receiving the blessing, for at least a period of years. 

"But and if that evil servant shall say in his heart, My lord 
delayeth his coming; and shall begin to smite his fellow 
servants," &c. Who is this? He is called that servant, i.e., one 
previously spoken of; one, then, who had been giving the 
household meat when the Lord came. What was that due meat? 
Surely, the time arguments proving 

R149 : page 7 

the presence of the Master. What then? Some part, large or 
small, of that little company must change their minds, and, 
taking back what they have said, declare, "My Lord delays his 
coming. " Mark, there can be no delay until the time of arrival 
has passed. This one, therefore, must have known and taught the 
true time of the coming. Again, to fill the picture, he must begin 
to smite the remainder of the company; and as he is in 
opposition, and proclaiming a delay, it is evident that they must 
be teaching that there is no delay, but that the truth of the past 
remains true. 

Brothers, sisters, how else could this scripture be fulfilled? 
When, but at this time, could it take place? Truly, the King has 
come in to the guest chamber, and is scanning those who have 



been privileged to enter. Can we bear that searching eye, 
looking clear through and through? Lord, help us to examine 
ourselves in the light of present truth. 



W. I. M. 



R149:page7 

A LETTER TO THE WATCH TOWER. 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: How true is it that our 
Heavenly Father can bring good out of evil, and cause the wrath 
of man to praise him. At the very time we are cautioned to 
"watch" and "beware," and that "the love of many shall wax 
cold," on account of iniquity abounding, He has arranged a mass 
of concurring events well calculated to increase our faith. I am 
reminded of this every day. I find men fulfilling prophecy; 
saying and doing many things, freely and voluntarily, which 
they have not the remotest idea had any connection with God or 
heaven, and yet which is of such a nature, or has such a relation 
to things which are of interest to the child of God who is 
watching closely every indication of the presence of his Lord, as 
to impress him forcibly with the thought that He is even at the 
door. While stopping in a certain city, not long since, a little 
incident occurred which had something to do with this train of 
thought. 

I was in conversation with a gentleman (not a professor of 
religion, I suppose). We were in his place of business, and 
looking out of the window before me, I saw the tall, symmetrical 
spire of an adjoining fashionable church, which was surmounted 
by a weather-vane in the form of a cock. At first sight and 
thought it seemed to me to be a vain thing to be upon a Christian 
church, and your correspondent expressed his surprise at its 
being in such a place; for although it is a reminder of Peter's 
weakness and denial of his Lord, and inferentially of our 
weakness, yet it is so often used as the emblem of boastful 
power that it seemed quite out of place there, and it seems that 
the gentleman referred to was impressed the same way, for he 
said, looking archly at it, "O, it is in harmony with the principles 
of the churches in these days," giving a peculiar accent to the 
words "these days." 

Soon after, looking out at the building from another point, I 
observed: "Those must be fine windows, judging from the 
appearance outside." "O, yes," said he; "it is a fine church 
inside, but that cannot be said of those who belong to it. " And 
then, striking an attitude, and pointing with scorn toward the 
place, he said, "Why, sir, if you could take all the Christianity 
there is in there and boil it down, you would not get a piece as 
large as a pin's head. " 



Of course, I had nothing to say, but went off into reverie, and 
said to myself (the outgrowth of thoughts presented in the 
WATCH TOWER). That church is struck with lightning, and 
don't know it, but will some 

R150:page7 

day wake up to the fact when it is too late to rebuild it. "As the 
lightning cometh out of the East, and shineth even unto the 
West, so shall also the coming [parousia— presence] of the Son 
of Man be." The lightning has swept away "the refuge of lies," 
and the world sees the dead men's bones and all uncleanness." 
The lightning not only reveals things which were hidden, but it 
has a pleasing or displeasing effect according as the things 
revealed are pleasing or displeasing to the beholder. To children 
who, in the stormy night, watch for the absent father, the 
lightning, to their joy, reveals him near at hand; but to the 
burglar, that same flash reveals approaching justice and doom; 
but in either case the beholders get true views of their 
surroundings. They see the highest objects first and best. The 
churches are the highest objects, and men now see what they are 
and what they should be; although they do not yet see down into 
the valleys of social and civil conditions so as to adjust things, 
but as the storm increases, they will be able to see, and "will 
learn righteousness," and acknowledge "that the Most High 
rulefh in the kingdom of men. " 

Let us lift up our heads "knowing that our redemption draweth 
nigh" 

Cheer up, cheer up; the day breaks o'er thee, 

Bright in the promised shining way! 

Light from heaven is streaming for thee, 

Proving thee near the perfect day. " 

Rejoicing in the light now shining from our Lord's presence and 
hoping for the soon coming change to the likeness of his 
glorious body, of all who have made a covenant with him by 
sacrifice, I am your brother in Christ. 

J. C. SUNDERLIN. 



R150:page7 

Questions of Correspondents. 

Q. Bro. R., please give me your view of 1 Pet. 3:18-20, which 
says that Jesus Christ was "quickened by the Spirit by which 
also he went and preached unto the Spirits in prison, which 
sometime were disobedient when once the long suffering of God 
waited in the days of Noah while the ark was a preparing. " 

A. We understand this to teach that the Spirit which raised Jesus 
from death was the same which while the ark was preparing 



preached through Noah ("a preacher of righteousness") to the 
antediluvian sinners, now in the great prison house of death. 

Q. Bro. R., you have shown, I think clearly and scripturally that 
the body of Christ, as well as the head give their lives as 
sacrifices for sins, and that as his was the ransom price of "the 
household of faith, " the body's life given during the Gospel Age 
is accepted as "filling up," or completing the work of the head 
"for the people"-the world. I see too that it seems to be the clear 
fulfillment of the goat sacrifice of Lev. 16., but there is one text 
which troubles me, i.e. Col. 1:24, where Paul says: "I now 
rejoice in my sufferings for you and fill up that which is behind 
of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for his body's sake which 
is the church. " My difficulty is that the sacrifice is for the church 
while the type (Lev. 16) teaches that the sacrifice for the church 
was completed in the death of Jesus as typified by the bullock's 
dying for Priests and Levites, and that Paul's sacrifice and that of 
every other member of the body of Christ is "for the sins of the 
people" (the world), and is represented by the goat. 

Can you suggest how we may harmonize these scriptures? 

A. God accepts the offering of the High-priest, head and body- 
the second Adam and his Bride as the ransom price of the 
world's life, as the offset of the disobedience of the first Adam 
and his wife. 

Adam and Eve were one in the transgression; Jesus Christ and 
his bride are one in the redemption of the world. Now consider 
that God has covenanted to accept our sacrifice of earth-life and 
nature; and has promised us the higher-the Divine-and we, 
Jesus and His body have accepted the conditions and covenanted 
to die. Next the question arises— How shall we die? Shall we go 
to the altar and knife as did the bullock and goat in the type? No, 
we have only to remember that the goat was to suffer and die as 
did the bullock which means that we have Christ Jesus as a 
pattern of how we are to give our lives. 

He spent His life according to the Father's will in "doing good 
unto all men as he had opportunity, especially to the household 
of faith." And this is just what the Apostle enjoins us to do also. 
There are hundreds of ways of spending our life-power 
according to the talents we possess; in the household, in the 
workshop, in temperance reform, and in any other way we can 
bless and benefit humanity and exercise the Divine attribute 
love. But while it is good to do for any one, yet, Paul esteemed it 
a special privilege to spend and be spent "for the church which 
is His (Christ's) body. " Jesus' time was spent largely in 
instructing the disciples, and we should esteem it a special honor 
to be permitted to do much and suffer much for each other, as 
long as we have life or strength to spend. 

Suppose I bought an article of you for $100, and came to you 
presenting the money and you said: Here is the article and the 



money too. I want you to spend this money, which is mine. Use 
it for the benefit of those you find needing it, especially any of 
my relatives. You will be acting as my agent and may use so 
much of it on yourself as you find necessary to the 
accomplishment of my work (only). This would illustrate how 
we give ourselves, and how our Father accepts us (the body of 
Christ) as part, with our Head, of the world's "sin-offering" and 
also permits us to be his agents in doing good. Thus we in 
spending our lives and all that God has given us, are merely his 
stewards and were given all powers and blessings, not for 
ourselves, nor to keep, but to use for Him. Let us so do. 

Q. Please explain 1 Pet. 4:6 "For this cause was the gospel 
preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged 
according to men, in the flesh, but live according to God, in the 
Spirit." 

A. This shows the double nature of one begotten of the Spirit— 
the body still human, the spirit of the mind Divine. Peter is 
exhorting to separateness from the world, not only our minds but 
also of our bodies as ruled over by our minds. 

The gospel (good news of our redemption and the promise of 
glory,) was given us, that our lives should be influenced by it 
and that we should be separated from the world as "new 
creatures" thus living according to God in the Spirit and 
regarded by Him as "new [spiritual] creatures" while men who 
see no physical change in us, regard us still "as men in the 
flesh," and think it strange if we do not act as natural men. 

"The natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit." He 
understands not the begetting to a new nature, new hopes and 
aspirations, and thinks a self-sacrificed life unnatural; and so it 
is unnatural. Therefore we must have the new nature implanted 
before we can crucify the old. 



R152:page7 

SEND A POSTAL CARD. 

We desire to send the WATCH TOWER to all who are 
interested in it sufficiently to read it carefully, but have none to 
waste. We will not indulge in the begging, urging and dunning 
process so common to religious journals. You know that the 
second volume commenced July, 1880, and if interested in and 
desirous of its continuance, you should in some way signify 
your wish. You know that the paper is FREE to all who want to 
read it and consider themselves unable to pay for it. You know, 
too, that we expect at least a postal card from each subscriber 
each year. If, therefore, you desire a continuance of the WATCH 
TOWER'S visits this year, and have not so informed us, do so at 



once, or be neither surprised nor offended if you do not receive 
the November issue. 



R152:page7 

NOT UNTIL NOVEMBER. 

In answer to a number of requests, we had purposed visiting 
several places in New York state, where little bands of 
subscribers reside, among others, Brockport, Honeoye, 
Dansville, etc., but will defer so doing until the early part of 
November. 

We have had numerous and urgent calls for WATCH TOWER 
Tracts on various topics, and purpose (D.V.) issuing several as 
soon as possible. They will be cheap tracts for gratuitous 
distribution and will be furnished at a very low price to those 
agreeing to distribute them, or free to those so desiring them. 
We will use a portion of October in this way instead of 
traveling. 



page 7 



EXTRACT FROM LETTER. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:— I was very much pleased with article 
in last number on "Baptism." It is in harmony with my thoughts 
on the subject. I have thought for two years or more, that those 
who thought, only of water baptism, when thinking of being 
baptized into Christ, were taking the shadow and leaving out the 
substance; just as they do, who ask to be provided with daily 
bread, and mean, mainly, natural bread. 

The real baptism is of vital importance; and it seems to me that 
when one has reached that point, he will give expression to it, by 
water baptism in a proper way, just as surely as it is true that out 
of the "abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh." 

By some of the friends, our ideas of being dead with Christ, are 
considered a little extreme, and so they may think in regard to 
these on baptism, but the former lead to the latter. 

Your brother, B. W. KEITH. 



R150 : page 8 



THE SCAPEGOAT. 



If the goat that was slain represented the saints, the "little 
flock," did not the scape-goat represent "the great multitude" 



that come out of great tribulation and wash their robes? After 
much thought, we had about come to this conclusion, but, on 
presenting it to others, difficulties became apparent, and we now 
suggest that the scape-goat represents that portion of the world, 
or "children of the devil," which are professedly Christian, and 
on account of whom the multitude of Christians are in the 
bondage of conformity to the world. It seems that the "little 
flock" represent the whole church, and will gather the "great 
multitude" around them as the lodestone will gather the particles 
of steel mingled in the dust. These particles of steel are treated 
as dust only till they are separated. So our thought is that the 
multitude of Christians, mingled with and in bondage to the 
worldly element, are counted as the scapegoat only till they are 
separated; then they are exalted to their proper relationship to 
the saints. "Without holiness, no man shall see the Lord." 

We think we see several scriptural facts that will serve to 
illustrate our view of the case. 

First: The meaning of the word scapegoat seems to indicate the 
idea. The Hebrew word, Azazel, rendered scapegoat, is said to 
mean devil. This fact has led some to believe that the devil 
himself is to be the antitypical scapegoat; and does not the 
definition favor the idea?-One goat to represent the Lord, and 
the other the devil. Our idea is, that one goat represents the 
Lord's children, or wheat, and the other the children of the devil, 
or tares, as in the parable of wheat and tares of Matt. 13. 

Second: It seems illustrated by the case of Israel in bondage in 
Egypt. Let Aaron be as the saint, the mass of Israel the "great 
multitude, " and Egypt, who held them in bondage, as the 
scapegoat. Israel suffered with Egypt until they were separated, 
and the object of all the plagues was the complete deliverance of 
the "great multitude." But, as has been shown in another article, 
all Israel were exempt from the "seven last plagues," and 
therefore 

R151 : page 8 

the great burden of wrath fell on the Egyptians. 

Take the case of the Jewish nation, as Christ found them, on this 
point. There we see a company of first ripe ones, those who 
accepted of Christ before their house was left desolate. All who 
accepted Him afterward, and before the wrath came on them to 
the uttermost, were wheat, though later ripe, but the chaff was 
burned with fire unquenchable. It was on that generation that 
Christ said all the righteous blood should come. Matt. 23:34-36. 
Does not this put them in the attitude of the scapegoat, receiving 
the sins at the hands of the priest? It was (as in Egypt) in their 
extreme calamity, that the Christians escaped from that 
generation by fleeing to the mountains, when they saw 
Jerusalem encompassed with armies. Luke 21:21. In this, we see 
the first fruit, the later fruit, and the scapegoat; and this is no less 



clear to our mind because the later fruits were the greater 
number, and because, until they were separated, they were 
included under the curse on that generation. 

It seems clear to us that the manner of the disposition of the 
Jewish church was intended, in its important features, as a 
pattern of the manner of the disposition of the gospel church, - 
that this is the great event to which several types, parables and 
prophecies point. As in the pattern, there is the first ripe, the 
later ripe— both wheat-and the tares: the "little flock" not defiled 
with corrupt churches; the "great multitude," who are defiled by 
contact with Babylon, but who come out of Babylon, and thus 
wash their robes from the world spots; and, third, the Babylon 
element that does not come out, but drink the wine of wrath 
without mixture, and go down as a millstone into the sea. It is 
Egypt, the chaff of the Jewish nation, the tares of the gospel 
church, or Babylon, that, each in their turn, receive the uttermost 
wrath, or wrath without mixture, as represented by the "seven 
last plagues; for in them is filled up the wrath of God." Rev. 
15:1. 

This uttermost wrath did not come on Israel in Egypt, nor upon 
the later ripe wheat of the Jewish house. Neither did it come on 
the later ripe wheat of the gospel church; i.e., the great multitude 
who come out of Babylon in obedience to the call, and thus 
wash their robes. Does not the scapegoat represent those who 
receive the uttermost wrath, and thus bear the sin? They did 
leave the world by profession, and were a part of the nominal 
church, or kingdom of heaven, but were tares, or children of the 
devil, all the time. They were sown among the wheat, but they 
never were wheat. They never had been even counted holy in 
God's sight, as are all the wheat, whether first ripe or later ripe. 
They had never defiled their garments, for they had no garments 
given them. Nothing can be defiled that was never clean. 

The defiled ones are like Esau, who lose their crown, their 
birthright. Heb. 12:14-17. Once lost, it can never be regained. 
But Esau was not cast out of the family. He took the place of the 
younger brother as a servant; and so those who defile their 
garments with Babylon, lose their crown, but, by washing their 
robes, become servants in the heavenly temple. Rev. 7:14-15. 
They come out of great tribulation, as did Israel from Egypt, but 
they are exempt like them from the "seven last plagues." Jacob 
and Esau are used by Paul to represent the first-born and later 
born in the same family, and he makes the defiled one take the 
place of the later born. But it is evident that the tares do not 
belong to either of these classes. 

Whoever will read the sixteenth chapter of Revelation will see 
that the seven last plagues do not come on those that repent, 
come out from Babylon, and wash their robes, but upon Babylon 
itself, or those who have the mark of the beast, and do not repent 
of their evil deeds and give God glory. Verses 9-11. They have 



no part either as kings and priests or as servants with this gospel 
crop. The church, order and paraphernalia which they delighted 
to sustain, because it gave them power to enslave and control the 
mass of Christians, will go down to rise no more, and they will 
be lost in the great sea of mankind. 

The parallelism between the ending of the Jewish and Gospel 
ages, and also the idea that the rejected portion of each house is 
the scapegoat, are sustained in our mind by comparing the words 
of Jesus in reference to the blood of the righteous: "All these 
things shall come upon this generation" (Matt. 23:35-36,) and 
the statement of John in reference to Babylon: "And in her was 
found the blood of prophets and of saints, and of all [that fear 
God's name] that were slain upon the earth." Rev. 18:24. 

It seems clear that the downfall of Babylon is necessary to the 
deliverance of God's people, the line between the church and the 
world, and between truth and error must be drawn, hence 
Babylon in her fall, not only bears, but bears away the sins of 
God's people. 

We would call attention to the judgment scene of Matt. 25, as 
having in it the illustration of much that we have said. The scene 
is laid after the saints have ascended to the Father with Christ 
who came forth to meet them in the holy place. They are now 
one in power and glory as were Moses and Aaron, and go forth 
to execute judgment. The nations are gathered before Christ and 
those whom He calls "These my brethren." Verses 40-45. That 
the nations here mean the Christian nations, is evident, because 
no others have been brought in contact with Christ in the 
persons of His saints. Here are included the "great multitude" of 
Christians called the "sheep" and the Babylon element, or tares- 
the children of the Devil-called "goats." They are all as the 
same until they are separated, but as the object of Moses and 
Aaron when they went forth to execute judgment was to 
separate and deliver Israel, and to bring Egypt down; so here we 
see first the separation and the "Come ye blessed" to the sheep, 
followed by "Depart ye cursed" to the goats. 

As we have seen it was after the first three plagues that the Lord 
said: "And I will sever in that day the land of Goshen in which 
my people dwell.... And I will put a division between my people 
and thy people," &c. Ex. 8:22-23. Then follows on Egypt the 
seven last plagues. This looks like the separation of the sheep 
from the goats, followed by the "fire" on the goats. 

Practically, we believe this separation will be fulfilled by the 
great body of Christians, who are left in the world when the 
saints or little flock are taken away to meet Christ, cutting them 
loose from their conformity to the maxims and customs of a 
worldly church, washing their robes and making them white and 
thus raising the standard of a pure Christianity to the world. The 
entrance into the temple in heaven cannot be immediately 



effected, as Israel was not delivered out of Egypt, until the 
fulfillment of the seven last plagues. Rev. 15:8. 

It would seem that this washed or separated state, while men are 
yet mortal, may possibly be lost. This is the state of those on "as 
it were a sea of glass." This danger of losing it is implied in the 
statement made after six of the seven last plagues are poured 
out: "Behold I come as a thief. Blessed is he that watcheth and 
keepeth his garment, lest he walk naked and they see his 
shame." Rev. 16:15. The coming as a thief extends over the 
whole period from His coming to meet His saints until these 
judgments on Babylon are complete; and it is clear that no man 
is absolutely above danger of falling until he is immortal. 

We are impressed with the thought that a certain class who had 
been forgiven have that pardon revoked, and so share the fate of 
the world. The idea of pardon being revoked seems strange to 
many Christians, as it once did to us, but such an idea is clearly 
taught by the Savior in the parable of the two debtors. Matt. 
18:23-35. One owed his Lord "ten thousand talents," and "the 
Lord of that servant was moved with compassion, and loosed 
him, and forgave him the debt. " This was because he was 
willing to pay and could not. The other debtor owed this 
forgiven one an hundred pence, and he took him by the throat 
(just as some professed followers of Christ apply the law to their 
fellow disciples) and in the face of his inability to pay, and his 
plea for mercy, he cast him into prison. And when his Lord 
heard it, he was angry and delivered him to the tormentors "until 
he should pay all that was due him. " 

Here is a case of pardon revoked; and after giving this 
illustration the Savior says, "So likewise shall my Heavenly 
Father do also unto you if ye from your hearts forgive not every 
one his brother their trespasses." Our sins are forgiven at 
conversion, but are not "blotted out" until the sanctuary is 
cleansed and the hands of the priest are laid upon the head of the 
scapegoat, or until "the times of refreshing shall come from the 
presence of the Lord." Acts 3:19. And the way to retain 
forgiveness is by forgiving others their trespasses. If we would 
be on the side of the Lord's goat instead of the Devil's we must 
follow the Lord's methods of dealing with others. "If any man 
will come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross 
and follow me. " Matt. 16:24. J. H P. 



page 8 

SOME NEW THOUGHTS. 

R151 : page 8 

In the article above, Brother P. suggests some food for thought 
regarding the type of the sin-offering, scape-goat, etc. We fully 



agree with the general view expressed relative to tares, Babylon, 
etc., not representing the church in any sense, neither the "little 
flock" nor great company. 

But we must yet hold to our views, as heretofore expressed, that 
the scapegoat represents the "great company," not Babylon, 
tares, etc., for several reasons. First: The scape-goat was brought 
to the door of the Tabernacle, and had been accepted of God. 
Surely this is not the case with hypocrites in the church. 

R152 : page 8 

If they present themselves, they may deceive men, but not God. 
Again: God intimates that as far as He is concerned, He has no 
choice (shown by casting lots) as to which shall be the sacrifice 
or sin-offering. This would not be true of a hypocrite. God 
would not accept of a tares sacrifice for sins; the offering must 
be pure, free from sin. Jesus was such in fact. We are so, 
because justified by Him, and we think that both goats standing 
thus before God must represent, not tares, but justified ones- 
Christians. 

This class of true (though not faithful) Christians stand side by 
side with the faithful ones who do follow their Lord's example, 
and crucify the will of the flesh. These are overcome by the 
world, and though they would love the approval of their Lord, 
cannot bear the frown of men. Like the unfruitful branches, they 
do not bear the fruit of the vine, but merely leaves, and are, 
therefore, "castaways" from the high calling and honors of the 
overcomers. These are not accounted worthy to escape those 
things coming upon the world, and go through at least a part of 
the world's trouble, the object being the "delivering over to 
Satan, for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be 
saved on the day of the Lord Jesus." This is made necessary by 
their having failed to crucify the fleshly nature according to their 
covenant. And as we have already seen, it is necessary for all to 
lose the fleshly nature and form, either by "destruction" or 
"sacrifice," in order to the obtaining of the Divine form and 
nature. "I beseech you, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye 
present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God— 
your reasonable service. " 

The subject is large and will bear much examination, which we 
hope all will give it. 


