Not Missing the Purpose of Our Field Ministry
1 Today, more and more we find people who do not listen to our message or take any literature but yet say: “My religious organization is doing the same thing,” or “You are doing a fine work. May God bless you.” We may have found ourselves going to the next door with the feeling that we merely left them in a good frame of mind for the next Witness. But we must remember that one day we may be making the last call on these people. Will our next call be the last one? What, then, should we do and say under these circumstances?​—2 Cor. 6:2; Isa. 55:6.
2 Is not our purpose to give a witness about the Kingdom, and are we not convinced that we are doing a work that no other religious organization is doing? So if these people just agree with us or merely say that the Bible is a good book and should be read more, and this is all we establish at the door, have we missed the purpose of our call? When we read the life history of Jesus, what do we find? He did not allow soft words and flattery to sway him from accomplishing his purpose. For example, on one occasion certain religious persons said to him, “Teacher, we know you are truthful and teach the way of God in truth, and you do not care for anybody, for you do not look upon men’s outward appearance.” This disarming approach did not cause him to miss the purpose of his ministry. He took the initiative and gave a witness about the truth so effectively that they marveled at what he said.​—Matt. 22:15-22.
3 During the month of November we offer to the people the Kingdom book. You may try different ways of arousing interest in the book and see what is effective in your territory. An approach that may be successful is to ask a parent at the door: “If your child who has learned the Lord’s prayer from you were to ask, ‘What is the Kingdom?’ could you answer him intelligently? Or, the child might ask, ‘When is the Kingdom going to come?’ What would you say?” Then you might explain that to make this prayer mean more than just words, he can get real answers concerning the Kingdom in this publication. (Page 191, paragraph 14)
4 Some individuals may be very satisfied with their religion, but we could frankly ask them if their religion has taught them how to obey the Bible command in Revelation 18:4. We could read the scripture if permitted or, if not, tell them what it says. Since they are satisfied with their religion and do not know what Babylon is and how to come out of it, we could tell them that because it is so urgent and they have not yet received this vital information we would like to leave this book with them to help them to find out how to obey this commandment. (Page 202 has good pointed information on Rev. 18:4.) It may be good not to tell them on this first call what Babylon the Great is; give them a chance to see if they can find out. When you return, you could take the discussion from that point. Their waiting a short period for the answer that they could not Scripturally get from their church may impress on them their need for something outside their religion.
5 To those who feel that all religious organizations are doing the same thing we might say: “No one other than Jehovah’s witnesses has ever called at my door with this message. How about you? Do you know what message God’s people were commanded to take to the people?” You might then refer to Matthew 24:14 on page 307. Interest might be cultivated in the book by using the good talking points on pages 306 and 307.
6 In making return visits it is always good to keep in mind our goal of giving a witness. If the person previously witnessed to is not home, then how about the person who has answered the knock? It is very easy to say: “Mr.​——​——​ and I had an interesting conversation on my last call and no doubt you likewise would be pleased to hear about a unique government​—the thousand-year government.”
7 We may be inclined to feel that some of these approaches are too direct and straightforward, but we can be assured that speaking the truth plainly but tactfully will not drive sheeplike ones away. Did not Jesus say concerning the true shepherd: “The sheep follow him, because they know his voice.”?​—John 10:4.
[Blurb on page 8]
Have You Made a Return Visit This Week?

