Presenting the Good News​—With the New Book True Peace and Security—​From What Source?
1 The book contains not only a wonderful and encouraging message, but many other features that will help us to place it in the hands of the people. This new book is really styled for use in the Kingdom field service.
2 The title itself gives us opportunities to make a presentation. When approaching someone, we might ask questions, such as: “Do you think the people of the world feel secure these days? How do you feel about your own situation?” There are many current events that cause people to think about their security. Perhaps in one community it will be a flood or other disaster, an earthquake or a storm; unemployment may be widespread; there may be robberies in the neighborhood, or assaults and murders that are widely publicized in the press. Children may be molested. All of these things will cause people to think about personal security. So we can ask appropriate questions according to what is likely to be on the minds of the people, then point to the title of the book and show them the table of contents.
3 Or, one might consider the bad conditions in the world and raise questions about what all this means. Then introduce the book and open it to pages 82 and 83 and use those two pages as the basis for interesting conversation and placement of the book.
4 Many of the chapters have very fine opening paragraphs for use in arousing interest in the book. We might open to the first two paragraphs in chapter 1 and read them and then direct attention to the picture, which shows people living in peace and security.
5 For other people in your territory you may find special interest in certain subjects. The first two paragraphs of chapter 2 raise some very thought-provoking questions that may appeal to certain people. For others you may find the words of chapter 5, the first paragraph, just right to stimulate interest in the book.
6 Those interested in religion may be aroused to want to read the book by our considering with them the first paragraph of chapter 6.
7 You may find some concerned about the buildup of armaments and nuclear testing and the ever-present possibility of nuclear war. The first paragraph of chapter 8 can be put to good use among such people.
8 Hope for the future is aroused in the first two paragraphs of chapter 9, stimulating the reader to want to see how true peace and security will come.
9 For a quick presentation one might show the title of the book, and then turn to the statement printed in bold type at the top of page two, the message from “The Publishers,” thus giving people reason to want to have and read the book.
10 These are examples of things that can be taken from the book and used in presenting it, and there are many more. Each Kingdom publisher can choose what suits him. Scripture texts can be read right from the book. If desired, two points could be combined to deal with a particular territory or situation. Some publishers may want to try various presentations in their territory and see which works the best in arousing the interest of the people in that community in reading the book. For example, there are many points in chapter 2 that can be used in talking to people familiar with current events. In December we will try to place this new book and the Bible together, emphasizing the fact that the Bible contains the answers. However, since many people have a Bible and do not wish to get another, we can place the book by itself. Select a way of presenting the good news that will get results in your territory.
11 (It will be profitable to suggest to people who are studying the Truth book and considering baptism that they might do well to read Peace and Security before getting baptized, for it contains important information not in the Truth book.)

