Prove Your Faith by Proclaiming the Millennium
1 When you received your personal copy of the book God’s Kingdom of a Thousand Years Has Approached and looked at the table of contents, how could you avoid being impelled to begin reading! And as you read, your faith was built up wonderfully. The book gives one a visionary preview of the thousand-year rule of God’s kingdom, the words painting such a clear picture that one can easily visualize many marvelous things connected with the Kingdom reign. Here we are at the threshold of the thousand-year reign, and how grateful we are that Jehovah has provided us with so many details concerning the Millennium and what will take place during that time!
2 At the end of the first chapter we read: “What those thousand years usher in upon our earth is something vitally necessary to the endless life and happiness of the world of mankind. How, then, can we reasonably hold back from at once examining closely the prophetic picture of the marvelous millennium that the apostle John so beautifully drew for us?”
3 Then we had great pleasure in examining the prophetic picture of the Millennium. The book directed our attention to the Scriptures, which let us look even beyond the Millennium, so we are able to see more than a thousand years into the future and know what we will experience if we prove our faith by firmness in our integrity to Jehovah.
4 After reading the first nine chapters, our appetites were stimulated to read on as the opening words of chapter 10 said: “When we look at it according to what the Bible says about it, the Millennium is a thing very much to be desired for all mankind, the living and the dead. That is why the announcement that it has approached is most welcome news for all who understand. We ought to be excitedly interested in knowing what valid reasons we have for being convinced that it has approached.” Then we were treated to a view of the events taking place now and immediately ahead of us.
5 Our preview of the thousand-year reign should move us to want others to have this same visionary preview. The month of November gives us a golden opportunity to thrill many others with a vision of God’s kingdom of a thousand years. (Matt. 10:27) Some of the points mentioned above can be used by us as we work among the people with this new book. People of Christendom have for centuries prayed for God’s kingdom to come. Now we can show them that it has approached, what it will really mean for them and the great blessings in store for those who prove to be integrity keepers. It is no longer a case of praying and not knowing when the Kingdom would come, but now the Millennial rule has approached and the time remaining to learn about it before the “great tribulation” is limited. Good people all over the world will rejoice as they learn what the Kingdom rule means for them and what they may experience if they qualify to live at that time.
6 While we are enthusiastic about the wonderful message contained in the book, we may find that the people with whom we place the book do not have the same appetites for spiritual things as we do. So our follow-up on each placement of the book is very important. There are many appetizing points that can be discussed. Surely good people will want to know that there will be one human race, one language, international peacefulness, and what the rulers will be like; that there will not be immediate perfection but there will be no evil influence of Satan and the demons around; when the resurrection will occur, etc. These are but a few of the wonderful things the Bible reveals about the Millennium. Some may want more proof or information about the sign of Christ’s presence, and we have all these points to refer to in the book. When you return to visit the people, be prepared with several points that you feel will be outstanding or of special interest to them and urge them to be sure to read right through the entire book. You can talk about things that you especially enjoyed. Points can be taken from different parts of the book if you like. Much will depend on the type of person and his background and religion or his interest in current events, but try to select points that will be interest arousing and cause the person to read the book.
7 Another thing we will do is try to get the people to come with us to the Kingdom Hall to hear the special series of talks based on this book. Tell them that they can bring the book with them and follow along as the speaker covers a portion of it, mentioning the outstanding points.
8 After December 1 this book will be used in the congregation book studies. Those who have obtained the book in our field service can be invited to attend the neighborhood congregation book study and there have an opportunity to go into details on these subjects and get an even clearer visionary preview of the thousand-year government. Surely we all are interested in what kind of government it will be, and the Bible tells us much about it. So the message we have is very appropriate for this time just before the Millennium begins and should bring much hope to the hearts of good people throughout our territory. (Matt. 24:14) May Jehovah’s blessing be upon the distribution and use of the Kingdom book.
[Blurb on page 1]
Prove Our Faith by Firmness in Our Integrity.

