Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 11
 8 min: Song 111. Introduction, text and comments.
17 min: “Prove Your Faith by Proclaiming the Millennium.” Questions and answers, including comments from audience on what subjects in book they use to appeal to people locally. Brief demonstration on paragraph 7.
20 min: “Can You, Too, Share in the Joy of Disciple-making?” Talk based on the first six paragraphs. Then under the heading “How Can Studies Be Started?” discuss paragraphs 6-11, inviting audience to comment.
15 min: Concluding comments. Mention plans for activity on world’s Thanksgiving Day. Include accounts report. Appropriate Announcements. Song 104.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 18
10 min: Song 114. Introduction, text and comment on Theocratic News.
20 min: “Joy of Disciple-making” insert. Discuss material under the heading “Search Out Every Possibility.” Develop suggestions on how to approach unbelieving mates in effort to start study; include local experiences on this. Explain how to go about finding out from persons with whom we now study whether they know anyone who might be interested, and ask for actual experiences. Also get local experiences from any children who have started studies.
15 min: “Not Missing the Purpose of Our Field Ministry.” Questions and answers (looking up references in “Kingdom” book).
15 min: Concluding comments. Consider Branch Letter. Song 113.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 25
10 min: Song 98. Introduction, text and comments.
23 min: Presenting the Good News. Questions and answers. Invite all to open “Peace and Security” book and follow discussion as references are made to book. Demonstrate two presentations that would be appropriate in your local territory, including the Bible in the offer.
15 min: Discussion based on “Joy of Disciple-making” insert, “How Can Studies Be Started?” paragraphs 1-5. Demonstrate how to start study on first call. After placing book, publisher suggests showing how to get most benefit from book if person has a few more moments to spare. Use chapter 1 of “Peace and Security” book. Follow up with offer to return next week and set definite time. Also demonstrate how to start a study on a return visit, using one of the other chapters, as suggested in paragraph 4 of this section of the insert.
12 min: Concluding comments. Refer to December theme (Mic. 4:5). Song 112.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 2
10 min: Song 99. Introduction, text and comments.
12 min: Talk based on “Joy of Disciple-making” insert, from “When and Where Can Studies Be Conducted?” to end. Endeavor to reach the hearts of the publishers.
13 min: “Tobacco Users.” Give talk including points from June 1, 1973, “Watchtower.” (Also see “Watchtower” 8/1/73 and “Awake!” 8/22/73.)
10 min: Question Box. Questions and answers followed by remarks on why one should marry “only in the Lord.”​—1 Cor. 7:39.
15 min: Concluding comments. Discuss what local congregation can do to “Prepare for December 22-31.” Song 105.

