Chapter 1
We Are Within the Purpose of a Loving Creator
 1, 2. Why is life on earth taking on new interest for increasing numbers of people?
LIFE on earth is taking on new interest for increasing numbers of people as our twentieth century nears its end.
2 The dying system of things under which we are finding it more and more difficult to live is not the last thing for us to experience. It is not all there is to it for us. Earth will cease to be a place for continual human suffering. The darkening night that now enshrouds all the earth with a deadly pall is about to be dispelled. The new day that must surely follow the night is about to break for all the earth to become a place of joyous living for the whole human family. All of this is not a matter of chance, not a matter of accident, not even a matter of some human scientific breakthrough. Someone higher than man has purposed it.
 3. How have Buddhists, Hindus and believers in Fate been affected by the new outlook on life upon earth?
3 Yes, increasing numbers of people of all kinds are throbbing with happy excitement as they look forward to life on our same old earth but under a life-giving system of things. Among these the onetime Buddhist who used to fold his hands and pray on bended knee before the gilded image of his meditating god has found new reason for enjoying human life on earth now and forever. The onetime Hindu who used to worship before his triune god Trimurti no longer tries to build up merit for himself under fear of an imagined transmigration of the human soul after death. With a loving interest in all others of mankind he now seeks to share with others the good news that the human family will enter into a better life here on earth. The worshiper who once believed that all his affairs were governed by Qadar (“Fate”) now wants to prove worthy of inheriting a paradise here on earth, more beautiful even than ancient Damascus.
 4. How have religionists of Christendom changed their expectations?
4 The onetime Roman Catholic, or Greek Orthodox, or Protestant, who looked forward to becoming an angel in heaven rather than burning forever in a hell of fire and brimstone, now prepares himself for endless life in human perfection on a safe, peaceful earth.
 5. How have the nonreligious been affected similarly?
5 Marvelous religious transformations all of those! But such transformations are not confined to sincere religious persons. Even the nonreligious have experienced this change of view of life on earth. The onetime evolutionist, who once exerted tremendous faith to believe that human life began accidentally from a tiny, short-lived cell in a primeval sea and evolved ambitiously upward to present human life, no longer depends upon mutations and modern science as to what he will be in the future. The aforetime “godless” Communist, who believed in absolute materialism and who worked for communizing the whole world under an irreligious political government, now hopes for a universal rulership higher than that of selfish, imperfect, dying creatures of blood and flesh.
 6. According to what are all those now patterning their lives?
6 All these transformed ones, religious and nonreligious, confidently look for life on earth to become better within their own generation. They are now patterning their lives with this assured expectation of grander things to come for earth’s inhabitants. Their present lives are happier for this, more useful, more beneficial to themselves and others. Unitedly, they all have this common outlook for the coming years. What has brought about this marvelous transformation in their minds and hearts and lives?
 7. What has brought about this transformation in such ones?
7 It is this: They have all come to an accurate knowledge of God’s “eternal purpose” and are shaping their lives in harmony with that divine purpose, rejoicing at heart because it is now triumphing for the everlasting good of all mankind. They are humbly grateful that they, too, are embraced within the loving purpose of God their Creator. Living within the range of His purpose makes life worth while for them. Eternal happiness is before them.

