VOL. XXVI. JULY 1, 1905. No. 13 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 195 

Rev. E. L. Eaton, D.D., on the Church of Todayl95 

The Westminster Confession— Will our 

Presbyterian Friends Repudiate It? 196 

Berean Bible Study for July— "Patience" 196 

Make Sure of Winning in God's Election 197 

Ignorance Respecting God's Election 198 

Other Scripture References to Election 199 

A Good Man's Prayer Answered 200 

Hezekiah's Fear of Death 202 

Hezekiah's Praise for Deliverance 203 

The World's Redeemer Pictured 204 

"By His Stripes We are Healed" 205 

The Chattanooga Convention 207 

page 194 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



GENERAL CONVENTION, NIAGARA FALLS, N.Y. JULY 8-11 



The RAILROADS of the New England, Trunk Lines, Central, 
Western and South-Western Associations, the C.P.R. and 
G.T.R. in Ontario, and the Richelieu & Ontario Navigation Co. 
will sell tickets to this Convention at ONE FARE AND ONE-THIRD, 
plus 25 cents, on the "Certificate Plan." You purchase a regular 
single-fare ticket to Niagara Falls, N.Y., telling your ticket-agent 
at the time that you are going to the WATCH TOWER BIBLE & 
TRACT SOCIETY'S CONVENTION, that you desire a Certificate, and 
which will entitle you to purchase a return ticket at ONE -THIRD 
a regular fare. Hold on to that certificate, as without it you 
would be charged full fare when buying your return ticket. 
The Certificates will need to be signed, but we will publicly 
announce at the Convention the name of the brother who will 
attend to the matter for you and save you all trouble. 

ACCOMMODATIONS should be secured in advance to avoid 
confusion and trouble to yourself and the Entertainment Committee. 
Therefore, if you will attend, write at once, saying 
BRIEFLY (a) how many will be of your party; (b) how many 
of each sex; (c) if colored, so state; (d) married couples desirous 
of rooming together should so state. AS TO RATES.— 
Arrangements can be made for accommodations in boarding 
houses at $1 to $1.25 per day and at hotels at $1.50 per day up. 
These rates include meals. 

Do not write on this subject AT LENGTH. Tell us about 
things at the Convention. Give the information briefly and to 
the point. A postal card will do. Address the WATCH TOWER 
BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 612 Arch St., Allegheny, Pa. 

OTHER EXCURSIONS 

From many points there are other Special Excursions run 
every summer to Niagara Falls. Some of these are at extremely 
low rates. It will be well for each to inquire of the 
railway ticket agents of his own city on this subject, and to 
select the excursion that will suit his convenience best. But take 
our own Excursion mentioned above unless you can do BETTER. 

GET READY PROPERLY 

Prepare your heart for a blessing. Come to the Convention 
in the proper spirit— as a disciple, a learner. Come intent 
also on doing good as well as getting good, of consoling and 
encouraging others, as well as to be yourself comforted. 
Above all, come realizing that the Lord himself is the fountain 
of blessings, and remembering his word— not by might, nor by 
power, but by the Lord's Spirit are we to expect the blessings 
we hope for. In making ready and en route do not forget this 
important item, for on it your share in the Convention's blessing 
greatly depends. 



THE VOLUNTEER LITERATURE 



This year's "ammunition," consisting of four short tracts 
folded together as one, seems to please all. We advise that it 
be not divided up, but given out as you receive it. On the 
other hand we find that some dear friends give out too many 
tracts, etc., at once. They get from us all the various kinds 
and make up packages of one each and give them thus to their 
friends. This is a mistake. We send freely what you request, 
but with the understanding that you will select for your friends 
the most suitable to their conditions. It is a mistake to send 
such bundles of tracts. The person who might read one tract 
is likely to discard all if he receives a bundle. Use plenty of 
tracts, but use them wisely. Ten tracts sent separately at intervals 
are apt to do a thousand times as much good as those 
sent all at once. 



R3583 : page 195 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
REV. E. L. EATON, D.D., ON THE CHURCH OF TODAY 



WE feel a keen interest in Dr. Eaton, with whom, it 

will be remembered, we had a friendly debate 

about two years ago. We keep hoping to note 

some influence from our Scriptural arguments showing 

that not the reformation and conversion of the world is 

the Lord's program for this Gospel age, but rather the 

selection or election of a "little flock," the Church, the 

Royal Priesthood, through whom under Jesus their High 

Priest all the world shall be mentally, morally and physically 

assisted out of present degradation and death 

conditions to life-everlasting privileges. 

We see little sign that Dr. Eaton has fully accepted 
our position, but in a recent sermon he seemed to have 
a clear view of the nominal church, as separate and distinct 
from the true Church composed only of "the few precious 
and godly men and women that can be found in all 
churches," so that we may not yet abandon hope for a 
further opening of the eyes of his understanding. He 
certainly cannot hope that the nominal mass of "Christendom" 
can ever "save the world" to any higher 
standard than its own. Yet here are his own words 
describing Churchianity, exactly reproduced:— 

"What is the exact state of the Church? I do not mean 
North Avenue church. I do not mean the few precious and 
godly men and women that can be found in all churches. 
I mean the entire Christian establishment in these United 
States. What is its condition to-day? From what I have 



seen during the last dozen years, and from what I constantly 
read, I am persuaded that the Church, with all its 
wealth and culture and prestige, is not leading the procession. 
It is not advancing as fast as our population is 
advancing. It is in a state of moral dearth, a spiritual dry-rot 
prevails all too generally. It is not winning the unsaved 
in great numbers. It has not seen a sweeping revival in 
thirty years. Its ministry— probably more than half of them 
—are willing to admit that the days of revivals are past, 
and that our only hope now is to try to save the children; 
that there is not power enough in the Church, the preaching, 
nor in the Gospel to save a grown-up sinner any more. We 
are not looking for great and all-inundating revivals as of 
yore. 

"The Church has generally become a social club, so nice 
and respectable and so fine that the poor do not feel at home 
in it, and the working men have turned their backs upon it 
almost from one end of the country to the other. And, next 
to the quarter of a million of America's licensed saloons, the 
saddest fact in America to-day is the alienation of the poor 
and the laboring classes from the Church! The climax of the 
catalogue of Gospel blessings which our Lord sent to John 
the Baptist in prison to comfort his sore heart was "To the 
poor the Gospel is preached!" But the Church is not reaching 
the poor, nor the rich in great numbers, not the submerged 
one-tenth, nor the criminals, nor the fast young men and 
women that swarm in saloons and club rooms, crowding them 
to suffocation these Sunday afternoons and nights. 

R3584 : page 195 

"But this state of things does not greatly disturb the 
Church. The majority of it is satisfied, apathetic, indifferent. 
It has not moral earnestness nor spiritual vim enough to 
attend Church, if at all, but once a day on Sunday, and prayer-meetings 
never. It has no testimony except a daily life that 
is exactly on the plane of the world. It has not fervency. 
It is cold. Its sentiments upon every question of morals is 
exactly the sentiment of the world about it. Its Bible is the 
daily newspapers. Its Sunday reading is the Sunday press. 
It is not looking for a revival. It does not want one. It 
don't enjoy that kind of entertainment. It prefers generally 
to spend its long winter evenings in the theatre. It prefers 
to see the half-dressed ballet dancers than to witness the 
wrestling of a lost soul at the altar of the Church. It prefers 
opera music to the song of Moses and the Lamb, and wants 
it brought into the Church on Sundays to crowd out the old 
fervent soul-stirring melodies that used to take our fathers 
and mothers by the hand and lead them up to the very gates 
of glory. That is the mental and moral state of the Church as 
it is represented by more than half of its members to-day. 
Revivals! The last thing on earth that it is thinking of, 
looking for, or desiring. 

"But this is not all. The Church has not seriously 
attacked a moral reform in forty years ! The social evil is 
spreading beyond anything ever before known. The Lord's 



day is desecrated until in some parts of the country it is 
entirely wiped out. Civic crime and municipal corruption 
are engulfing our cities, until every great city in this country 
is a cess-pool of political rottenness and crime. And the increase 
of saloons, drink and drunkenness for the past thirty 
years is appalling and phenomenal. Yet with all this, the 
Church utterly disclaims any responsibility, and is either 
indifferent or utterly unwilling to raise a protesting voice, 
or even to vote against it. Probably not five per cent, of the 
voting church will register its protest on next Tuesday against 
the saloon, which is the center, source, inspiration and procuring 
cause of seven-eighths of all this moral devastation and 
retrogression. The Church of Jesus Christ must wake up and 

R3584 : page 196 

attack these problems and lift this country out of the stark 
heathenism toward which we are fast drifting, as the early 
Church lifted the old Roman civilization out of its social 
wickedness and its national sins, or we are gone without hope 
and without remedy." 

THE WESTMINSTER CONFESSION-WILL OUR PRESBYTERIAN 
FRIENDS REPUDIATE IT? 



The General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church, which 
met a few weeks ago at Winona Lake, Ind., discussed 
the overtures made by the presbytery of Nassau, L.I., 
to drop the Westminster confession of faith and substitute 
therefor the brief statement of the reformed faith. Between 
the conservatives and radicals there occurred a very lively 
discussion. 

This was recently adopted by the General Assembly as a 
brief statement, but not as a creed of the Church, the old confession, 
known as the Westminster confession, which contains 
many doctrines that have caused sharp controversies between 
clergymen, being retained. 

PLEADS FOR REFORM 

The Rev. Dr. Samuel T. Carter, New York City, last 
September sent an open letter to the presbytery at Nassau 
which attracted wide attention. He assailed certain doctrines 
"received by the Church, but not generally believed." The 
reading of the letter at the Presbyterian meeting at Oyster 
Bay precipitated a discussion over the statements it 
contained. 

The controversy continued until the next meeting, 
held in December. It was believed that Dr. Carter might be 
tried for heresy, but after appearing before the presbytery 
at Nassau and making an eloquent appeal for the truth and 
the dropping of misstatements, however, time honored, he 
triumphed in that instead of trying him for heresy the 
presbytery voted to make overtures to the General Assembly 



to drop the Westminster confession. 

DR. CARTER'S STATEMENT 

A statement has been given out by Dr. Carter, in which 
he says: 

"The General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church 
meets in the month of May. The presbytery of Nassau asks 
it to take the necessary steps towards dropping the Westminster 
confession and adopting the brief statement of the 
reformed faith, the simple and kindlier creed which has 
already been indorsed by the Church. 

"The General Assembly can reject the petition more or 
less courteously. But can it afford to do so? It is important 
to rid the Church of bad creed, but still more important to 
dispel from the minds of men the gloomy ideas of religion 
which go with the old creeds and most of all the dreadful 
dogma of endless torment which has caused such intense 
suffering. 

CONDEMNS BEFORE BIRTH 

"The secular press has thus far treated the matter so 
courteously and sympathetically that I feel it to be a privilege 
to present my appeal before the public through it. The Westminster 
confession presents for the worship and allegiance 
of man a God who, according to the good pleasure of his will, 
has assigned millions of the human race to endless torment 
before they were born or had done good or ill. 

"Of this number a large proportion died in infancy and 
committed no personal transgression. The whole heathen 
world formed another large company. By the teachings of 
the confession Homer and Virgil, Plato and Socrates, Cato 
and Antonius, Confucius and Gautama are at this moment 
roasting in the literal flames of hell fire and shall so burn 
forever and ever. 

"Has the Presbyterian Church the face to make this 
declaration to men in this generation? The Westminster 
confession, in fact, says that God is a monster; modern 
theology says he is not. In this sentence lies the whole gist 
of the confession. 

REJECTS GOD OF CONFESSION 

"Every fibre of my moral being rises up against this 
God who dishonors theology; with the utmost fervor in my 
soul I reject this God of the confession, and as fully as I 
reject this God, so gladly do I receive the God of the gospel, 
Jesus Christ. 

"The father in the great parable, who runs forth to meet 
his wretched, but repenting son, falls upon his neck and kisses 
him. Sham theology is sure to make sham religion, and sham 
religion is sure to lead to the horrors of the Roman empire 
and the French revolution, to the eruption of the human 
volcano. 

"It has been well said, 'Repelled light becomes lightning.' 



Of such a state of affairs as this, Martineau sadly says: 
'Will not bad creed, then, be got rid of? Not a bit; and year 
after year thousands of clergymen will solemnly profess 
before tens of thousands of assenting people a creed which is 
false to the heart of them all.' 

"This is what they are doing in the Presbyterian Church 
to-day. The General Assembly will do nothing so good as 
to make an end of it. It is more seriously important than 
sending missionaries to China. There is no use of sending 
truth abroad if we live a lie at home." 



R3584 : page 196 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDY FOR JULY. 
--(SEE PREFACE OF WATCH TOWER BIBLES)- 
PATIENCE 

1 . What is the importance of Patience as an element of 
Christian character? Jas. 1:4; Z.'02-308 (1st col. 

par. 2); Z/02-247, (2nd col. par. 2); Z.'01-l 19 (2nd col. 
par. 2). 

2. What is the common significance of this word? See 
Webster's Dictionary; also Z. '01-1 15 (1st col. par. 2). 

3. What is the deeper significance of this word as used in 
Scripture, especially in Rev. 3:10 and Luke 8:15? 
Z.'01-115 (1st and 2nd cols.) 

4. Why is "patient-endurance" so necessary? Z. '01-1 16 
(2nd col. par. 1,2). 

5. What is the relation between patient-endurance and 
self-control? 2 Pet. 1:6; Z/96-222 (1st col. par. 1). 

6. How should we endure our trials and thus "possess our 
souls"? Luke 21:19; Z.'01-116 (1st col. par. 2,3). 

7. What is the relation between faith and patient-endurance? 
Jas. l:3;Z.'01-117(2ndcol. par. 1);Z.'03-361 

(1st col. par. 3) Z/03-362 (2nd col. par. 2). 

8. Why should we "glory in tribulation"? Rom. 5:3; 
Z/00-364 (2nd col. par. 1,2); Z/02-380 (2nd col. 
par. 2); Z/03-439 (2nd col. par. 1,2). 

9. What particular thoughts constantly kept in mind will 
enable us to be "patient in tribulation"? Rom. 12:12; 
Z/97-265 (2nd col. par. 1); Z/98-41 (1st col. 

par. 1,2); F.632, (par. 2) to 634, (par. 2). 

10. Does faithfulness to our covenant of self-sacrifice demand 
patience? Z. '03-408 (1st col. par. 3). 

11. How should we meet persecution and opposition? 
1 Pet. 2:20-23; Z/03-164 (2nd col. par. 2); Z/96-83 
(2nd col. par. 2). 

12. How can we be "patient toward all"? 1 Thess. 5:14; 
Z/03-24, (1st col. par. 2); F.306,307. 

13. Why is there special need of patience in the Harvest 
of the Gospel age? Z/97-148 (1st col. par. 2); Z/01-119 
(1st and 2nd cols.) 



14. Is it possible to pervert the grace of patience? Eph. 5:11; 
Z.'97-148(lstcol. par. 1). 

R3585 : page 197 

15. Why does the Apostle rank patient-endurance above 
even Love? Titus 2:2; 2 Tim. 3:10; Z/00-332 

(1st and 2nd cols.); Z/01-116 (2nd col. par. 3); Z/01-117 
(1st col. par. 2,3). 

16. What is the relation between patience and "enduring 
hardness as good soldiers of Jesus Christ"? 1 Pet. 5:10; 
Z.'95-202 (2nd col. par. 1). 

17. How are we to run the race for "the prize of our high 
calling of God in Christ Jesus"? Heb. 12:1; 6:12; 
Z/01-117 (2nd col. par. 3); Z/03-54 (1st col. par. 4). 

18. Why is patient-endurance the final test? Heb. 10:36; 
C.212, par. 1; Z/01-115 (2nd col. par. 1); 116 (1st 

col. par. 1); 1 17 (2nd col. par. 1). 

19. How is God's promise to those who "keep the word of 
his patience" now fulfilled? Rev. 3:10; Z/01-118 

(1st and 2nd cols.) 

20. What lessons do we learn from Jesus' example of 
patience? Heb. 12:3; Z/98-160 (2nd col. par. 3); 
Z/01-298 (1st col. par. 1,2); Z.'00-l 19 (1st col. 

par. 1); Z/05-120 (1st col. par. 3). 

21. What other notable examples of patience are recorded 
in Scripture? Jas. 5:10,11; 2 Cor. 6:4-10; 

2 Cor. 12:12. 

22. Is patience an essential quality in an Elder? 1 Tim. 3:3; 
F.251,par. 2; F.298, par. 1,2. 

23. How can we cultivate patient-endurance? 

a. By prayer, Z. '96-163 (1st and 2nd cols.) 

b. By growing in knowledge, Z. '03-24 (1st col. 
par. 2). 

c. By increasing our faith, Z. '03-361 (1st col. 
par. 3). 

d. By recognizing the time-element in God's plans. 
Z/97-147 (2nd col. par. 3); Z/01-118 (2nd col. 
par. 2). 

24. What additional thoughts are suggested by reference 
to the Topical Indexes of "Heavenly Manna" and 

the "Watch Tower Bible"? 



R3585 : page 197 

MAKE SURE OF WINNING IN GOD'S ELECTION. 

"Brethren, give diligence to make your 
calling and election sure."— 2 Pet. 1:10. 

INTEREST in the recent election of a President of 

the United States has been general throughout 

the whole world, and especially amongst English-speaking 

peoples: in fact, the exercise of the 



franchise by the public, whenever and wherever, is 
generally a matter of absorbing interest to "the children 
of this world"— whether the office be a high one, 
as that of President of the United States, or Member 
of Congress, or Member of Parliament, or whether it 
be a lower one, for some petty office of ward magistrate 
or constable. The candidates for these offices 
and their friends, in proportion to the dignity of the 
office, do not hesitate to spend money for printing, 
brass bands, banners, flags, banquets, traveling speakers, 
etc. And this is looked upon as thoroughly reasonable, 
and engaged in by the reputedly more intelligent 
and sane of all nations. But there is another 
election in progress— an election of a hundred and 
forty-four thousand to a higher position than that of 
any earthly magistrate or potentate; and for not a few 
years merely, for the elect are promised this highest 
of all honors for all eternity. 

Does the world know about this election? We 
answer, No. True, many have heard something about 
an election— that God is "taking out of the nations a 
people for his name," a "little flock," who, as joint-heirs 
with Jesus Christ their Lord, will be given the 
Kingdom which God hath promised to them that love 
him,— the Kingdom for which we pray, "Thy Kingdom 
come; thy will be done on earth as it is done in 
heaven." But though they have heard of this Kingdom 
and the election now in progress, to make up the 
foreordained number of its kings and priests, they do 
not really believe it, but regard it as a fantasy, "as a 
tale that is told," a fairy story, which none but the 
simple-minded and children would take seriously. Ah, 
yes! and so the Redeemer-King informed us it would 
be; and so he prayed to the Father, saying, "I thank 
thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because 
thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent 
and revealed them unto babes; even so, Father, for 
so it seemed good in thy sight."— Matt. 11:25,26. 

If the wise and prudent, the keen and the shrewd, 
the learned and the great, really comprehended the 
situation,— if they really believed in this election 
which is in progress under divine direction, according 
to the divine Word, what haste there would be amongst 
them to "make their calling and election sure," as 
the Apostle exhorts. It is not that people are not 
appreciative of such honors and dignities of power 
and influence as this Kingdom offers, that they pass 
by God's election and treat it with indifference; for 
their love of power, their love of influence, their love 
of position and prestige, is abundantly in evidence in 
connection, not only with the governments of this 
world, but also in connection with even the trifling 
offices in the nominal churches. The spirit of "Which 
shall be greatest?" has apparently not died out. 

But while those who seek for earthly offices of a 
brief tenure and comparatively small dignity are willing 



to sacrifice time, energy, money, etc., to attain 
these petty offices and honors, and while they can 
arouse enthusiasm among their friends and neighbors, 
leading to the expenditure of time, money and 
energy to an astounding degree, and though they think 
it strange that we "run not with them to the same 
excess of riot, speaking evil of us" (1 Pet. 4:4), 
nevertheless, they affect to think it remarkable that 
we who are candidates for the superlatively high office 
for which God has nominated us should spend time, 
influence and means in making our calling and election 
sure, and in assisting "brethren" in their election 
work; they consider our time wasted. Although they 
spend millions of dollars in speeches, brass bands, 
editorials, parades, etc., to determine which of two 
men should hold the most honorable office of this 
nation for four years, they consider it remarkably 
strange that we should spend a fragment of the amount 
or make the one-thousandth part of the commotion 
to secure for ourselves and to all of the "elect" the 
great "prize of our high calling." 

DIFFERENT STANDPOINT-DIFFERENT VIEW 

All this only illustrates the two very different 
standpoints from which matters may be viewed. From 
the world's standpoint the Lord's consecrated people 
who seek to make their calling and election sure to 
the heavenly Kingdom are counted fools, because to 

R3585 : page 198 

attain that they are willing to sacrifice present temporal 
interests; and this sentiment of the public is the 
same today that it was in the Apostle's time, when 
he wrote, "If any man among you seemeth to be wise, 
in this world, let him become a fool that he may be 
wise." (1 Cor. 3:18; 4:10.) From our standpoint, 
seeing the eternal things and the glories attaching to 
them, we cannot avoid the feeling that it is "the children 
of this world" who are foolish, in that they expend 
so much breath and energy upon things which, 
if attained, last but a short time, and bring with them 
large measures of perplexity and trouble and criticism 
of opponents to their election: and sometimes 
untellable injury to themselves, the ruled. 

But why this difference of opinion? Which party 
is sane, and which is lacking in sanity? We answer, 
that the difference is that the one class sees what the 
other class does not see, and that because God has 
specially revealed it unto the one. As it is written, 
"Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it 
entered into the heart of man [the natural man, unilluminated 
by the holy Spirit] the things which God 
hath in reservation for them that love him; but God 
hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit,... which 



searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God."— 
1 Cor. 2:9,10. 

The fact, then, is that the Lord's consecrated 
people, through faith and by God's holy Spirit, have 
inside information respecting "the things not seen as 
yet." Hence we see that the two parties— the one 
seeking earthly honors and advantages, for themselves 
and each other, the other seeking the heavenly 
advantages, or election, for themselves and each other 
—are both laboring for what they see, for what they 
consider to be the most valuable thing they see and 
may attain. O, how precious, then, is the eye of 
faith, which the Lord's consecrated people have! No 
wonder our Lord said to some of his disciples, "Blessed 
are your eyes for they see, and your ears, for they 
hear." Other eyes do not see and other ears do not 
hear these heavenly things. And in that sense of the 
word comparatively few even in civilized lands have 
been called or nominated of the Lord for his election 
—comparatively few know anything about it or the 
terms which must be understood and obeyed in order 
to make the calling and election sure. 

IGNORANCE RESPECTING GOD'S ELECTION 

Even amongst professing Protestant Christians 
the majority do not know that there is an election. 
The leading denomination, Methodists, positively deny 
that there is an election; and even the large denominations 
which hold that an election is in progress 
(Presbyterians and Baptists, etc.) have totally false 
conceptions of its character. They regard God's call 
or nomination as being the election itself, and hence 
the words of the Apostle in our text confuse rather 
than help them. They think of the matter from the 
standpoint of divine foreknowledge and predestination; 
they consider the election as something done by 
the Almighty wholly regardless of the character and 
works of the elect, saying in their Confessions of Faith 
that it takes place without consideration of any worthiness 
or merit on the part of the elect, but solely of 
divine grace. They thus make void the Word of God 

R3586 : page 198 

and the election inducements which it holds out- 
confusing their own minds, and in the end traducing 
the character of the divine ruler and his law. 

Would that they could see what is so plainly set 
forth in the divine Word, viz.: (1) That the predestination 
on God's part was that he would choose a 
Church,— from amongst those whom his grace would 
redeem from the curse of death through the precious 
blood of Christ. (2) That he predestinated that this 
Church should be of a fixed, positive, limited number; 
—we believe literally 144,000— of whom the nucleus 



was found in the remnant of Israel which accepted of 
Christ at and after Pentecost— the number being constantly 
added to throughout the Gospel age, and to 
be fully completed with the end of this age. (3) That 
he predestinated what must be the fixed character of 
each one whom he would recognize as a member of 
this elect Church, the body of Christ— as the Apostle 
says, he "predestinated that we should be conformed 
to the likeness of his Son." (Rom. 8:29.) Consequently 
the predestination meant that none could be 
of the elect Kingdom class (however plainly they 
heard the call or nomination) unless they made their 
calling and election sure by cultivating the graces of 
the Spirit and thus coming into heart-likeness of our 
Lord Jesus Christ— copies of him who set us an example, 
that we should walk in his steps.— 1 Pet. 2:21. 

Here we have an election which accords with 
every definition of the Scriptures and the Scriptural 
facts relating to the divine plan of the ages. It is 
this election which we feel justified in securing at any 
cost, at any self-denial, at any self-sacrifice; and these 
self-denials and self-sacrifices are works which must 
be performed if we would be of the elect; as the 
Apostle says, we must "work out our own salvation 
with fear and trembling." (Phil. 2:12; Jas. 2:22.) 
Yet these works are not ours (as men) but as "new 
creatures," members of the body of Christ. And 
they are God's works, in the sense that they are incited 
by his Word and Spirit, for "it is God that 
worketh in you to will and to do."— Phil. 2:13; 
Eph. 3:20. 

Let us not be misunderstood, however. Our justification, 
the basis of our call or nomination to this 
high position in the Kingdom was secured, not by 
works, but by simple faith without works. We were 
justified by faith, and had peace with God, before it 
was possible for us to do any works which would be 
acceptable in his sight. But when we were accepted 
in the Beloved, having made full consecration of our 
mortal bodies, and every interest pertaining thereto, 
then the works began, the sacrificing began, the 
self-denials began, the overcoming of the world began, 
the battle with the world, the flesh and the devil 
began. This battle must be won in our hearts (even 
though we will not attain perfection in the flesh) else 
we will not make our election sure and receive the 
crown of glory, the symbol of our joint-heirship with 
him who bought us with his own precious blood. 

So, then, we see (a) that only those who have 
heard something at least of the grace of God in Christ 
have been in the remotest sense in contact with the 
privileges of this election— because "faith cometh by 
hearing." And (b) faith, the result of hearing, rightly 
received, brings justification from the sins that are 
past, and peace with God. And (c) only those who 
are at peace with God (being justified by faith) are 



R3586 : page 199 

called to joint-heirship with Christ in his sacrifice, 
walking in his footsteps and thus attaining to joint-heirship 
with him in his Kingdom. And (d) only 
those thus called or nominated by God have the remotest 
opportunity of becoming the elect. And then 
mark, (e) the Lord's own declaration, "Many are 
called; few are chosen [elected— from the same Greek 
word]. "-Matt. 22:14. 

Let us not only assure ourselves of the fact that 
there is an elect class being selected during the Gospel 
age, to a special position of honor and service with 
the Lord, but let us at the same time note the lessons 
enjoined upon this class of called or nominated 
ones— the instructions given them of the Lord whereby 
they may make their calling and election sure. 

OTHER SCRIPTURE REFERENCES TO THE ELECT 

"I endure all things for the elect's sake," writes 
the Apostle Paul. (2 Tim. 2:10.) The Apostle's 
sufferings whereby, as he said, he sought to "fill up 
that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ 
[were] for his body's sake, which is the Church" 
(Col. 1:24)— not for the world. The reason for this 
is evident: The Apostle knew the Lord's plan to be 
to call and to elect during this Gospel age a little 
flock of overcomers of the world, faithful even unto 
death, as a Royal Priesthood, to share with the 
Lord Jesus in the Millennial Kingdom. He knew, 
therefore, that labor on behalf of the world before 
the world's day of trial or judgment would come, 
would be to a large extent at least love's labor lost; 
and hence he was not of those who would "beat the 
air" in the service of the Lord, accomplishing nothing; 
he would work according to the divine direction 
and thus be a co-worker together with God, that in 
due time as a member of the elect company, faithful 
to the Lord's call, he would be granted a share in 
the Kingdom which is to bless all the families of the 
earth. 

ELECTION ACCORDING TO GRACE 

"Even so, at this present time there is an election 
according to grace. ...Israel hath not obtained 
that which he seeketh for, but the election hath obtained 
it and the rest were blinded." (Rom. 11:5,7.) 
Here the Apostle is speaking of this same elect 
Church, and is referring to the Jewish remnant out 
of all the tribes with which this elect Church was 
started, and to which, after Israel's national rejection 
of the Lord, the special invitation went forth to the 
Gentiles, to "take out of them a people for his name 



[to bear the name of Christ]" to complete the predestinated 
number of the elect 144,000 (twelve 
thousand accredited to each of the twelve tribes of 
Israel). Thus we who are being called from amongst 
the Gentiles are invited to fill up the deficiency in the 
elect number of Israel, and will be, so to speak, 
divided amongst the twelve tribes, tho according to 
what rule of distinction the Scriptures do not show. 

GOD'S ELECT, HOLY AND BELOVED 

"Put on, therefore, as God's elect, holy and beloved, 
a heart of compassion, kindness, humility, 
meekness, long suffering, forbearing one another and 
forgiving one another." (Col. 3:12,13.) Here we 
have an intimation of the character-likeness to God's 
dear Son which the same writer tells us God has predestinated 
respecting everyone who will make his 
calling and election sure.— Rom. 8:29. 

God has called us with his high calling, and from 
the time we accept the call and make requisite full 
consecration of ourselves to him he gives us the earnest 
of our inheritance, viz., the spirit of adoption, the 
spirit of sonship: it remains, however, for us to be 
tested,— to prove the depth of our consecration, the 
sincerity of our professed love. If we love the Lord 
with all our hearts we will seek to do these things 
which are pleasing to him, and these the Apostle is 
specifying in this Scripture, showing us that God's 
requirements are all in harmony with his holy spirit 
of love; that "Love is the fulfilling of the Law," and 
that we must attain to this condition of perfect love 
in our hearts if we desire to finish our course with 
joy, and make our calling and election sure— making 
sure a share in the inheritance to the spiritual body 
and the Kingdom glories of which our spirit of begetting 
is but the earnest or foretaste. 

THE FAITH OF GOD'S ELECT 

"Paul, a servant of God, and an Apostle of Jesus 
Christ, according to the faith of God's elect." (Titus 1:1.) 
Here the Apostle not only reiterates that there 
is an elect class, but he specifically points out that this 
class has a special faith, a peculiar faith, that is not 
shared by others, neither can others know it, for "it 
is spiritually discerned."— 1 Cor. 2:14. 

AVENGE HIS OWN ELECT 

Shall not God avenge his own elect, tho they 
cry day and night unto him?" (Luke 18:7.) Here 
our Lord himself testifies respecting this elect class. 
He gave a parable of an unjust judge, who, tho careless 
respecting the doing of justice to a poor widow, 
nevertheless was so careful of his own convenience 



that he would give her justice, lest by her continual 

coming she would annoy him. And our Lord's inquiry 

is, if an unjust judge would thus render justice 

from a selfish motive, could we expect less from the 

all-wise, all-loving and all -just Heavenly Father? 

Verily, God shall avenge the cause of his elect, altho 

he has permitted them to be maligned, slandered, misrepresented, 

for over eighteen centuries; the time will 

come when he will give them justice, when he will 

exalt them; and when those who have wilfully and 

maliciously injured them shall certainly be punished 

—in the great time of retribution in which every such 

evil deed of mankind shall be rendered a recompense, 

and every good deed receive its reward— in the Millennial 

day. 

GATHER TOGETHER HIS ELECT 

"He shall send forth his angels [messengers] and 
shall gather together his elect from the four winds of 
heaven." (Matt. 24:31.) Here our Lord not only 
testifies to the fact that there is an elect class, but he 
assures us that he himself will gather this elect class 
in due time; in the end of this age when he is ready to 
establish his Kingdom, in which, as the overcomers, 
the elect of God, they will be joint heirs and sharers, 
as in the present life they have been sharers in the 
sufferings of Christ.— Rom. 8:17; 2 Tim. 2:12; 
Matt. 13:43. 

FOR THE ELECT'S SAKE 

Those days shall be shortened." (Matt. 24:22.) 
Our Lord here refers to the great time of trouble 

R3587 : page 200 

with which this age shall end, "the day of 

vengeance," the time of retribution, the day of 

avenging his elect; and he assures us that the 

trouble then coming upon the world, and which will 

largely, we see, be brought about by the world's own 

course, would, if not interrupted by the Kingdom and 

its intervention with power from on high, mean the 

utter obliteration of the race at the hand of its own 

selfishness. But for the elect's sake those days should 

be shortened, and the time of trouble will not be permitted 

to run the length which otherwise it would 

run. As at first, "He shall speak to them in his wrath 

and vex them in his sore displeasure," so afterward 

he shall not permit their utter destruction: his Kingdom 

will stay the trouble, for "He shall speak peace 

to the heathen [peoples];" he shall say unto them, 

"Be still and know that I am God; I will be exalted 

among the nations; I will be exalted in the earth."— 

Psa. 46:10. 



THE ELECT ARE UNCONDEMNED 

"Who shall lay anything to the charge of God's 
elect?" (Rom. 8:33.) The Apostle is here pointing 
out that altho this called class accepted of God to be 
his elect, and to run with patience the race set before 
them, and make their calling and election sure, have 
weaknesses of the flesh, in the overcoming of which 
they, as new creatures, are not always wholly successful, 
nevertheless, God looks upon the heart, and their 
judgment is not according to the flesh, but according 
to the spirit, the will. Lest such should fear failure 
after all, he points out that in the great heavenly 
court there would be none to condemn them;— because 
God the judge who once condemned us in Adam has 
himself justified us in Christ,— accepting on behalf 
of the Adamic sin and the resultant weaknesses the 
sacrifice of Christ. He then points out that Satan, 
our Adversary, will have no hearing before the heavenly 
Court, and that there will be none to appear 
against us, and that on the contrary our Lord and 
Master, who redeemed us with his precious blood, 
will be our Advocate. Who then could lay anything 
to the charge of God's elect?— those whom God has 
justified, whom God has called, whom God has accepted, 
and who, according to the divine arrangement, 
make their calling and election sure. Who 
would they be who could find fault with these whom 
God accepts on his own terms? Surely none! "Yea, 
we are more than conquerors, through him who loved 
us and bought us with his own precious blood!" 

THE ELECT FOREKNOWN 

"Elect, according to the foreknowledge of God 
the Father... through sanctification of the spirit 
unto obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus 
Christ." (1 Pet. 1:2.) The Apostle here marks out 
the terms of our election; none can remain in this elect 
company, nor make his calling and election sure, without 
being under the sprinkling of the blood— justification 
through faith in the great sacrifice; nor can 
any attain it without sanctification, a setting apart 
to God; and such a sanctification as will lead to 
obedience to God— to the full submission of his will 
to the will of the Father in heaven. 

Such must be the character of those who will be 
of the elect, and this class of which we are seeking 
to become members was predetermined, foreordained 
by God; it was not a new thing, but the carrying out 
of the original divine purpose, in which also our Lord 
Jesus shared. This the same Apostle shows (1 Pet. 2:4-6), 
declaring that our Lord Jesus himself was the 
elect of God, and that we who are now being chosen 
from amongst men to be "members of the body of 



Christ," members of the elect class, are chosen in 

him, chosen as members of his body, and as such 

must be conformed to the likeness of his character. 

He says: "To whom coming, as unto a living stone, 

disallowed indeed of men, but chosen [elect] of God 

and precious, ye also, as living stones, are built up, 

a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up sacrifices* 

acceptable to God by Jesus Christ." 

"Wherefore also it is contained in the Scripture, 
Behold I lay in Zion a chief corner stone, elect, precious, 
and he that believeth in him shall not be confounded." 
(1 Pet. 2:6.) Thus the Church of Christ, the 
elect little flock, are now being shaped, fitted and prepared 
for positions in the Temple of God, of which 
the dear Redeemer himself is the chief cornerstone, 
the foundation. 

"They that are with him are called and chosen 
[elect— the same word in the Greek] and faithful." 
(Rev. 17:14.) Here in symbol our Lord Jesus tells 
John, and us through him, of the glorious exaltation 
of the elect in the Kingdom, when they shall be with 
him and share his glory as the Apostle declares, and 
with him judge the world;— granting trial, with gracious 
opportunities to every member of Adam's race 
to return to full harmony with God through the merit 
and by the assistance of him who redeemed the race. 

GOD DELIGHTS IN HIS ELECT 

"Behold my servant, whom I uphold; mine elect, 
in whom my soul delighteth: I have put my spirit 
upon him. He shall bring forth judgment to the 
Gentiles." "I will bring forth a seed out of Jacob 
and out of Judah, an inheritor of my mountain: and 
mine elect shall inherit it." "They shall not build 
and another inhabit; they shall not plant and another 
eat; for as the days of a tree are the days of my people, 
and mine elect shall make them continue long." 
— Isa. 42:1; 65:9,22, margin. 

Here our Lord Jesus, the Head, and the Church, 
"members in particular of the body of Christ," are 
unitedly declared to be God's elect, in whom he is 
well pleased. The Father was well pleased in the 
Son, who came not to do his own will but the will of 
him that sent him, and by his obedience won all the 
gracious things promised under the Law Covenant, 
and redeemed Adam and his race; and the Father is 
well pleased also in us, whom, tho "we were children 
of wrath even as others," he has accepted in Christ, 
justified and sanctified by his Word and spirit, and 
who, if we abide in Christ, faithful unto death, will 
be fitted and prepared for his promised Kingdom. 

In these statements of the Prophet reference evidently 
is made to the work of the Lord's anointed 
(Head and Body) in conferring restitution blessings 
upon the world of mankind during the Millennial age; 



and this in full accord with all the New Testament 
declarations respecting the work of the elect. 



*The word spiritual is omitted in this verse as spurious by 
old MSS. The flesh is sacrificed, not the new creature. 

R3587 : page 201 

STRIVE FOR YOUR ELECTION 

"Brethren give diligence to make your calling 
and election sure." This our text is one of the most 
forceful of the many references to God's elect, and is 
particularly clear in marking out the conditions upon 
which election may be surely attained by each one 
whom the Lord our God shall call or nominate to this 
grand office— the Royal Priesthood. The Apostle has 
been mentioning the various graces of the Lord's spirit 
which those who are seeking to be of his royal and 
priestly class must develop in their characters. He 
shows us that there is more or less of an addition 
in the matter: we put on one grace and add to it another, 
and to that another, and so on; and do this repeatedly 
in respect to all the graces, which keep growing, 
developing in us and rounding out and deepening 
and broadening us as spiritual new creatures. And 
he shows that those who do not have such experiences 
of growth in grace and in knowledge are deficient, 
and cannot hope to make their calling and election 
sure. 

But seeming to understand that some would question 
the possibility of their gaining so great a prize, 
the holy Spirit, through the Apostle, gives to this 
called and chosen class a word of special encouragement, 
saying, "For if ye do these things ye shall never 
fall." There may be more or less stumbling on the 
part of the elect, not through weakness of the spirit, 
the heart, the new mind, but "through manifold temptations" 
of the flesh, the earthen vessel, in which 
temporarily resides the new creature, begotten of the 
spirit, the elect. 

The Apostle proceeds to give further assurances, 
saying, "For so an entrance shall be ministered unto 
you abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our 
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ." The elect will not be 
received of the Lord with chidings and upbraidings 
for the imperfections of the flesh, which were unwillingly 
theirs, but on the contrary all the weaknesses 
of the flesh will be ignored, and the intents of the 
heart alone will be judged, and the heart-character 
formed will alone be tested and approved; and this 
will determine whether or not we shall stand the 
Lord's approval and be granted the glorious things 
which he has promised to them that love him— 



"glory, honor and immortality" and a share in the 
Kingdom and its work of blessing. 

THE ELECTION HOPE PURIFYING 

"He that hath this [election] hope in him purifieth 
himself even as he [the Lord] is pure." But 
how is it with those who have not this hope, and who 
are totally ignorant of this election,— even though they 
be Christians, in the sense of believing in the Lord 
Jesus Christ as their Redeemer? Surely they are at a 
great disadvantage, lacking as they do the proper conception 
of the exceeding great and precious promises 
which are the channel of the power of God working 
in the elect both to will and to do of his good pleasure. 

If we have seen that there is an elect class, it follows 
that there must be a non-elect class— those who 
are not making their calling and election sure, and it 
is proper in this connection that we see something respecting 
this class, and what provision God has made 
for them. This phase of the subject is treated 
elsewhere.* 



*See pamphlet, Hope for the Innumerable Non-elect, 
sample free, this office. 



R3588 : page 201 

A GOOD MAN'S PRAYER ANSWERED. 

-ISAIAH 38: 1-8. -JULY 9.- 

Golden Text: "God is our refuge and strength, 
a very present help in trouble."— Psa. 46:1. 

HEZEKIAH, known as the good king amongst 
King David's successors, took sick. A carbuncle 
or other malignant ulcer threatened his life, 
and the prophet Isaiah was sent to him by the Lord with 
the message, "Set thine house in order, for thou shalt 
die." There are some who are inclined to claim that 
all sickness is of the devil, that no good person could be 
sick, etc., but we find nothing in the Scriptures to this 
effect. We do indeed find that all sickness and all death 
are indirectly the results of Satan's work. It was his 
deception of our first parents in Eden that brought 
upon them the death penalty, with its adjuncts of sorrow 
and pain, all of which is continued in us their 
children. We are not to forget that some of the Lord's 
most earnest saints have been sick, and that thus it is 
written, "He whom thou lovest is sick," and again, 
"Whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth." 



Regarding the whole race as under the divine 
sentence of death, we realize that as a result of our 
sharing in this penalty some of us are debilitated in one 
particular and some in another. All are imperfect 
mentally, morally and physically, but these imperfections 
take different forms according to different circumstances, 
heredities, etc. We are, therefore, to consider 
sickness in general as operating along the lines of 
cause and effect rather than as direct inflictions either 
of God or of Satan. It is well, however, to keep in mind 
the fact that the Jews under their covenant were subjects 
of special divine protection to the extent that they 
lived in harmony with the Lord, just as the Spiritual 
Israelites of this Gospel age are under special divine 
protection and guidance, only that the promises and 
blessings to the natural Israelites were of the earthly, 
temporal kind, while the blessings and care promised 
to the Spiritual Israelites are in respect to their spiritual 
welfare, their heavenly interests, their spiritual health, 
etc. 

"SET THINE HOUSE IN ORDER." 

Assuming then that Hezekiah's sickness was neither 
of divine nor satanic inflictions (as in the case of 
Job), and assuming that it was the natural effect from 
some natural cause, we see Hezekiah sick unto death but 
not without hope of recovery up to the time he received 
the message from the Lord at the mouth of Isaiah, "Set 
thine house in order, for thou shalt die." By this 
evidently was meant, Make such preparations in respect 
to the interests of the kingdom, the disposition of your 
property, arrangements for your funeral and for your 
successor in the throne as would be proper. We may 
each stop here to draw a practical lesson in respect to 
our affairs. We are not kings, as Hezekiah was, but we 
have, nevertheless, stewardships great or small received 

R3588 : page 202 

from the Lord in respect to which we should be faithful. 
The message has come to every one of us that we shall 
die— every member of the body of Christ is consecrated 
to death— "Be ye faithful unto death and I will give thee 
a crown of life." "Ye shall all die like men." 

Realizing this, it is incumbent upon us as a part of 
our stewardship to order the affairs of our lives, our 
homes, our business or whatever we may have as a 
stewardship in such a manner as will redound to the 
Lord's praise and for the good of his cause. This is 
setting the house in order, straightening out all the affairs 
of life, so that those who take up the lines where we drop 
them will be able to do so properly, intelligently— so 
that whatever we have of the Lord's goods may be disposed 
of as we believe would be his will, so that our 
stewardship faithfully carried out through life may 



faithfully end in death. A great many of the Lord's 
dear people need counsel on this subject. Many die 
without having set their houses in order, without having 
arranged their affairs financially and otherwise as 
stewards of the Lord's goods. 

HEZEKIAH'S FEAR OF DEATH. 

Nothing in Hezekiah's conduct indicated that he 
had any fear that in dying he would pass into an eternity 
of torment. He had not so learned respecting the 
divine plan— neither the Law nor the prophets had 
given such an intimation. But, on the other hand, he 
did not exultingly cry, "O, now I shall soon be with 
God and the holy angels and know ten thousand times 
as much as I now know." He did not rejoice in the 
thought of death. On the contrary, he was sad and 
dejected, fearful, and pleaded with the Lord that he 
might continue to live. In all this he conducted himself 
in much the same way as other people do whose minds 
are not warped and twisted and tangled with false 
theologies— with the thought that if they were dead they 
would be more alive than they ever were when they 
were alive, etc. 

Hezekiah on his sick bed turned his face to the wall, 
as though he would seek the more private communion 
with the Lord, and prayed, "Remember now, O Lord, 
I beseech thee, that I have walked before thee in truth 
and with a perfect heart and have done that which is 
good in thy sight." This is a brief summary or digest 
of his prayer, which was accompanied with sore weeping. 
It was not a boastful prayer, for he freely acknowledged 
his sins (v. 17.) He did claim, however, as all should 
be able to claim, that he walked before the Lord with a 
perfect heart, with a perfect will, with thoroughly good 
intentions; that there was no desire in his heart to go 
contrary to the divine will. The history of his times 
bears out all that King Hezekiah claimed for himself 
respecting his good reign as the Lord's representative 
in the throne. See 2 Kings 18:3-6; 2 Chron. 29:2; 
31:20,21. 

The Lord was merciful to Hezekiah, hearing and 
answering his prayer. Isaiah had not gotten out of the 
king's house on his homeward way until a message from 
the Lord came to him directing him to return to Hezekiah's 
sick chamber to tell him that the Lord had heard 
his prayer and seen his tears and had added to his life 
fifteen years, directing him through the prophet to the 
medicine, the poultice which would bring relief— a 
poultice of figs. There is a lesson here: not that we should 
never use remedial agencies in connection with our 
troubles and ailments, but that we should recognize 
as behind the remedial agents the will of the Lord. The 
fig poultice would not have brought relief in this case 
aside from the divine interposition of divine power, 
but on the other hand the divine power preferred to 



operate through the poultice of figs rather than without 
it. It is not for us to dictate to the Lord how our blessings 
should come, but to seek to learn from these and 
other illustrations he has given us what would probably 
be his will respecting us and our afflictions. 

The question arises, Did God change his plan and 
arrangements because of Hezekiah's prayer, and does 
he do so whenever a prayer is answered? We reply 
that in certain matters it evidently is as easy for the 
Lord to arrange them one way as another without any 
interference with his general plans. To our understanding 
the Lord would have allowed Hezekiah to die if 
he had not prayed. In other words, the Lord merely 
informed the king of what would have been the natural 
consequence of his case, and informed him for the very 
purpose of giving him an opportunity to ask in faith for 
his recovery. Thus the Lord waited to be gracious to 
him. 

ALL CASES NOT ALIKE. 

We are not in this wishing to imply that Hezekiah's 
conduct and prayers should be a sample and a lesson to 
all of the Lord's people under similar circumstances, 
that when ourselves or our dear ones are ill we should 
make specific request for the prolongation of their lives 
and recovery from their illness. There is a difference 
between our condition and our relationship to the Lord 
and that of Hezekiah. Although the king was a good 
man he lived before the Gospel call began. He was, 
therefore, not one of the spirit-begotten ones, for the 
holy Spirit was not yet given, because Jesus had not yet 
suffered and had not yet been glorified. (John 7:39; 
1 Pet. 1:11.) Those who are the Lord's consecrated 
people now, the "saints," should realize that they have 
entered into a new special relationship to the Lord, 
different from that of other men; that the Lord has 
agreed with them that their surrender of earthly life 
and all their earthly interests shall bring to them instead 
special spiritual favors, privileges, safe guardings, 
etc. 

From this standpoint it would be unwise to ask the 
Lord for earthly privileges and advantages of any kind, 
since this might work to their disadvantage as New 
Creatures. Rather they are to remember the words of 
our Lord, that all mankind are seeking after the earthly 
things, but that the Father knoweth the things we have 
need of before we ask him, without our asking him. The 
preferable attitude of heart for the Lord's consecrated 
people therefore is— O, Lord, thou knowest far better 
than I what would be for my highest welfare, my highest 
spiritual interest. Thou hast promised that all things 
shall work together for good to me because I am thine, 
because I have been called according to thy purpose. 
I entreat of thee give what is best in all of life's affairs 
and withhold whatever seems unto thee best— "Thy 



will be done." For the Lord's consecrated people to 
undertake to move Jehovah's arm in respect to their 
affairs would seem to be the taking of the rudder out of 
his hands— would seem to be more or less of self-will, 
which we have pledged to the Lord shall be dead that his 
will may be done in us. 

The Lord granted Hezekiah a sign that he would 
recover and that he would live fifteen years. Elsewhere 

R3589 : page 203 

we learn (2 Kings 20:8) that Hezekiah requested the 

sign. This brings up the general question of the propriety 

of asking the Lord for signs. We find that the 

Lord gave Gideon a sign in answer to prayer— a choice 

of signs; and similarly in this case the Lord gave Hezekiah 

a choice of two signs, either that the shadow on the dial 

should advance ten degrees or that it should recede ten degrees. 

Hezekiah chose the latter as being the more difficult 

to be accounted for and therefore the surer test. On the 

other hand the Lord spoke disrespectfully of the Jews 

of his day saying, "This faithless generation seeketh 

after a sign," etc. The thought would seem to be that 

a sign may be desired for one of two reasons. Disbelief 

may ask a sign, thoroughly doubting the possibility 

of one; on the other hand true belief may ask one 

for confirmation of faith. The latter seems to have been 

the case with Gideon and also with Hezekiah. We 

recommend that the Lord's people of the New Creation 

avoid putting the Lord to tests and signs, for we remember 

that the Lord has called us to a special high calling, 

the test for which is faith, and that this is one reason 

why throughout this Gospel age he gives few if any 

outward signs, desiring his people to walk by faith and 

not by sight. 

THE DIAL OF AHAZ. 

Hezekiah's father, King Ahaz, had erected a stone 
dial, the latest design up to that time for measuring the 
hours of the day. It was formed of a succession of steps 
on two sides and a crest in the center, and was so oriented 
that the rising sun would so strike the top as to cast its 
shadow on the lowest step on the western side of the 
dial. As the sun rose higher and higher the shadow crept 
up and up, step by step, until at noonday there was no 
shadow, for the sun was directly overhead. In the afternoon, 
the sun having passed to the westward, the shadows 
would begin to lengthen out upon the eastward side 
of the monument or dial, covering gradually one side at 
a time until the last, each step representing approximately 
half an hour. 

The turning back of the shadow ten degrees or ten 
steps on the dial would be a very noticeable matter, 
not only to the king, who looked for it, but to his entire 
household and to the people of Israel in general, who 



would be informed of the event, the king's business 
being very generally public property in such matters. 
It was a miracle probably very similar to that wrought 
in Joshua's day, when the sunlight was made to linger 
in the valley of Ajalon. We have no thought that God 
either stopped the earth on its axis or that he moved the 
sun backward in its course. In either of these cases 
the miracles as we may call them could be much easier 
performed, and we think that undoubtedly the Lord 
would take the easier way in any such matter. Prof. 
Garbett declares that he had a practical illustration of 
this miracle, and describes the modus operandi to the 
astronomer Richard A. Proctor, as follows:— 

THE MIRACLE'S POSSIBLE PROCESS. 

"The shiftings of the shadows on the dial that 
Isaiah predicted to sick Hezekiah are liable to occur at 
any time when these two circumstances concur: (1) that 
the upper atmosphere is in that condition which causes 
two bright parhelia or mock suns to appear on opposite 
sides of the sun; and (2) that the air contains drifting 
clouds, massive enough to hide often two of the three. 
When the real sun and the eastern mock sun are hidden, 
there is only the western to cast shadows, which then 
coincides with that the sun will cast an hour and a half 
later; but if the clouds shift so as to hide the west 
parhelion, and disclose the eastern, the shadows instantly 
become such as the sun casts an hour and a half earlier. 
The parhelia being always caused by rays refracted 
through two faces of equilateral triangular prisms or 
fibers of ice, their angular distance from the sun is always 
the minimum deviation that such a prism of ice produces 
on the brightest or yellow rays, which is very nearly a 
fourth of a right angle; so that if Hezekiah's dialers 
divided the quadrant into forty, than which no number 
is more likely, considering how constantly it recurs in 
the Hebrew laws and history (oftener, indeed, than any 
number above ten), the advance or recession of the 
shadow would have to be ten of these parts. On March 
28, 1848, these effects occurred, had any one been looking, 
on every dial in the Isle of Portsea, and very probably 
of much of Hampshire besides. The parhelia were 
present and bright enough at about 1 1 a.m. and still 
better at 1 p.m." 

The fact that the method of God's operations might 
be learned by us would not disprove them. For instance, 
some day we shall know just what process turned 
the water into wine at Cana of Galilee, but our knowledge 
of the process thus used by our Lord will not in any 
measure detract from the miracle which was certainly 
beyond human power— just as in the miracle now under 
consideration, all the laws of nature are subject to the 
God of all creation, and this is sufficient for the eye and 
ear and heart of faith. 



HEZEKIAH'S PRAISE FOR DELIVERANCE. 

On his recovery from his illness Hezekiah wrote a 
poem of thanksgiving, praising the Lord for his deliverance 
from the jaw of death— from the grave. In it he 
describes his feelings as he thought of death and his 
rejoicing at his recovery. He said, "In the cutting off 
of my days I shall go into the gates of the grave [sheol, 
hades, the tomb]. I am deprived of the residue of my 
years. ...Like a crane or a swallow, so did I chatter: 
I did mourn as a dove: my eyes fail with looking upward: 
O, Lord, I am oppressed; undertake for me. What shall 
I say? He hath spoken unto me and himself hath done 
it." [I freely acknowledge that it was not the lump of 
figs, but the Lord who had produced the recovery.] 
Then, speaking of the effect this should have upon him 
for the remaining years, he added, "I shall go softly 
all my years because of the bitterness of my soul.... 
Behold it was for my peace that I had great bitterness, 
but thou hast in love for my soul delivered it from the 
body of corruption; for thou hast cast all my sins behind 
thy back. For the grave [sheol, hades] cannot praise 
thee, death cannot celebrate thee, they that go down 
into the pit cannot hope for thy truth. The living, the 
living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day."— 
Verses 9-19. 

Hezekiah's proper desires were to live and serve 
and praise the Lord. He well knew that these things 
would be impossible in death, that the only hope in 
death is in the resurrection. The case of the Lord's 
people even during this Gospel age, even since redeemed 
with the precious blood, has been very similar. They 
have properly no desire to be unclothed but rather to 
be clothed upon with the heavenly conditions. But now 
in the close of the age matters are different from what 
they ever were before. Living as we are in the presence 
of the Son of man, we realize that although all must die, 

R3589 : page 204 

yet the overcomers will not sleep, but will be changed 
in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye— in the moment 
of dying— changed to the glorious spirit condition which 
the Lord has promised to them that love him. From our 
standpoint, then, not only has death lost its terrors, 
because Christ has redeemed us from the power of the 
tomb and will by and by bring forth all from it that are 
in it, that they may have an opportunity for coming into 
harmony with him and attainment to eternal life, but 
to us death has lost its dread in another sense, namely, 
that we shall not need to sleep— ours is the blessed 
time of the change. Let us wait for our change and seek 
by the Lord's grace to be so prepared for it in heart and 
character development that we shall welcome it with joy. 

"Unanswered yet!— the prayers your lips have pleaded 



In agony of heart these many years;— 
Does faith begin to fail? Is hope departing? 

And think you all in vain those falling tears? 
Say not the Father hath not heard your prayer: 

He'll answer yet your right desire— sometime, somewhere. 



R3589 : page 204 

THE WORLD'S REDEEMER PICTURED. 

-ISAIAH 52:13-53:12.-JULY 16.- 

Golden Text:— "The Lord hath laid 
upon him the iniquity of us all." 

THIS little section of Isaiah's great prophecy is a very 
striking one. The original prophecy, as is well 
known, was without division into chapters and 
verses. 

The preceding context points us clearly and distinctly 
to the second advent of our Lord and his gathering 
of his people to himself. It describes the present 
time, therefore, the harvest of this Gospel age, telling 
how the Lord's people would now know his name- 
understand and appreciate his true character, announce 
the presence of the King and the beginning of his reign. 
(Vs. 6-8.) It also tells of the beginning of favor upon 
natural Israel, and, looking into the future, points to 
the Lord's glorification through that people. (Vs. 9-10.) 
It also shows the separating work of this harvest time, 
the gathering of the good fish into the vessels, the gathering 
of the wheat into the barn. 

Then, pointing to the Millennial reign of Christ, 
the first three verses of our lesson (13-15) picture the 
high exaltation and honor of Jehovah's servant Son, our 
Lord Jesus, saying, "He shall deal prudently, he shall 
be exalted and honored and shall be very high." The 
whole earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory 
of the Lord, which will then shine forth through the 
blessed and wise government of Immanuel, as has been 
declared, "The Desire of all Nations shall come:" they 
shall see that the way of righteousness is the desirable 
way, the blessed way, the way of true wisdom and happiness, 

R3590 : page 204 

and all who will refuse to come into this attitude 
shall be cut off from amongst the people in the second 
death. -Acts 3:23. 

Next a contrast is instituted between how our Lord 
was humiliated and how by and by he shall be exalted. 
The prophet, so to speak, takes his seat at the cross, 
and beholds the Lord sadly distorted in his crucifixion, 
torn in an inhuman manner, his features drawn with 



pain. The picture of this, as given in Cheyne's translation, 
is written in poetic form, as was the original. 
It reads as follows:— 

"Deeply marred was his appearance, out of all human 
likeness, 
And his form out of all semblance to sons of men; 
But as deep will be the obeisance of many. 
Before him kings shall be awestruck in silence." 

The thought evidently is that his glory and honor, 
influence and power, will be proportionate to the sufferings 
and ignominy which he experienced. And this is 
the thought everywhere held out in the Scriptures, not 
only as respects our Redeemer but also as respects his 
Church. "If we suffer with him we shall also reign with 
him." Present trials and sufferings work out for us a 
"far more and exceeding weight of glory." So in speaking 
of our Lord the Apostle declares that "he humbled 
himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death 
of the cross. Wherefore God also hath highly exalted 
him, and given him a name above every name: that at 
the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in 
heaven and things in earth."— Phil. 2:8. 

We cannot claim that it is a divine law that glory 
and honor must be preceded by sufferings and humiliations. 
Our heavenly Father and the holy angels, highly 
honored, have never been humiliated. Nevertheless 
we are assured that so far as God's dealings with the 
Church of this present Gospel age are concerned, they 
are along these lines. The suffering is not compulsory 
but granted us as a privilege, and the exaltation is held 
out as a reward, marking the degree of divine approval. 
With this thought before us how it helps us to appreciate 
the sentiments of the Apostle, "Gladly, therefore, 
will I glory in tribulation." We glory not in the 
tribulations themselves, for sometimes they seem to the 
flesh to be grievous; but our hearts can glory in tribulations, 
since we know that under the divine arrangement 
governing our call as the Church of Christ these tribulations 
are working in us those elements of character 
pleasing and acceptable in the Father's sight, which 
eventually he will reward with a share in the exaltation 
of our Redeemer, our Bridegroom. 

So grand, so glorious will be the demonstration of 
divine power and blessing in the Messiah that no word of 
dissent will be heard— unto him every knee shall bow 
and every tongue confess. This will be true not only of 
the common people, the world in general, but true also 
of the greatest, the princes, the kings of earth, intellectual 
kings, financial kings, political kings. All eyes shall 
be opened, all ears shall be unstopped, to the knowledge 
of divine goodness and mercy, justice and truth, as it 
will then be revealed in the Messiah. 

"WHO HATH BELIEVED OUR TEACHING?" 



In the fifty-third chapter the Prophet looks backward 
from our day and the coming glory, and intimates 
that until the glory of the Lord shall be revealed his 
cause will make comparatively little headway in the 
world. The true teaching respecting him and his mission 
will not be generally received— various false teachings, 
false gospels will have the preference. The inquiry, 
"Who hath believed our report?" our teaching, our 
presentations, implies the answer, Few. And so it has 
been. There were few who had the hearing ears and 
understanding hearts at the time of our Lord's first 

R3590 : page 205 

advent, and only a few all down throughout the Gospel 
age have really and truly appreciated the message. 

True, there are large numbers to-day who are 
nominally Christians, who with their lips draw nigh to 
the Lord occasionally one day in the seven for an hour, 
but who are at heart far from him. The vast majority, 
even in the pulpits of Christendom, seem not to have 
given heed to the report, the doctrines, the teaching 
of the Lord's Word in respect to Messiah, his sufferings 
of this present time and his glories to follow, but rather 
to have hearkened to false doctrines misrepresenting 
the divine plan of the ages, substituting therefor many 
"doctrines of devils," in which a little truth is mixed 
with much error, to the discomfiture and spiritual sickness 
and weakness of many of the Lord's truly begotten 
ones, and to the total confusion of the world, 
"Christendom." 

"To whom hath the arm of the Lord been revealed?" 
cried the prophet. Alas, it is so that few, very few, 
see in our Lord Jesus the powerful arm, the omnipotence 
of Jehovah, stretched down for the aid of our fallen 
race. Few realize that the work finished at Calvary is 
the foundation, the basis, upon which the great Jehovah 
will ultimately establish the Millennial Kingdom for 
the blessing and uplifting of all the families of the earth. 
The majority see Jesus as merely the finger of the Lord, 
doing a comparatively small work for a comparatively 
small class. As our eyes open we behold to our joy that 
Messiah, Head and body, will yet constitute the arm 
of Jehovah, that all-powerful force which shall overthrow 
evil and establish righteousness and bless all the 
families of the earth through the seed of Abraham. "If 
ye be Christ's then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs 
according to the promise."— Gal. 3:29. 

GOD'S WAYS NOT MAN'S WAYS. 

The prophet proceeds to point out why the report, 
the teaching, of God's Word and the power of his omnipotent 
arm for man's salvation have not been discerned 
by mankind. It is largely because the Lord's way of 



accomplishing matters is the very reverse of what mankind 
would have naturally expected. With our mental 
tendencies, our natural expectations would have been 
that the Son of the Highest at his first advent would 
have been manifested in glory and not in humiliation— 
that the heavenly Father would have sent him in glory 
and not in humiliation. Even in his taking of the human 
form and nature we would have expected it to be under 
such conditions and with such environments as would 
have shown forth strikingly and forcefully amongst the 
members of the human race. 

It was a disappointment, especially to the Jews, 
who were expecting a glorious and powerful king, that 
our Lord came as the man of sorrows and acquainted 
with grief. To them he appeared too tender a plant to 
ever prosper. They acknowledged him to be of the 
Davidic line, but esteemed him to be from one of the 
roots of David which had lost its virility, its life. They 
thought him a root out of dry ground, from which they 
could never hope for a sprout of power and glory and 
dignity and honor such as they had anticipated Messiah 
would have. In him they saw not the form of the soldier, 
the general, which to their conception was the grand, the 
comely form that Messiah would have, boasting of his 
power, his strength, his divine support, etc. 

No wonder the poor Jews were disappointed, no 
wonder they considered him undesirable as material 
for a king, no wonder that they had no hope that he 
would ever be the great Messiah, the great deliverer. 
We sympathize with them deeply in their disappointments 
and in their failure to recognize him as Immanuel. 
He was despised and rejected of men, even of the men of 
his own nation, who for sixteen centuries had hoped 
and waited for his coming. They were ashamed of him, 
hid their faces from him. He was despised of the Romans 
and counted unworthy of particular notice, whether 
he claimed to be king of the Jews or what not, and the 
Jews esteemed him not— except the few who, because 
they were Israelites indeed, were guided to an appreciation 
of him with a wisdom from on high. 

What meant all this? Why should the King of 
glory, the Sent of God, the heir of all the promises, be 
thus the man of sorrows and acquainted with grief? Ah! 
says the prophet, I perceive surely that it was our 
griefs that he bore, our sorrows that he carried, not his 
own. We thought that he was stricken of God, that 
he was afflicted by the Almighty, and that this was an 
evidence that he was not in divine favor. We misunderstood 
the entire matter. Now we see that his wounds 
were for our transgressions, that his bruises were for 
our iniquities, that our peace with God was secured by 
the stripes, the chastisements, the penalties of the divine 
law inflicted upon him. We perceive that by his stripes 
we are healed,— that the punishment or stripes due to 
us were laid upon him, that the death sentence that was 
against us he bore, dying the Just for the unjust that he 



might bring us to God. 

"BY HIS STRIPES WE ARE HEALED" 

Yes, yes, continues the prophet, we all went astray 
like sheep, following one another into wrong paths. 
We, even of the seed of Abraham, brought nigh to God's 
favor through the Law Covenant under Moses, have 
failed to retain our position as proper sheep of his fold, 
and the penalty of divine justice has been borne by the 
Shepherd for his sheep, Jehovah hath laid on him— 
charged up to him, accepted of him— the iniquity of us 
all. How gracious is this message! Those who received 
it first from Isaiah, having the guidance and enlightenment 
of the holy Spirit, could not appreciate his words 
to the full, but, nevertheless, must have to some extent 
appreciated them— must have drawn some blessing and 
hope from them. But now, we of this Gospel age, living 
since the redemption price was paid, and since it was 
accepted by the Father on our behalf when our Master 
ascended on high, and since the Pentecostal blessing 
evidencing our forgiveness has reached every member of 
the consecrated class to enlighten the eyes of our understanding 
to enable us to see the deep things of God and 
his gracious promises, we may now rejoice in these things 
so hard for the Jew to understand, and equally impossible 
for the natural man of the Gentiles to comprehend. 
Truly our Lord's words are refreshing and explanatory— 
"To you it is given to know of the mysteries of the 
Kingdom of God;" to all others these things are "spoken 
in parables and dark sayings."— Luke 8:10; 
Mat. 13:10-15,35. 

"HE OPENED NOT HIS MOUTH" 

He was oppressed, as a lamb he was led to the 
slaughter, and as a sheep that before her shearers is 
dumb; yet he opened not his mouth. The fulfilment of 
this we see in the case of our Lord. Had he chosen to 
open his mouth, to argue his case, to defend himself, 
we may well suppose that the Scribes and Pharisees, high 

R3591 : page 206 

priests and doctors of the Law, Pilate and his soldiers 
and the Jewish rabble, would have succumbed to the 
eloquence of him who spoke as never man spoke. Thus 
he might merely have defended himself with his tongue, 
and righteously, too, without ever moving a finger in 
his own defence or exercising any of the divine powers 
deposited in him, or calling for any of the legions of 
angels who would have responded to his prayer. He did 
indeed reply to a question of the High Priest and also 
to a question by Pilate, but he was dumb so far as 
making any plea or endeavoring in any manner to deliver 
himself from the death which he perceived was upon 



him and which he knew was permitted of the Father. 
As he himself expressed it— "The cup which the Father 
hath poured for me, shall I not drink it?" 

We must not lose sight of the fact that our dear 
Redeemer is also our pattern and that we are to walk 
in his steps. The lesson to us, then, is full submission to 
divine providence in respect to all of our affairs— those 
which we see clearly and understand and those also 
which are obscure to us, some of which at times may 
seem unnecessary. Our faith must triumph; we must 
learn that our Father is too wise to err, and that he loves 
us too much to cause a needless tear, a needless pang. 
But if he permitted severe afflictions to come upon his Son, 
his well beloved and only one, that he might be tested 
and proven in respect to his loyalty to the last degree, 
shall we wonder that in calling us to be associates of 
that Son in glory, he should require of us also that we 
should learn obedience by the things we suffer? Gladly 
then, says the Apostle, will we suffer; gladly will we take 
this as an evidence that we are in the hands of the Lord 
and that he is shaping and fashioning us according to 
the glorious pattern, that we may ultimately be participants 
also of the heavenly glories and joys and immortality 
promised to his faithful. 

"By oppression and judgment he was taken away," 
cut off from life— oppression or injustice so far as those 
who condemned him were concerned, by divine justice 
and judgment so far as God was concerned, because he 
had consecrated himself unto death as man's Redeemer, 
and the Father had accepted him as such. 

"WITH THE WICKED AND THE RICH" 

"And who shall declare his generation, for he was 
cut off out of the land of the living." Who could suppose 
that he would have offspring, children— that he 
would be ultimately the Everlasting Father to the 
world of mankind? Who could have seen any prospect, 
any hope, for the race through his death? Who could 
have foreseen that as all in Adam die, even so all in Christ 
shall be made alive? To have discerned these things 
would have been impossible, and the poor Jews and 
the world in general are not to be blamed for not discerning 
them. Rather those who have come into relationship 
to the Lord through faith and through obedience 
unto consecration, and who have been begotten of the 
Spirit to newness of nature, and through the Spirit's 
enlightenment are able to comprehend these wonderful 
things of the divine plan— these highly favored of God 
may rejoice in their blessings without condemning those 
who do not enjoy to the full the same blessings and 
opportunities in this present time. Yes, the entire 
secret of the matter lies in our perception that Jesus 
was the Redeemer, the one who bought the world with 
his own precious blood, the one who was stricken by 
the Father, not for his own sins but for our transgressions 



—for the transgressions of the people, "for the sins 
of the whole world." 

Although he had done no violence he was numbered 
with the transgressors, with the wicked, in his death, 
being crucified between two thieves, although there was 
no deceit in his mouth and he had gained no riches by 
deceiving or overreaching his neighbor; yet he was 
buried in the tomb of the rich Joseph of Arimathea. 
Thus does the prophet mark certain incidents connected 
with our Lord's death, that our Redeemer's identity 
might be the more clearly established. 

"IT PLEASED JEHOVAH" 

All these things, apparently so unjust and so unreasonable 
and so contrary to anything mankind could 
have expected, Jehovah was pleased to permit. To 
have exacted such sufferings from Jesus as our penalty 
would have been an injustice, and this would have been 
an impossibility to God; but it did please him to allow 
his only-begotten one to demonstrate his loyalty and 
faith even unto death, even the death of the cross. It 
pleased him that the Son should thus be temporarily 
injured and put to grief because he foresaw the glorious 
results both to Jesus and to mankind. To his Son he 
would give more than compensating honor and glory 
and dignity and power, yea, eternal life, when to his 
hands would be committed all the remaining features 
of the divine plan. 

Well did the Father know that his Son's faith and 
obedience would be abundantly rewarded. Well did 
he know that the soul of Jesus, his being, would constitute 
the sin offering for Adam and his race, and well 
he knew that ultimately the Son should see a reward 
from this travail of his soul which would satisfy him, 
which would more than compensate every trial, every 
tear, every pain. And is it not wonderful that in God's 
providence the called ones of this Gospel age may apply 
these same consolations and assurances each to his 
own heart, and know that all things are working together 
for good to them that love God— to the called 
ones according to his purpose? Is it not wonderful that 
we also have the assurance that if we suffer with him we 
shall also reign with him, that if we experience travail 
of soul in following in the footsteps of our Redeemer we 
shall have more than compensating satisfaction, and that 
the Word of the Lord so guarantees it? To all who accept 
the Lord's promises in faith, the matter becomes a 
certainty— "Faith can firmly trust him, come what 
may." 

Although when he was cut off from the land of the 
living none could have declared his generation, his seed, 
his posterity, yet he shall see his seed— the redeemed 
and restored of mankind, who at the close of the Millennial 
age shall be privileged to inherit all the earthly 
things lost by father Adam, redeemed by Jesus, restored 



by the Second Adam. 

THE IMPORTANCE OF KNOWLEDGE 

The declaration that it was by his knowledge that 
our Lord Jesus, as the righteous servant of Jehovah, 
justified many and bore their iniquities, is an important 
item in this lesson. We see that it was from lack of 
knowledge of God that the first Adam in his perfection 
was weak. Not knowing the power of God, not realizing 
his gracious and merciful character, father Adam 
considered that all hope of comfort, joy and pleasure in 
life had gone from him when mother Eve transgressed 
the divine regulation respecting the forbidden fruit and 

R3591 : page 207 

came under the divine sentence of death. Being unacquainted 

with the divine character he was without 

hope respecting her recovery and his own future happiness, 

and therefore deliberately shared the death penalty 

with his wife— suicided, so to speak. On the contrary 

our Lord Jesus, knowing the Father, remembering the 

glory he had with him before the world was, trusting 

the Father implicitly, was able to be obedient to the 

Father's requirements, even unto death, even the death 

of the cross. 

Thus did knowledge serve him in good stead and 
enable him to pass through the most trying experiences 
victoriously. It was his knowledge, then, in conjunction 
with his mental and moral and physical perfection, 
that enabled our Lord Jesus to fully meet all the requirements 
of his consecration and thus enabled him to 
justify many, to redeem Adam and his race— enabled 
him to bear their iniquities cheerfully, joyfully, delighting 
to do the Father's will, and for the joy that was 
set before him enduring the cross, despising the shame. 

No wonder, then, that the Scriptures everywhere 
set forth the thought that knowledge is important to 
the followers of Jesus; no wonder that they urge upon us 
that we grow in grace and in knowledge, assuring us 
that to know God is eternal life. To attain to that 
relationship to God which will permit us to fully know 
him and appreciate his just and reasonable and loving 
commands would signify that we were in the condition 
which he would be pleased to bless everlastingly, and 
signify also that, possessing this knowledge, we should 
be able to fulfil all the reasonable requirements imposed 
upon us. Let none of us, then, despise knowledge. 

Nevertheless, while heartily appreciating it, let 
us not forget that it is not merely knowledge about his 
plan, nor knowledge of the various so-called earthly 
sciences, but the knowledge or acquaintanceship of 
God himself. Thus the Apostle also declares of our Lord 
Jesus, "that we may know him," be acquainted with 
him, be intimate with him. Whoever has this intimate 



relationship with the Father and the Son has therein 
the power of God, which will work in him to will and to 
do the Lord's good pleasure, and ultimately bring him 
to a glorious inheritance under the divine arrangement. 
But, as the Apostle points out, to have knowledge of 
earthly things or of the divine plan without having the 
heart obedience and the heart acquaintanceship with the 
Lord, might leave us still poor and wretched and miserable, 
sounding brass and tinkling cymbals. 

THE "GREAT" AND THE "STRONG" 

Therefore, because of his faithfulness as God's 
righteous servant, because guided by his knowledge in 
his obedience to the Father, because faithful in bearing 

R3592 : page 207 

the iniquities of the many, therefore "God will divide 
him a portion with the great." How great a portion is 
not here stated. Other Scriptures inform us that the 
Father has given him a portion with himself— he overcame 
and sat down with the Father in his throne. He 
has indeed been granted a portion with the great— the 
great Jehovah. In turn he shall divide the spoil with 
the strong, the spoil of his great conquest over sin and 
death at the cost of his own life, the spoil of victory, 
the reward of his own high exaltation far above angels, 
principalities and powers, and every name that is 
named— the reward of his high relationship with the 
Father, the reward of his Millennial Kingdom and its 
opportunities and privileges of blessing the whole groaning 
creation, the reward of the Father's smile and 
favor eternally. 

This "spoil," which all came to the dear Redeemer 
as the one who kept the Law and redeemed the world 
with his own precious blood, this spoil he proposes to 
share with the faithful of his followers, the overcomers, 
here called "the strong." O, what a thought! In all 
our weaknesses and imperfections we are by the Lord's 
grace enabled to come off conquerors and more than conquerors 
through him who loved us and bought us with 
his precious blood. 

With the Apostle we can say, "When I am weak, 
then am I strong;" when I realize my own imperfections 
and shortcomings then, by faith realizing the 
strength and perfection of my dear Redeemer and his 
provision for all who are his, I can be strong in faith 
and trust and love, and realize that the exceeding great 
and precious promises of God's Word are yea and amen 
to me. In the present life, then, by faith we have a 
portion with the Lord, and may reckon ourselves as 
having passed from death unto life, as heirs of God and 
joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord. But the attainment 
of all these things, their fulness and completeness, 
lies beyond the grave, beyond the resurrection, when all 



the faithful shall be with him and, like him, share his 
glory, for "he will divide the spoil with the strong." 

THE CAUSE OF THE MATTER 

Our lesson closes with a reiteration of the general 
facts stated. All of this greatness given to our Lord 
and shared with his faithful followers is because he poured 
out his soul unto death, and was numbered with the 
transgressors, and bore the sins of many, and made 
intercession for the transgressors. How emphatically 
the Scriptures point out to us that without the shedding 
of blood there is no remission of sins, that without the 
ransom price being paid there could have been no release 
of Adam and his race from the sentence of death, 
no hope of any of them attaining life everlasting. As 
we appreciate this great central thought of the divine 
plan, let us reverence our dear Master the more as the 
author of our faith, who, by and by, will be the finisher 
of it, and let us seek more and more to be faithful to 
him and to walk in his steps and to lay down our lives 
for the brethren. 



R3592 : page 207 

THE CHATTANOOGA CONVENTION. 



Although we were unfortunate in the selection of the date of 
this Convention, June being a very busy time for the Southern 
farmer, nevertheless we had a delightful season of fellowship. 
The gathering numbered about 150 from every quarter of the 
South land, with a fair representation from more northerly 
States. The Sunday afternoon session was for the public and 
had an attendance of between 500 and 600. We have reason to 
hope that some true Israelites profited by the discourse on The 
Oath-bound Covenant, "In thy Seed shall all the families of 
the earth be blessed." The dear friends of the Chattanooga 
Church managed the arrangements so well that we heard not a 
single murmur. Everybody looked happy with a holy joy that 
lit all faces. The testimonies, too, corroborated this. Nearly 
all told of a share of the opposition promised to all who seek 
to closely follow the Savior, and of joys from the Truth which 
made oppositions seem light afflictions in view of the hopes of 
future glory with our Lord. Two Baptist ministers were in attendance 
at nearly all of the sessions, and one of these at the 
close of the Love Feast, told the writer of his proposed methods 
for extending the knowledge of the "good tidings of great 
joy for all people" to many whom he has been serving hitherto 
as a Baptist. Eleven brethren and ten sisters symbolized 
their consecration by water immersion. It is our hope that all 
present were richly repaid for their expenditure of time and 
money and that the blessing of the Lord poured upon their hearts 
will extend to their friends and brethren at their various homes. 



page 209 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 