Announcements
● Literature offer for August: One of the following 32-page, magazine-size brochures: Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!, “Look! I Am Making All Things New,” The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever, or The Government That Will Bring Paradise may be offered for a contribution of 30¢. As an alternate offer, two of the following books may be offered for $1.00: Choosing the Best Way of Life, Commentary on the Letter of James, God’s “Eternal Purpose” Now Triumphing for Man’s Good, or Is the Bible Really the Word of God? Additional copies of Commentary on James may be ordered from the Society. Congregations should not order the other three books mentioned, since they are out of stock. Use only those books that are available locally. (For obtaining credit, see the guidelines in the Society’s letter of December 21, 1988, to all bodies of elders.) September: Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? for a contribution of $3.00. Small-size books are $1.50. October: One-year subscription for Awake! or Watchtower, or both, for a contribution of $5.00 each. November: New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures and latest brochure for $4.30.
● From August 31 to September 2, 1989, the Society will be taking an inventory of all literature on hand in Brooklyn Bethel. Because of this inventory, no congregation literature orders will be processed for shipment or for pickup during those days.
● Each congregation will receive three Literature Inventory forms and should take an actual count of campaign literature. Please fill out the forms completely and send the original to us no later than September 6, 1989. Keep a carbon copy for your files. We are sending the third copy for use as a work sheet.
● Congregations should begin ordering the 1990 Calendar of Jehovah’s Witnesses with their September literature order. (See the Cost List, paragraphs 7-10.) The calendars again depict Bible locations and will be available in Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Norwegian, Portuguese, Spanish, and Swedish. Some may want to get an extra calendar and frame the pictures or put them in a binder for permanent use. These pictures should be a valuable addition to your theocratic library. Please consider this when placing your order. Calendars are controlled stock items and will be charged to the literature account at $1.00 each, which is the rate for publishers, pioneers, and the public. Do not send remittance with the orders. (See the Cost List, paragraphs 23-25.) Until the calendars are available and shipments are made, these will appear as “Back Ordered” on congregation invoices.
● On receiving the 1990 calendar, you will observe that the expression “Share in field ministry” has been deleted on the first Sunday of the month and “Share in magazine service” has been deleted from the second and fourth Saturdays of the month. Why? Because it properly is the custom for publishers to share in the field ministry on every Saturday and Sunday that they possibly can. Indeed, many are setting a fine example by sharing in the ministry practically every Saturday and Sunday during the month.
● The 1990 Memorial celebration will be on Tuesday, April 10, after sundown. Daylight saving time may affect many, so this advance announcement is given so that the brothers may make necessary reservations or contracts for available halls when there are too many congregations using one Kingdom Hall and they must find other facilities.
● New Publications Available:
Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry​—Cebuano
Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!​—Mam
Jehovah’s Witnesses and the Question of Blood​—Hungarian
Watch Tower Publications Index 1981​—Korean
Watch Tower Publications Index 1986​—Greek
Watch Tower Publications Scripture Index 1950-1985 (congregation, public, and pioneer: $1.50)​—Greek
Tract No. 13​—Bulgarian
Tract No. 14​—Bulgarian
Tract No. 15​—Bulgarian
Tract No. 16​—Bulgarian
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Listening to the Great Teacher (set of four cassettes and a book in an album; congregation and public: $10.00; pioneers: $7.50)​—French
Hosea through Malachi (set of three cassettes; congregation and public: $4.50; pioneers: $3.75)​—German
Listening to the Great Teacher (set of six cassettes and a book in an album; congregation and public: $12.50; pioneers: $9.50)​—Japanese

