Do You Respect Your Kingdom Hall?
1 “Look! How good and how pleasant it is for brothers to dwell together in unity!” (Ps. 133:1) Meetings in our Kingdom Hall provide an opportunity to be united with our brothers so we can incite one another to love and fine works, encouraging one another.​—Heb. 10:24, 25.
2 Since the Kingdom Hall serves such an important function in our lives, do we really respect it? The Kingdom Hall is the center of true worship in the area. Therefore, we should hold it in high esteem. All of us should feel the need to share in keeping it clean and in good condition. There are times when our book study group will be assigned to clean the hall. If it is at all possible for us to share in that work, we should want to do so, thus showing our appreciation for a clean and attractive meeting place.
3 We can all show an interest in the Kingdom Hall, whether we are assigned to clean or not. How? By such a simple act as wiping our feet when entering the hall so as not to track in dirt. This is especially true when the weather is inclement. If we have occasion to use the rest room, we can wipe around the sink after using it so as to leave it clean for the next person. Those who work at the literature and magazine counters can show their interest by promptly disposing of empty cartons. All trash should be placed in the receptacles provided for that purpose. If we see discarded paper or other litter on the floor, we should pick it up rather than leave it for someone else to pick up. Our Kingdom Ministry for January 1989 gave suggestions on keeping the information board neat. Others should cooperate with the presiding overseer in making sure this advice is followed.​—km 1/89 p. 7.
4 The same principles apply when we attend assemblies or conventions. The assembly site is a center of pure worship, whether it is one of our Assembly Halls or some other facility, and it should be treated with respect. We should always check when we leave to be sure we have not left any litter where we were sitting. We should have a helpful attitude and not feel that those assigned to clean are there to pick up after us.
SHARING A HALL
5 Because of the high cost of property, many Kingdom Halls are used by more than one congregation. In urban areas, as many as five or six congregations may share a single Kingdom Hall. Each congregation should take an interest in the Kingdom Hall, recognizing that it belongs to Jehovah and is used for his worship. So respect for the Kingdom Hall entails not only our love for Jehovah but also our love for our brothers in other congregations using the hall.
6 Generally, Kingdom Hall cleaning is done once a week. Where more than one congregation uses the hall, it is necessary for some cleaning to be done after each meeting so that the next congregation that comes into the hall will find it presentable. This also applies to Sundays when one congregation comes in right after another. It is good for some cleaning to be done as time permits for the congregation coming in next. When several congregations use the hall on the same day, it can become quite untidy by the end of the day if no one cares for this.
7 Even as we are “fitly united in the same mind and in the same line of thought” when it comes to spiritual matters, may we be united also in showing respect for our Kingdom Halls.​—1 Cor. 1:10.

