Life Everlasting​—Our Goal
1 Thousands of people who were taught by Jesus witnessed the signs he performed. What a privilege they enjoyed! On one occasion he had the crowd recline, offered thanks, and then fed them with an abundant supply of bread and fish. They numbered about 5,000 men, not counting women and children. While Jesus took into consideration the physical needs of the people, he was primarily concerned with their spiritual needs. Hence, the next day he told the crowd: “Work, not for the food that perishes, but for the food that remains for life everlasting.”​—John 6:27.
2 As true Christians, we want to follow Jesus’ counsel and work for everlasting spiritual benefits. This means keeping material pursuits in their place and having as our primary goal the doing of God’s will. Therefore, we imitate Jesus and make every reasonable effort to share the truth with others and help them to appreciate spiritual things, having everlasting life as a goal.
ACTIVITY IN AUGUST
3 During August, we will continue to present the magazine-size brochures Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!, “Look! I Am Making All Things New,” The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever, or The Government That Will Bring Paradise. As an alternate offer, some may wish to use two of the following older books for $1: Choosing, Commentary on James, “Eternal Purpose,” or Word of God.
4 It is good to have a selection of these fine publications. This allows us to be flexible, adapt to the interests of the householder, and present the brochure that seems most appropriate. Helpful suggestions on offering the brochures were given in “Presenting the Good News” in the August 1988 Our Kingdom Ministry.
5 If no literature is taken by the householder, we might leave a tract or handbill to stimulate the person’s interest in spiritual matters. Or we may find it appropriate to raise a Bible question and suggest the householder give it some thought for a later discussion when we call again. You may select one of the many questions discussed in the Reasoning book, such as those mentioned on pages 193, 198, 245, or 247.
6 To be effective in sharing the good news with others, we need to be well prepared. This requires advance preparation. Are we familiar with the Topic for Conversation, and do we have specific points to mention from the literature? By doing our weekly Bible reading assignment and considering the text each day, our spirituality will grow, and we will have many good things to talk about in our ministry.​—Compare Jeremiah 20:9.
7 During August, you may have the opportunity to work with a number of different publishers. This can widen your acquaintance and friendship with others. It will also allow you to see how others present the good news, something you may miss out on if you always work with the same individual. Yes, our goal is faithful service to Jehovah with everlasting life in view. May we display appreciation for spiritual things by our activity as we incite others to love and fine works.​—Heb. 10:24.

