Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 7
Song 109
10 min: Local announcements and report to congregation of previous month’s field activity. Let brothers know what was accomplished, and encourage them for the work ahead. Highlight items in Theocratic News as time allows. Encourage magazine witnessing for this Saturday. Include brief demonstrations on presenting current magazines.
20 min: “Life Everlasting​—Our Goal.” Question-and-answer discussion. Include two demonstrations using different brochures based on the suggestions in the August 1988 Our Kingdom Ministry. In one demonstration, as the householder refuses the offer, the publisher can close by raising an appropriate question from the Reasoning book for discussion at another time.
15 min: “Planning Ahead for September.” Talk. Start planning what can be done as individuals and as a congregation to advance the spread of the truth. Encourage starting pioneer service in September. Points from The Watchtower of May 1, 1985, pages 13-17, may be included. If time permits, ask for comments on suggestions from district convention that we can apply in months ahead.
Song 15 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 14
Song 28
10 min: Local announcements and selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Accounts report and any donation acknowledgments.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—With Variety in House-to-House Work.” To be handled as a discussion with audience participation. In connection with paragraphs 2 and 3, have well-prepared publisher demonstrate 30- to 60-second magazine presentation. When considering paragraphs 4 and 5, demonstrate simple, direct approach using two different introductions from Reasoning book or July 15, 1988, Watchtower. Select introductions that are practical for local territory.
15 min: Local needs or talk based on article “What Values Govern Your Life?” from March 22, 1989, Awake!, pages 8-10.
Song 34 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 21
Song 50
 8 min: Local announcements. Suggest articles in current magazines for use this Saturday. Review “Standing Firm as One Flock,” and announce date for special assembly day if it is already known.
17 min: “Do You Respect Your Kingdom Hall?” Questions and answers. Elder should handle, highlighting parts of article that apply locally.
20 min: “Are You Using What You Have?” Discuss insert material with audience. Use Index to illustrate finding information that has been needed locally.
Song 80 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 28
Song 70
 8 min: Local announcements. Encourage all to share in field service this weekend. Outline special field service activity for September 4. Suggest talking points for offering Creation book during September.
24 min: “Youths, Witness Effectively in School.” Include three demonstrations with young Witnesses using the suggested presentations in paragraphs 4-6.
13 min: Results of Youths Witnessing in School. To be handled by an elder. Use local experiences. If no local experiences are available, the following experiences can be related by some exemplary youths: 1989 Yearbook, page 45, paragraphs 1, 2, and page 49, paragraphs 1, 2; 1988 Yearbook, page 53, paragraphs 1-3, and page 60, paragraphs 1-3. Encourage young people to take the initiative in seeking opportunities to witness in school. Urge parents to help their children to prepare so as to witness effectively in school.
Song 75 and concluding prayer.

