Presenting the Good News​—With Variety in House-to-House Work
1 Does not Jehovah’s creation abound with variety? The psalmist declared: “How many your works are, O Jehovah! All of them in wisdom you have made. The earth is full of your productions.” (Ps. 104:24) There are also many facets to the good news he has commanded us to preach. Are you using variety in your house-to-house ministry in order to reach as many people as possible?
ON MAGAZINE DAY
2 The Society encourages all to share in magazine distribution every Saturday. Rather than using the Topic for Conversation, giving a 30- to 60-second presentation featuring just one article and then offering both magazines for 50¢ is appropriate. If the householder asks questions or shows more than ordinary interest, there is no need to feel we must rush to the next door.
3 There is no lack of variety when it comes to The Watchtower and Awake! Often, the brother handling the first part on the Service Meeting will present talking points from the current magazines. Pay attention; jot down suggestions you might use. If the Service Meeting includes a demonstration, take note of how it is done, practice it, and then use it in the field on Saturday. If you find you get a poor response, select another article to feature. Each issue contains a number of subjects designed to appeal to people with varied interests. By being conversant with the articles in both magazines, it will be easy to adapt your presentation to the interest of the householder.
VARY YOUR INTRODUCTION
4 At other times the Topic for Conversation should be used with the current offer. Our Kingdom Ministry suggests a different Topic for Conversation from time to time. When training new ones, it is best to use the current topic in a simple presentation. However, at other times it may be good to vary your approach. Have you tried opening your presentation by offering one of the tracts or a handbill as a conversation starter?
5 No doubt there are some introductions in the Reasoning book you have not yet tried. For example, pages 10-11 suggest introductions based on current events. Keep yourself informed, and have in mind scriptures that bear upon up-to-date news items. Is your territory frequently worked? If so, you may do well to vary your introductions, making use of those on page 15 of the Reasoning book. Also, do not forget the excellent suggestions in the July 15, 1988, Watchtower, pages 15-20. Try some of the well-thought-out questions on page 19, paragraph 16, being sure to allow the householder to express his view.
6 The people in our territory come from many different backgrounds and circumstances. We need to vary our approach in order to appeal to all who will listen, doing so out of concern for the welfare of others. (1 Cor. 9:19-23) Using variety in our house-to-house ministry will help us to ‘save both ourselves and those who listen to us.’​—1 Tim. 4:16.

