Youths, Witness Effectively in School
1 Serving Jehovah when you are young and full of appreciation for his promises is a wonderful thing. (Eccl. 12:1) You young people have the special opportunity of sharing the truth with classmates and teachers, a territory that is usually inaccessible to adults. Are you alert to the many ways you can witness informally at school?
2 Why do some find it difficult to share the truth with others at school? Could it be fear of what their classmates will think of them if they talk about God? (Compare Mark 8:38.) Perhaps you experienced this kind of fear when you began going from house to house with the good news. However, if you appreciate the need that other youths have for the truth, as well as your own responsibility as an evangelizer, you will seek opportunities to share the Kingdom message with others. (Matt. 9:36-38; Luke 12:8, 9) To be effective in witnessing informally to those at your school requires advance preparation and planning on your part.
HOW TO DO IT
3 One youngster read her Bible Stories book at school every day during a 15-minute free period. When a classmate inquired about the book, she was invited to sit down and consider a story together. After that, she did not wait to be invited to study but came eagerly to consider the next story. She shared with her mother what she was learning. As a result, the mother began studying the Bible and attending meetings at the Kingdom Hall along with her young daughter.
4 Why not take the initiative and speak to others about the Bible Stories book? For example, you could say: “This book shows how God can protect his faithful servants. [Turn to story 79.] Jehovah protected Daniel in the lions’ pit. Do you think God will save his people by putting an end to badness in the future?” After allowing comments, you could turn to story 114 to show that Jehovah will destroy wickedness and save his people.
5 You might place the Creation book on your desk so that others will notice it. Or when the opportunity presents itself, you could turn to the picture on page 83 and ask a classmate or a teacher: “Do you think that our ancestors looked like this?” After getting a response, you could discuss the information on page 89, paragraphs 19 and 20. Others may have their curiosity aroused if they are shown the titles of the chapters listed on page 5. Depending upon their response, you could share additional information from other parts of the Creation book, or you might demonstrate how the book can be studied by reading a paragraph and then asking the question at the bottom of the page.
6 Upon entering high school, one teenage publisher made it her goal to start a Bible study. A classmate was having some problems with her parents and spoke to the Witness girl about this. The young publisher showed her an appropriate “Young People Ask . . ” article from Awake! The classmate was impressed with the material and asked more questions. The young publisher placed the Live Forever book with her, explained that this could help answer her questions, and started a Bible study.
7 To be a witness for Jehovah, we must speak about him. (Isa. 43:10-12) Have you sincerely made the effort to share the truth with classmates and teachers at your school? Prepare interesting topics to discuss with them. Put forth the effort. Ask your parents or others to assist you. Pray to Jehovah to bless your efforts, just as he has blessed those of many other young publishers who are effective witnesses for Jehovah at school.​—Col. 1:9, 10.

