Kingdom Preaching​—A Precious Privilege
1 Daily, billions of earth’s inhabitants benefit from Jehovah’s generous provisions for life. (Matt. 5:45) However, very few enjoy the unique privilege of showing appreciation to their Creator by preaching the good news of God’s Kingdom. (Matt. 24:14) How highly do you esteem this precious privilege?
2 Kingdom preaching honors God and brings hope and peace to people who are distressed by today’s turbulent times. (Heb. 13:15) To those who respond to the message, it means everlasting life. (John 17:3) What secular career or profession offers such benefits? The apostle Paul demonstrated his appreciation for the ministry in the way he carried it out. He viewed it as a treasure.​—Acts 20:20, 21, 24; 2 Cor. 4:1, 7.
3 Treasuring Our Precious Privilege: One way we show appreciation for the privilege to preach is by giving attention to the quality of our service. Do we take time to prepare a presentation that will touch the hearts of our listeners? Can we improve our skill in using the Scriptures and in reasoning with people? Do we work our assigned territory thoroughly? Can we start and conduct a Bible study? Like faithful Christians, both past and present, we are motivated by a proper view of this activity, and we cherish our privilege.​—Matt. 25:14-23.
4 When we are dealing with the effects of advanced age, poor health, or other difficult circumstances, it is comforting to know that our zealous efforts to share in the ministry are indeed highly valued. God’s Word assures us that Jehovah values such efforts in serving him, even those efforts that may not seem impressive in the eyes of others.​—Luke 21:1-4.
5 Kingdom preaching is a source of great satisfaction. A 92-year-old sister said: “What a privilege to look back over 80 years of dedicated service to God​—with no regrets! If I could live my life again, I would live it the same way because, indeed, ‘God’s loving-kindness is better than life itself.’” (Ps. 63:3) May we too treasure this precious privilege from God​—the Kingdom-preaching work.

