Now Is the Time to Preach!
 1. Why is now the time to preach?
1 “Fear God and give him glory.” Under angelic direction, this message is being declared “to every nation and tribe and tongue and people.” Why? “Because the hour of the judgment by [God] has arrived.” Today, we are living in that ‘hour of judgment,’ which will culminate with the destruction of the present system of things. It is vital for people to “worship the One who made the heaven and the earth and sea and fountains of waters.” No other work being done today can compare in importance or urgency with the proclamation of the “everlasting good news.” Yes, now is the time to preach!​—Rev. 14:6, 7.
 2. How are servants of Jehovah demonstrating that they recognize the urgency of the times?
2 During the past ten years, servants of Jehovah have spent nearly 12 billion hours in the Kingdom-preaching and disciple-making work. Many have made adjustments in their lives in order to share more fully in the spiritual harvest. (Matt. 9:37, 38) Last year, for example, an average of over 850,000 publishers each month served as pioneers. For regular pioneers, this requires spending an average of 70 hours every month in the preaching work. For auxiliary pioneers, the requirement is 50 hours.
 3. What adjustments do publishers often need to make in order to pioneer?
3 How to Pioneer: Recognizing that “the time left is reduced,” pioneers strive to keep their life simple. (1 Cor. 7:29, 31) They look for ways to reduce expenses so that they can spend less time doing secular work. For example, some have moved into smaller dwellings. Others have eliminated unnecessary material possessions. (Matt. 6:19-21) Often, they must also curtail personal pursuits. All of this is done with the goal of devoting more time and attention to the ministry. (Eph. 5:15, 16) With persistence, a self-sacrificing spirit, and prayerful reliance on Jehovah, many publishers have been able to arrange a practical schedule that enables them to pioneer.
 4. What practical steps can help you to work toward the goal of pioneering?
4 Can you pioneer? Why not ask successful pioneers how they are able to do it? Work with them in the field ministry, and experience their joy. Consider articles on pioneering that have appeared in our publications. Set practical goals for yourself that can serve as stepping-stones to pioneering. If there are obstacles that presently prevent you from serving as a pioneer, bring them before Jehovah in prayer, and ask him to help you resolve them.​—Prov. 16:3.
 5. How does pioneering help us to improve our skills in the ministry?
5 Blessings and Joys: Pioneering sharpens our skills in the use of God’s Word, which in turn brings increased joy. “Being able to handle God’s Word of truth aright is a real blessing,” commented one young pioneer sister. “When you pioneer, you use the Bible so much. Now when I go from door to door, I can think of scriptures that are appropriate for each householder.”​—2 Tim. 2:15.
 6. What training does pioneering provide?
6 Pioneering also teaches many valuable life skills. It can help young people learn how to budget time wisely, how to manage finances, and how to get along with people. Many develop a more spiritual outlook on life as a result of pioneering. (Eph. 4:13) Furthermore, pioneers are often privileged to see Jehovah’s hand at work in their behalf.​—Acts 11:21; Phil. 4:11-13.
 7. How does pioneering help us to draw close to Jehovah?
7 Perhaps one of the greatest blessings of pioneering is that it helps us draw close to Jehovah. This can sustain us through trials. A sister who endured a period of severe difficulty said: “The close relationship that I have developed with Jehovah through pioneering helped me through it all.” She added: “I feel so happy that I’ve spent my adult life serving Jehovah full-time. It has enabled me to give of myself in ways I never thought I could.” (Acts 20:35) May we likewise experience rich blessings as we do our utmost in the all-important preaching work.​—Prov. 10:22.

