Part 12​—Conducting Progressive Bible Studies
Helping Students Start and Conduct Bible Studies
1 When our Bible students begin sharing in the field ministry, they may be intimidated by the thought of starting and conducting their own Bible studies. How can we help them develop a positive attitude toward this essential part of our ministry?​—Matt. 24:14; 28:19, 20.
2 Once a Bible student qualifies to be an unbaptized publisher, he is likely already taking full advantage of the Theocratic Ministry School. The training he receives in preparing and presenting student assignments will help him to develop the teaching skills that are needed by “a workman with nothing to be ashamed of, handling the word of the truth aright.”​—2 Tim. 2:15.
3 Teach by Your Example: Jesus trained his disciples by giving clear instruction and setting a fine example. He said: “Everyone that is perfectly instructed will be like his teacher.” (Luke 6:40) Your imitating Jesus by setting a proper example in your own ministry is vital. As your student observes your lead in the ministry, he will appreciate that the objective in making return visits is to start Bible studies.
4 Explain that when we offer a study, it is not generally necessary to describe the study arrangement in detail. Often it is best simply to demonstrate the study by using one or perhaps two paragraphs from a study publication. Helpful suggestions for doing this can be found on page 8 of this issue and on page 6 of the January 2002 Our Kingdom Ministry.
5 When appropriate, invite the student to accompany you or another experienced publisher on other Bible studies. He might share in commenting on a paragraph or a key scripture. Thus, by observation, the student will learn much about conducting progressive Bible studies. (Prov. 27:17; 2 Tim. 2:2) Give him commendation, and discuss how he can improve.
6 Training new publishers to be teachers of God’s Word will equip them for the “good work” of starting and conducting studies of their own. (2 Tim. 3:17) How satisfying it is to work side by side with them in extending the loving invitation: “Let anyone that wishes take life’s water free”!​—Rev. 22:17.

