Service Meeting Schedule
NOTE: A month or two after the congregation attends the “Godly Obedience” District Convention, 15 to 20 minutes should be set aside on the Service Meeting (perhaps using a local needs portion) for a review of points from the convention that the publishers have found to be helpful in the field ministry. The special Service Meeting part will give us the opportunity to explain how we are using what we learned at the convention and how it has helped make our ministry more effective.​—See the April 2005 Our Kingdom Ministry, p. 2.
Week Starting August 8
Song 125
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Remind publishers of the dates of the circuit assembly and special assembly day programs for the 2006 service year if these are known.
10 min: “Are You Using Handbills?” Talk and audience discussion. Invite audience to comment on the good results obtained from using handbills. Include a brief demonstration of a publisher inviting an interested person to a meeting by using a handbill.
25 min: “Now Is the Time to Preach!”a Arrange in advance for one or two regular pioneers to comment on the adjustments they made in order to pioneer and the blessings they have enjoyed as a result.
Song 197 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting August 15
Song 11
10 min: Local announcements. Use the suggestions on page 8 (if appropriate for your territory) to demonstrate how to present the August 15 Watchtower and the August 22 Awake! Show an elder and an infirm publisher doing telephone witnessing.
15 min: Do You Remember? Audience discussion based on the April 15, 2005, Watchtower, page 30. Invite audience to comment on each question. Highlight the practical value of the material. Encourage all to read carefully each issue of The Watchtower and Awake!
20 min: “Starting Bible Studies at the Doorstep and by Telephone.”b Include a brief demonstration showing how a Bible study can be started on the initial call, using just one or two paragraphs in the Require brochure. Relate briefly one or two encouraging experiences about starting studies by telephone.
Song 30 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting August 22
Song 161
10 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: “Kingdom Preaching​—A Precious Privilege.”c When discussing paragraph 4, review the special provision for reporting field service time in 15-minute increments by those who are very limited by advanced age or health problems.​—See the October 2002 Our Kingdom Ministry, p. 8, par. 6.
Song 204 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting August 29
Song 45
10 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for August. Using the suggestions on page 8 (if appropriate for your territory), demonstrate how to present the September 1 Watchtower and the September 8 Awake! In one of the presentations, demonstrate making a return visit on a magazine-route call.
15 min: “A Witness Without Words.”d Invite selected publishers to comment on how observing the fine conduct of God’s people helped them to become servants of Jehovah.
20 min: Feature the Bible on Initial Calls. Talk and audience discussion. Review suggestions in the September 2004 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 4, paragraph 2, for directing attention to God’s Word on initial calls. Demonstrate how one or two of the suggested presentations could be used with the literature offer for September. Suggestions in the January 2005 Our Kingdom Ministry insert for presenting the offer may also be discussed and demonstrated as time permits.
Song 71 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 5
Song 98
10 min: Local announcements.
15 min: “Conducting Progressive Bible Studies​—Part 12.”e Arrange in advance for one or two publishers to comment on what helped them to make progress in starting and conducting Bible studies.
20 min: Organizing to Assist the Elderly. Talk by an elder based on the August 15, 1993, Watchtower, pages 28-9, under the subheading “Organizing Is Valuable.” Mention arrangements that have been made in the congregation to assist sick and elderly ones.
Song 164 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

