Starting Bible Studies at the Doorstep and by Telephone
1, 2. How may we adapt our Bible study program to help busy people?
1 People today are busy. Yet, many have an interest in spiritual things. How can we help them to satisfy their spiritual need? (Matt. 5:3) Many publishers are able to study the Bible with people at their doorstep or by telephone. Could you expand your ministry in this manner?
2 To start Bible studies, we need to be prepared to demonstrate a Bible study whenever the opportunity presents itself. How and where can this be done?
 3. Why demonstrate a Bible study on the initial call, and how can this be done?
3 At the Doorstep: When you meet a person who is willing to converse about the Bible, simply open to a paragraph that you have prepared in advance, such as the first paragraph of lesson 1 in the Require brochure, and begin. Read the paragraph, consider the question, and discuss one or two cited scriptures. Often this can be done right at the doorstep in five to ten minutes. If the person enjoys the discussion, make an arrangement to consider the next paragraph or two at another time.​—Further suggestions on using the direct approach to start studies can be found in the January 2002 Our Kingdom Ministry, p. 6.
 4. How might we start a Bible study at the doorstep when making return visits?
4 A similar approach can be used to start Bible studies when making return visits. For example, you might introduce the Require brochure and feature God’s name, using lesson 2, paragraphs 1-2. On the next visit, you could discuss what the Bible reveals about Jehovah’s qualities, using paragraphs 3-4. For the following discussion, you could consider paragraphs 5-6 and the picture on page 5 to highlight how a study of the Bible helps us to get to know Jehovah. All of this can take place while standing at the doorstep.
5, 6. (a) Why may some people prefer to study the Bible by telephone? (b) What approach can we use when offering to study by phone?
5 By Telephone: Some people may be more willing to study the Bible by telephone than in person. Consider the following experience: While preaching from house to house, a sister met a young woman who is a mother and a busy career woman. When the sister was unable to contact her again at home, she decided to telephone her. The young woman explained that she really did not have time to discuss the Bible. The sister said: “In 10 or 15 minutes, you can learn something new, even by telephone.” “Well, if it’s by phone, then, OK!” answered the woman. Before long, a regular study was being conducted over the telephone.
6 Would some of those whom you visit be willing to study by telephone? You could try the approach just described, or you might simply say: “If you prefer, we could discuss the Bible by telephone. Would that be better for you?” By adapting our Bible study program to the circumstances of others, we may help them to “find the very knowledge of God.”​—Prov. 2:5; 1 Cor. 9:23.

