A Memorial Invitation
What is this Memorial?
It is the memorial of the most important and most precious death this earth has ever witnessed, the death of Jesus Christ, the Son of God. It took place 1,937 years ago in the spring of 33 C.E.
Why is Jesus’ death being memorialized?
Because Jesus Christ himself commanded his followers to do so, saying: “Keep doing this in remembrance of me.” The observance of the Memorial serves as a reminder of what Jesus Christ accomplished for the human race by his death.​—Luke 22:19, 20.
Just what did the death of Jesus accomplish for mankind?
By reason of its being the death of a perfect, sinless man it provided the means to ransom the human family from sin and death, enabling us to get back into harmony with Jehovah God and gain everlasting life. The Bible explains this loving provision that Jehovah God made for us in this way: “God loved the world so much that he gave his only-begotten Son, in order that everyone exercising faith in him might not be destroyed but have everlasting life.”​—John 3:16; Matt. 20:28.
How will Jesus’ death be memorialized?
In the way that he indicated. Christians will meet together, and on hand will be unleavened bread and red wine, symbols of Jesus’ body that he offered up and blood that he poured out for humankind. Of these emblems those Christians who have been anointed by God’s holy spirit will partake. Also there will be a discourse on the role that Jesus Christ plays in Jehovah’s purposes and the example he set for his followers. Included will be appropriate songs and prayers. You will receive a rich spiritual blessing from attending.​—Matt. 26:26-28.
Where will this Memorial be held?
At all Kingdom Halls of Jehovah’s witnesses throughout the world. No admission will be charged and no collection will be taken. All visitors who are lovers of truth and righteousness are most welcome. If you do not know the location of the local Kingdom Hall, feel free to ask any Christian witness of Jehovah you may happen to know, or write the publishers of this magazine, who will be glad to provide you with the address.
When will this Memorial be celebrated?
On Sunday, March 22, 1970, after sundown. This is Nisan 14 according to the lunar calendar, on which date Jesus Christ instituted this celebration. If you have never attended the Memorial, why not make this your first one and experience the blessings that are in store for you on such an occasion? If you have attended before, be certain to attend again this year. Remember the date​—March 22, 1970.

