Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING JULY 5
Song 192
10 min: Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry and local announcements. Demonstrate two brief magazine presentations appropriate for local territory, and encourage all to share in magazine work this Saturday. Give names of those enrolled as auxiliary pioneers for July, and encourage others to work in service with the pioneers.
20 min: “Keep Our Minds on Maintaining Fine Works.” Develop material with questions to audience, including questions that require local application. When discussing paragraph 6, one or two brief prearranged experiences on witnessing while away from home may be included. Also, discuss new Topic for Conversation and demonstrate its use with Live Forever book offer.
15 min: “God Will Finish Your Training.” Talk on article in June 15, 1987, Watchtower.
Song 91 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 12
Song 70
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Express appreciation for financial support of congregation, and report Society acknowledgment of any contributions sent in during June. Mention contribution made to help missionaries attend 1988 convention.
20 min: “Regular Pioneering​—Can You Begin in September?” Question-and-answer consideration of material. Encourage those who qualify and are in a position to enter the regular pioneer work in September. Explain local arrangements to support pioneers through convenient service arrangements and other personal assistance. May include brief prearranged experiences that would be encouraging to those contemplating enrollment as regular pioneers.
15 min: “Unitedly Worshiping Jehovah.” Talk. Encourage all to plan on being present each week for the Congregation Book Study. Help those in audience who have studied the book previously to reason on Philippians 3:1; 2 Peter 1:12, 13; and 2 Peter 3:1, and thus appreciate value of reminders concerning basic elements of Christian faith contained in United in Worship book.
Song 59 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 19
Song 151
13 min: Local announcements. Question Box. Review highlights of outstanding April report. Commend congregation on local accomplishments in the field.
12 min: Using Reasoning Book in Your Territory. Pick one or two subjects from Reasoning book that often come up locally, and demonstrate how the Reasoning book can be used to help the householder. As time permits, call for experiences on using the Reasoning book.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—With New Ones.” Question-and-answer discussion of article. Use one or two brief preselected experiences to illustrate points in article. Emphasize need for experienced publishers to be alert to help newer ones. When possible, volunteer assistance individually and respond positively when overseers request your help for newer ones. Encourage all to share in field service with magazines on Saturday.
Song 133 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 26
Song 55
10 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News.
10 min: Preparation for August literature offer. Suggest and demonstrate use of talking points from brochures that will be appropriate for local territory. Show how to tie in Topic for Conversation with brochures. Encourage all to be out in field service this weekend.
10 min: “Make Sure of the More Important Things.” Talk.
15 min: Local needs or talk on “Help in Making Wise Decisions,” based on article in the May 15, 1987, issue of The Watchtower.
Song 210 and concluding prayer.

