Presenting the Good News​—With New Ones
1 What a wonderful advantage it is to have among us experienced publishers of the good news! They are a real asset to the congregation as they use their abilities along with knowledge and experience to assist the many new ones flocking to Jehovah’s organization today. They take to heart the inspired admonition: “In proportion as each one has received a gift, use it in ministering to one another.”​—1 Pet. 4:10.
2 Approved associates and those who are newly baptized deserve commendation for their hard work in the field ministry. However, their experience may still be limited to just one or two features of the preaching work, such as the distributing of magazines and witnessing informally. To make their advancement manifest, these new ones need to share in as many features of the ministry as they can and improve their effectiveness as proclaimers of the good news. New ones will be helped to become proficient Kingdom ministers by working along with those who have had more experience.​—Eccl. 4:9, 10.
MAKE YOURSELF AVAILABLE
3 Can you make yourself available to assist others in the ministry? New ones need to learn not only how to offer magazines but also how to use the Bible in the house-to-house ministry. They need to learn how to initiate and continue conversations with householders. Someone who lacks experience may be apprehensive about making return visits and conducting Bible studies. But those who are willing can learn how to handle these new responsibilities if they receive the needed help and encouragement.
HOW CAN YOU HELP?
4 One way you can help is to get together with less experienced ones and discuss suggested presentations found in Our Kingdom Ministry. Using the Reasoning book, select appropriate introductions and practice responding to objections and conversation stoppers. In practice sessions, you can rehearse the use of scriptures and how to present the current literature offer. You can discuss how to conclude an initial call so as to lay the foundation for a return visit, or you can show how a Bible study may be started. Such preparation will help the new publisher to have confidence in his ability to speak to people about God’s Word.
5 Make definite appointments to work in the field ministry. The new one may prefer to go along and just observe for a few calls. Then he can try putting into practice what was prepared in practice sessions. As you work together, discuss how your presentations might be improved and how to handle such things as indifference and opposition. Be encouraging and supportive. Remind the new one that it is Jehovah’s work and that he will bless our honesthearted efforts.​—Matt. 11:29, 30.
WORK WITH YOUNG ONES TOO
6 Young ones enjoy their share in the ministry more when they have a well-prepared presentation. The very young can be encouraged to make a simple magazine presentation. If able, they may be given opportunity to read a Bible text to the householder. Help each one to progress according to his age and ability. Parents and others in the congregation can provide the necessary help and encouragement so that the very young ones as well as those growing to maturity will become adept in “handling the word of the truth aright.”​—2 Tim. 2:15.
7 Those conducting Bible studies will want to introduce the students to the field service as soon as they qualify. Elders, ministerial servants, pioneers, and parents should also be alert to offer assistance to those who are just beginning to share in the preaching work. Can you make yourself available to assist new ones? Take the initiative in doing so, for our ‘being harmoniously joined together and giving what is needed makes for the growth of the body.’​—Eph. 4:16.

