Regular Pioneering​—Can You Begin in September?
1 September marks the beginning of the 1988 service year. It will also be the first month of regular pioneer service for many. Will it be for you?
2 Many have served as auxiliary pioneers during the 1987 service year. As stated in the June issue of Our Kingdom Ministry, the auxiliary pioneer service could very well be a stepping-stone toward becoming a regular pioneer. If this is true in your case, why not begin in September? While it is good to have sufficient advance preparation, balance is also necessary so that this important personal goal does not elude you. Appropriately, the Scriptures admonish: “Do not loiter at your business. Be aglow with the spirit. Slave for Jehovah.”​—Rom. 12:11.
3 Before you decide to enroll as a regular pioneer, you should follow Jesus’ admonition to “sit down and calculate the expense.” (Luke 14:28) Factors such as health, family obligations, age, and congregational responsibilities are to be considered. But if you have already analyzed your circumstances and have determined that with some adjustments you can be a regular pioneer, do not hold back.
TRUST IN JEHOVAH’S POWER
4 When considering your personal circumstances, do not conclude that just any handicap, disadvantage, or family responsibility will prevent you from being a successful pioneer. Likely you are acquainted with regular pioneers who serve in spite of advanced age, poor health, and various personal or family obligations. Such factors can be considered on an individual basis with complete trust that “power beyond what is normal” can be ours when we rely on Jehovah rather than trusting in our own strength.​—2 Cor. 4:7.
5 The Society’s office is already receiving applications from those who wish to begin regular pioneering in September. Thousands are expected to apply before the end of August. This is all evidence of Jehovah’s power in action. With prayerful planning and implicit trust in Jehovah, many will be able to make the necessary adjustments and join the regular pioneer ranks with the beginning of the 1988 service year. Will you be among them?
6 Blessings in store for those who become regular pioneers include the joy of sharing in the full-time preaching work and being able to assist new ones in the field. Also, those who are able to start pioneering in September have the prospect of attending the Pioneer Service School in August 1988. How true the proverb: “The blessing of Jehovah​—that is what makes rich”!​—Prov. 10:22.

