Unitedly Worshiping Jehovah
1 The psalmist captured well our feelings regarding the worldwide brotherhood unitedly worshiping Jehovah when he wrote: “Look! How good and how pleasant it is for brothers to dwell together in unity!” (Ps. 133:1) By growing in accurate knowledge of the truth and being motivated to apply it daily in our lives, we all maintain ‘the same mind and the same line of thought.’ (1 Cor. 1:10) Unity among us has been enhanced in recent years through use of the book United in Worship of the Only True God, released at the “Kingdom Unity” District Conventions in 1983. We should come to appreciate this outstanding publication even more as we consider it again at the Congregation Book Study beginning in September.
2 All will benefit, whether we were in the congregation when the book was studied previously or we are among the thousands of new ones who have come into the truth since the United in Worship book was last considered in the Congregation Book Study. New ones will benefit from the varied comments and applications made by mature fellow believers. Local application of the material and points emphasized by experienced conductors will no doubt touch on areas of our personal life and ministry needing further attention. Since none of us are in the identical circumstances we faced when we studied the book previously, reviewing the information and applying the counsel in the United in Worship book, as it relates to the problems and pressures we face today, will strengthen us as we continue to “put up a hard fight for the faith.”​—Jude 3.
3 Besides containing sound counsel that is encouraging and motivating, the United in Worship book stimulates our appetite for spiritual knowledge. Our reasoning powers are strengthened by the way the information is presented. The questions at the bottom of the page, as well as the questions and scriptures within certain paragraphs, require deep thought and personal application on our part if we are to absorb the full sense of the material. Studying this book helps us develop thinking ability and improve our discernment of spiritual matters. We are helped to see the truth in its various aspects and to evaluate not only the relationship of one point to another but also how it applies to us personally. (Prov. 1:1-5) This helps us to “make sure of the more important things.”​—Phil. 1:10.
4 A key factor in benefiting fully is careful preparation. If you have considered the material in the past and already have the answers marked in your book, avoid thinking that careful preparation each week will not be necessary. From time to time all of us need to have our minds refreshed on these spiritual matters. The apostle Peter was inspired to remind the brothers concerning basic truths they had already learned. (2 Pet. 1:12, 13; 3:1) Paul reminds us that such is for our spiritual safety. (Phil. 3:1) By examining the United in Worship book again, we will be strengthened to remain united in our worship of the only true God Jehovah in these critical last days.

