‘Keep Our Minds on Maintaining Fine Works’
1 Fine works are those activities directly related to God’s righteousness and the good news of salvation that is through Jesus Christ. Paul encouraged Titus to remind the brothers “to be ready for every good work” and “to make firm assertions constantly, in order that those who have believed God may keep their minds on maintaining fine works.” (Titus 3:1, 8) By keeping the good news to the fore and by conducting their lives in harmony with Jehovah’s righteous standards, the brothers would not be led astray.​—Matt. 6:33.
2 Paul’s counsel applies to us today. Surrounded as we are by a wicked system of things that could easily turn our attention away from Jehovah’s service, we need to be on guard. That involves keeping our minds on maintaining fine works. How can we do that?
HELP PROVIDED
3 We need to take advantage of the spiritual provisions Jehovah has made through the Christian congregation. (Heb. 13:20, 21) He has given us his Word, the Bible, along with an abundance of excellent study aids. Spiritually older men have been appointed to render personal assistance as shepherds of the flock. Regular weekly meetings at the Kingdom Hall and in private homes, as well as periodic larger assemblies and conventions, provide wholesome upbuilding association and faith-strengthening instruction.
4 Convenient arrangements for field service, including personal assistance for those who are less experienced, are made through the congregation. Such arrangements help us to be well equipped to carry out our commission to preach the “good news” and to help others to become fellow worshipers of Jehovah.​—Matt. 24:14; 28:19, 20.
ACTIVITY FOR JULY
5 July will be a busy month for most of us. Many will be attending the “Trust in Jehovah” District Convention. Some will be working in unassigned territory. For many thousands, July is a month set aside for auxiliary pioneer service. All of us should be intent on doing what we can to place the Live Forever book and start Bible studies where possible.
6 If your schedule of activity for July includes travel away from home, likely you will have many opportunities to meet and talk with people on an informal basis. Many have found that by carrying a small-size Live Forever book, they have been encouraged and helped to strike up conversations that often lead to giving a fine witness. Of course, The Watchtower and Awake! also are convenient instruments to use when witnessing informally.
7 In order to make your travel plans complete, be sure to include arrangements for attending meetings and perhaps sharing in field service with the local congregation. The June 1987 Our Kingdom Ministry article “Include Meetings in Your Vacation Plans” offered suggestions on how to locate the nearest Kingdom Hall.
8 Whether we are spending most of July with our home congregation or we are visiting in other areas, we will want to participate to the extent possible in congregation meetings and field activity. By “always having plenty to do in the work of the Lord,” our minds will be directed aright, and we will maintain fine works to Jehovah’s praise.​—1 Cor. 15:58.

