page 1 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVI. JANUARY 1, 1905. No. 1 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 3 

Happy New Year, 1905 3 

"They Will Accuse Me of Heresy." 4 

Is an Atheist a Heretic? 4 

Higher Criticism Affecting Romanism 5 

Lack of Candidates for the Ministry 5 

Assaults on St. Paul 6 

"We Have Found the Messiah." 7 

My Beautiful Secret (Poem) 10 

Filled and Transformed 10 

Essentials to a Share in the Kingdom 13 

Public Ministries of the Truth 16 

Brother Russell's Discourses Weekly 2 

page 2 

THIS JOURNAL AND ITS MISSION. 



THIS journal is set for the defence of the only true foundation of 

the Christian's hope now being so generally repudiated,— Redemption 

through the precious blood of "the man Christ Jesus who gave himself 

aransom [a corresponding price, a substitute] for all." (1 Pet. 1:19; 

1 Tim. 2:6.) Building up on this sure foundation the gold, silver 

and precious stones (1 Cor. 3:1 1-15; 2 Pet. 1:5-11) of the Word 

of God, its further mission is to— "Make all see what is the fellowship 

of the mystery which. ..has been hid in God,. ..to the intent 

that now might be made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of 

God"— "which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men, 

as it is now revealed."— Eph. 3:5-9,10. 

It stands free from all parties, sects and creeds of men, while it 
seeks more and more to bring its every utterance into fullest subjection to 
the will of God in Christ, as expressed in the Holy Scriptures. It is thus 
free to declare boldly whatsoever the Lord hath spoken;— according to 
the divine wisdom granted unto us, to understand. Its attitude is not 
dogmatical, but confident; for we know whereof we affirm, treading with 
implicit faith upon the sure promises of God. It is held as a trust, to 
be used only in his service; hence our decisions relative to what may and 
what may not appear in its columns must be according to our judgment 
of his good pleasure, the teaching of his Word, for the upbuilding of his 
people in grace and knowledge. And we not only invite but urge our readers 
to prove all its utterances by the infallible Word to which reference 
is constantly made, to facilitate such testing. 

TO US THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH 



That the Church is "the Temple of the Living God"— peculiarly "His 

workmanship;" that its construction has been in progress throughout the 
Gospel age— ever since Christ became the world's Redeemer and 
the chief corner stone of this Temple, through which, when finished, 
God's blessings shall come "to all people," and they find access to 
him.-l Cor. 3:16,17; Eph. 2:20-22; Gen. 28:14; Gal. 3:29. 

That meantime the chiseling, shaping and polishing, of consecrated believers 
in Christ's atonement for sin, progresses; and when the last of these 
"living stones," "elect and precious," shall have been made ready, 
the great Master Workman will bring all together in the First Resurrection; 
and the Temple shall be filled with his glory, and be the meeting 
place between God and men throughout the Millennium.— Rev. 15:5-8. 

That the Basis of Hope, for the Church and the World, lies in the fact that 
"Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every man," "a ransom 
for all," and will be "the true light which lighteth every man that 
cometh into the world," "in due time."— Heb. 2:9; John 1:9; 1 Tim. 

2:5,6. 

That the Hope of the Church is that she may be like her Lord, "see him 
as he is," be "partaker of the divine nature," and share his glory as 
his joint-heir.- 1 John 3:2; John 17:24; Rom. 8:17; 2 Pet. 1:4. 

That the present mission of the Church is the perfecting of the saints for 
the future work of service; to develop in herself every grace; to be God's 
witness to the world; and to prepare to be the kings and priests of the 
next age. -Eph. 4:12; Matt. 24:14; Rev. 1:6; 20:6. 

That the hope for the World lies in the blessings of knowledge and opportunity 
to be brought to all by Christ's Millennial Kingdom— the restitution 
of all that was lost in Adam, to all the willing and obedient, at the 
hands of their Redeemer and his glorified Church— when all the wilfully 
wicked will be destroyed.— Acts 3:19-23; Isa. 35. 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, Editor. 



LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



BROTHER RUSSELL'S DISCOURSES WEEKLY. 



In our last issue we announced that the "Gazette" 
discontinued the publication of these sermons, and that 
the DISPATCH, Pittsburg's principal newspaper, had taken 
them up, with the understanding that should they 
be discontinued balances of subscription SENT IN BY US 
would be refunded. 

The DISPATCH rate is 2 cents per copy, $6.00 per year. 
By a special clubbing arrangement we are enabled to 
supply the DISPATCH, ZION'S WATCH TOWER, the "Solon 
Journal" and any four volumes you may choose of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, all for the price of the DISPATCH alone. 
Those who prefer may subscribe for six months at same 
rate, $3.00, or for three months for $1.50. Those who 
have already sent in WATCH TOWER subscriptions for 
1905 may deduct the amount from the $6.00 and send 
the balance. 

Those who reside at points where the DISPATCH has 
agents can better be served by them, at times and in 
quantities desired. It is well to advise New Agents of 
why you desire several copies and how many you will 
want regularly, so that they can procure extra supplies 
for Monday. 

EXTRA COPIES OF MONDAY'S DISPATCH. 

We are privileged to send extra copies of the Monday's 
DISPATCH to anyone who is a REGULAR SUBSCRIBER. 
Thus many friends at one place can get supplies 
through one of their number. Such papers, however, 
require extra wrapping and postage. The following 
will be the rates:— 
7 copies Monday's DISPATCH for 12 weeks, $1.50 

15 " ' 12 " 3.00 

50 12 " 9.00 

Parties previously getting such packages of "Gazettes" 
now get DISPATCHES, the remaining portion of their subscriptions 
being shortened proportionately, to correspond 
with the double price of the DISPATCH. 

WRITE ALL ORDERS CAREFULLY. 



Save our time, please, by writing orders SEPARATELY 
from letters, with FULL address. If you live in the country 
and the article is such as might go best by express, 
give name of express office as well as R.F.D. 

WATCH TOWER BINDERS. 



Remember, that we have these in good supply, at 50 
cents each, delivery free. Each Binder will hold two 
years' issues, and they are very convenient for easy reference 
and preserving the papers from injury or soiling. 



INSTEAD OF FOREIGN TRACTS, hereafter use Foreign 
TOWERS. Order all the sample copies you can use judiciously, 
FREE. 



R3479 : page 3 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
HAPPY NEW YEAR, 1905. 



GREETINGS, dear fellow Watchers! The great 

clock of Time marks another cycle, and shows 

us another day's march nearer Home— nearer 

to our "change," and contact fellowship with our Savior 

—nearer to the Kingdom and its blessings for all the 

families of the earth. 

"How light our trials then will seem! 
How short our pilgrim way!" 

But, though thus rejoicing in the flight of time, it 
is not with us as with many of the poor world when they 
would express themselves similarly, perhaps at the moment 
meditating suicide. No, indeed! The love of 
Christ makes fresh our hearts, as a fountain ever springing, 
so that to the true children of God every day has 
the Christian's secret of a happy day and every year the 
same. We are greatly enjoying the present, with its 
songs and sighs, its pleasures and disappointments, its 
joys and discouragements, while waiting for and with 
the eye of faith looking for "That blessed hope, the glorious 
revelation of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ," 
and the wonderful riches of divine grace and blessing 
then to be showered upon the world of mankind under 
the New Covenant. 

"It makes each trial blest" to realize that it is one 



of the "all things" promised to work for good to the 
Lord's Spirit-begotten children, who are being prepared 
for join t-heirship with their Lord in the great Kingdom 
which soon is to bless and uplift Adam and all his race. 
This is the secret which none but the blood-washed and 
consecrated, the spirit-begotten, can "comprehend." 
(Eph. 3:18.) These alone are able truly to sing:— 

"Yes, happy every day has been 
Since I am His and He is mine. 

He leads me and I follow on 

Directed through the Word divine." 
Not that we are absolutely pure and perfect, any of 
us (except "pure in heart," pure in our intentions and 
desires), but that we by faith realize that our Redeemer's 
merit covers us, and permits us, if overtaken of a fault 
unwillingly, to apply for a share of the merit of "the 
blood" to cleanse our wedding garment from spot or 
wrinkle or any such thing, that our communion and fellowship 
with our Lord be never hindered except for a 
moment as it were. 

Let us start the New Year properly, remembering 
the Apostle's words: "Set your affections on things 
above;"— not on earthly things. If they slip away 
through earthly attractions reset them, time and time 
again. Gradually they will become more strongly attached 
to the heavenly things;— gradually we will come 
to appreciate both more truthfully and find that— 

"The joys of earth of little worth 

Should not confine our thoughts to earth. 

Why grasp at transitory toys 

So near to heaven's eternal joys?" 
Many adopted our suggestion of a text for 1904 
with great profit, and now we suggest one for the 
year 1905 as follows: 



1905-MOTTO TEXT-1905 

"Wisdom is the Principal Thing: 

Therefore get Wisdom."— Prov. 4:7 
* * * 

"The Wisdom that is from Above 
is first Pure, 
Then Peaceable, Gentle, Easy of Entreatment, 
Full of Mercy and Good Fruits."— Jas. 3:17 



Let us as "Children of the Highest" give earnest 
heed to the heavenly counsel as the essence of Wisdom. 
No matter how far advanced we may be in Christian 
character it will make us better to give earnest heed to 
this wisdom;— better husbands and wives, better parents 
and children, better colaborers, friends and neighbors ! 
Let us be wise toward God, whatever fellowmen 
may consider us. 



R3479 : page 4 

"THEY WILL ACCUSE ME OF HERESY." 



These words are becoming quite familiar to those 
who get a glance at the public press reports. Yesterday 
it was Rev. S. T. Carter, D.D., who thus feared as he 
addressed the Nassau Presbytery, telling them that he 
no longer believes the Bible narrative of the fall in Eden, 
and a divine curse in consequence, and the need of a 
Redeemer to effect atonement for the sin and to again 
open to man a way of life: today it is Rev. Lyman Abbott, 
D.D., a Congregationalist, who expresses the same fear 
to Harvard College students, while telling them of his 
abandonment of the very same doctrines. How it shocks 
us to hear these aged veterans tell that they are no 
longer soldiers of the cross and followers of the Lamb. 
The cross to them was needless and the Lamb's blood 
was unnecessary. 

But there is a ridiculous side to this serious question. 
These aged Christian ministers intimate to us that for a 
long time they have had their unbelief;— for a long time 
they have been too cowardly to confess it;— for a long 
time therefore they have hypocritically posed as believers 
when they were unbelievers! Alas that such a 
view of their course is the only one possible. Alas that 
we must fear that there are others in the pulpits of 
Christendom, many of them, equally pharisaical. 

Rev. Carter feared that the Nassau Presbytery 
would accuse him of heresy! Is that meant as a joke? 
Does not this learned doctor of divinity know the meaning 
of the word heretic? Did he claim that he is not an 
heretic and fear that the Presbytery would be falsely 
accusing him by calling him one? Let us see what the 
word heretic means, in plain English. We take the 
Standard Dictionary's definition:— 

"Heretic (theological def.) An actual or former 
member of a Church, or one whose allegiance is claimed 
by it, who holds religious opinions contrary to the fundamental 
doctrines or tenets of that Church." 

R3480 : page 4 

This fits Dr. Carter's case exactly. He admits that 
he no longer believes the fundamental teachings of the 
Presbyterian Church, and that he no longer believes 
the fundamental teachings of the Bible respecting sin 
and its atonement, etc. He is a heretic, therefore, not 
only to the Presbyterian Church but also, and more important 
by far, he is a heretic toward God and "the 
Church of the first-born, whose names are written in 
heaven." 

But Dr. Carter's fears were groundless: Nassau 



Presbytery by a good majority decided that to brand 
him a "heretic" would be to brand the Presbytery the 
same. To say that Dr. Carter had been acting the hypocrite 
for years would be to charge themselves with the 
same dishonesty. So Dr. Carter's practical endorsement 
by Nassau Presbytery (one of the most influential in 
the land) must be understood by thinking people to 
mean that Nassau Presbytery is either totally or by 
majority composed of heretics who do not stand for the 
fundamentals of religion, neither as expressed in the 
Bible, God's standard, nor as expressed in the Presbyterian 
Confession of Faith, which they have vowed to 
uphold and teach. 

IS AN ATHEIST A HERETIC? 



Dr. Lyman Abbott's pronunciamento has been published 
broadcast, but we give a liberal extract from it 
from the Pittsburg Dispatch, as follows:— 

CAMBRIDGE, Mass., Dec. 18. -Leaning far out 
over the pulpit in Appleton Chapel, his long white beard 
and flowing gown making him look like a veritable 
patriarch, Dr. Lyman Abbott, in a sermon to Harvard 
students to-night, broke away from the theology which 
to-day forms the basis of the faith of millions of orthodox 
Christians, and sounded the keynote of a new religion 
founded, not on the Bible, but on science and the out-reachings 
of the human heart. 

"I wonder," he said, "if you students in Harvard 
will understand me when I say that I no longer believe 
in a great first cause. To-morrow the newspapers will 
get hold of this and brand me as a heretic. My God is 
a great and ever-present force, which is manifest in all 
the activities of man and all the workings of nature. 

"I believe in a God who is in, and through, and of, 
everything— not an absentee God, whom we have to 
reach through a Bible or a priest or some other outside 
aid. Science, literature and history tell us that there is 
one eternal energy, that the Bible no longer can be accepted 
as ultimate, that many of its laws were copied 
from other religions, that the Ten Commandments did 
not spring spontaneously from Moses, but were, like all 
laws, a gradual growth, and that man is a creature, not 
a creation." 



If we grasp Dr. Abbott's language it means, what all 
atheists hold, that there is no God, that in some unexplainable 
sense all nature is God, and that we are all 
the children of nature, God, by processes of evolution. 
Voltaire, Thos. Paine, and Robert Ingersoll never did 
such slight to justice and religion as this. They were too 
honest to wear a cloak of religion to conceal the poisoned 



dagger of infidelity for a close approach to permit spiritual 
assassination. Oh shame, shame! That a greyhaired 
man should wear the livery of a Christian minister, and 
the decorations of "Reverend" and of "Doctor of 
Divinity" to maintain his honor among men, and then, 
stealing into the Christian Chapel of one of the foremost 
colleges of the world, should seek to assassinate the Bible 
and its God and Christ, and to put the poison of infidelity 
into the streams of culture where they would be most 
effective in poisoning the entire household of faith! 

Dr. Abbott, also, is afraid he will be found out as a 
"heretic," but— wiser on the subject than Dr. Carter- 
he does not anticipate trouble from the ministry, who 
he well knows are generally "tarred with the same stick," 
—he fears that the newspapers will find him out. He is 
still more shrewd, for knowing that the newspapers would 
discern his heresy he doubtless wrote out the newspaper 
statement above with his own pen! Why? To deceive! 
To give the impression— this is not heresy, but the newspapers 

R3480 : page 5 

will know no better than to consider it so. What 
abominable hypocrisy in the name of Christianity! And 
yet at one time in our estimation Dr. Abbott was one 
of God's most sincere servants: we judge from his writings 
of thirty years ago. Verily a star, a bright one, is 
thus seen to have "fallen from heaven." 

Surely we are witnessing the masterstrokes of Satanic 
craft as no time since the dark ages witnessed them. 
Then the Adversary used ignorance and superstition and 
priestcraft as his tools: now he transforms himself and 
poses as an angel of light. Taking advantage of the recoil 
of civilization against the monstrous and unscriptural 
errors of the past, he takes the torch of higher 
criticism and becomes leader, that he may attract attention 
to the opposite extreme— equally far from the 
truth. 

But we are neither surprised nor dismayed by such 
"falling of the stars from heaven," and the consequent 
"shaking" of the foundations of society as respects religious 
things. No; the Master foretold it all, and, as our 
older readers well know, we have been expecting these 
things for thirty years, and noting their gradual 
approach. 

So far as the Lord's cause is concerned we would not 
even change matters; for although it will soon produce 
demoralization in nominal Christendom, it will result to 
the advantage of the Lord's true people, "Israelites 
indeed." We are in the "harvest" of the Gospel Age, 
and while "wheat" and "tares" have grown together 
in the past, the Lord is seeing to it that now they must 
be manifested as totally different, that the "wheat" 
may all be reaped with the sickle of Truth and be gathered 
into the heavenly "garner." In proportion as the 
eyes of our understanding open and we see these things, 



we may indeed lift up our heads and rejoice, knowing 
that our deliverance draweth near! 

HIGHER CRITICISM AFFECTING ROMANISM 



It would appear that Romanism also is seriously 
affected by "modern scholarship," otherwise "higher 
criticism" or refined infidelity. Papacy's claim of Infallibility 
makes her specially vulnerable. The following 
from the higher critical viewpoint appeared in the Fortnightly 
Review: 

"The conclusion— painful as it is— that one is compelled 
to draw is that Rome regards the maintenance of 
her absolute authority, unlimited in its sphere and exercise, 
as the one thing to be fought for at all costs, even at 
the cost of the loss to the church of the great majority of 
her children. This is the spirit, and this the temper, 
which brought about the Reformation; it does not spring 
from 'ineradicable confidence' in the future of the church, 
but rather from a well-grounded fear that the claim of 
Rome to absolute, infallible, and unlimited authority 
in all matters will not stand the test of history, and can 
not be maintained except by the rigorous repression of 
individual initiative and independent thought. 

"The position in which the individual Catholic is 
placed by the policy of his rulers is one of grave difficulty, 
and nowhere is the situation more acute than in France. 
In the English Catholic body few of the laity, and fewer 
still of the clergy, take any interest in intellectual matters; 
but there are signs of grave mischief among the 
younger laymen even in England. They have been 
trained to draw no distinction between the Catholic faith 
and its scholastic expression, or the insecure historical 
basis upon which their teachers have founded it. 

"The natural consequence is that, in so far as those 
who have been educated in this way become convinced 
of the strength of the critical position, their hold on the 
faith is likely to be weakened. Rome has weakened it 
still more by declaring that any attempt to find a synthesis 
between the critical position and the faith is unlawful 
for Catholics." 



But Rome will not be as much shaken as Protestantism 
in this respect. She has her grip upon the people 
through priestcraft and superstition, and it will hold 
to the "bitter end," when anarchy will down all. Meantime 
it will be all the more trying upon intelligent Protestant 
Christians, loyal to the Bible, to find the great 
Antichrist system on their side, defending the Bible, 
with all the "worldly wise" in opposition. The Lord, 
however, knows how to sift and shake his professed 
Church so as to gather out of it all things that offend and 



they that do iniquity. 

LACK OF CANDIDATES FOR MINISTRY. 



Two conventions of Christian workers have been 
held recently to consider the dearth of Ministerial candidates. 
The WORLD'S WORK says on the subject: - 

"There is no real 'dearth' of students for the ministry. 
There is a slight back-set at the present time, but 
it is not so great as has occurred in other years, and reports 
of attendance of students in the theological seminaries, 
when compared with similar reports twenty-five 
years ago, show a marked and marvelous increase. 

"In some quarters there is a deterioration in the 
quality of students, but the reports are not altogether 
unanimous. Methodists and Episcopalians report a decided 
increase in numbers and in quality, and other 
religious bodies vary in localities and colleges in this 
respect. 

"There is a marked change in the sources of supply. 
The West and South provide a much larger proportion 
of students than the East. The response is greater in 
the newer regions than in the old, in the country than in 
the city, in the small churches than in the larger." 



It would seem, however, that there is a danger even 
more serious than that resulting from a lack of proper 
candidates for the ministry. Mr. Tomlinson wrote to 
twenty "successful pastors," asking whether, if they 
had their lives to live over again, they would select the 
work they are now doing. Seven replied "Yes" enthusiastically, 
three were undecided, nine gave emphatic 
negatives, and one declared that if he could avoid being 
"ordained," he would be glad to take up the work. 

R3481 : page 6 

Reading between the lines it would appear that the 
consciences of the majority of ministers are causing them 
pain which they would be glad to be rid of if they knew 
of an equally honorable and remunerative engagement 
open to them. Having lost their faith they are not 
happy in their unbelief, and are ashamed of the hypocrisy 
of their position. Why do they not follow the examples 
of Drs. Carter and Abbott, you ask? Oh! their 
case is very different: Dr. Carter is on the superannuated 
list and not in contact with nor dependent on the public. 
And Dr. Abbott is quite independent as the editor of 
a prosperous journal. The others, many, many, are 
waiting to see how the public stands the heretical utterances 
of the independents, hoping some day that it 
will be safe for them to follow the same course without 



loss of position and income and honor of men. The general 
public does not comprehend the situation— "None 
of the wicked shall understand" (Dan. 12:10)— they 
call it "theological hair-splitting anyway." But the 
Lord's true sheep, who have believed in him as their 
Redeemer, will know and will understand, and the coming 
cleavage will awaken them and prepare them for 
the Light and Truth in fuller measure than they have yet 
received them. 



"If these twenty men be fairly representative," 
says the New York Evening Post, "the problem is not 
only how to get men to preach, but how to keep them 
preaching." The editor, evidently a "higher critic," proceeds 
to say: 

"The causes that deter men from becoming clergymen 
are today pretty obvious. The old prejudice, that 
'learning hath always been an enemy to the gospel,' 
is still alive. Indeed, the struggle between rigid ecclesiastics, 
on the one hand, and scientists and scholars, on 
the other, first over evolution and then over the higher 
criticism, has dealt a severer blow to the Church than the 
gentlemen who now so gracefully acquiesce in the new 
doctrines imagine. ...The old contest is not forgotten, 
especially while the reactionary religious press keeps up 
its din about the higher criticism. Young men, viewing 
the past and the present, scrutinize the ordination 
vows, and frankly say they will not put their necks into 
the noose." 

ASSAULTS ON ST. PAUL. 



Higher Critics and Evolutionists find serious obstacles 
in the clear statements of the great Apostle Paul 
in the New Testament. No wonder then that he is discredited 
by them. It is their frequent claim that they 
take Jesus' statements and not St. Paul's— that the 
latter and not the former taught concerning Adam's 
fall and the consequent "curse," and the need of an 
atonement for sin, etc. 

Seemingly they are willingly ignorant of our Lord's 
statement that all were "lost"— that he "came to seek 
and to save that which was lost." They also ignore his 
statement that the Son of man came "to give his life 
a ransom for many." (Matt. 20:28.) They forget that 
it was our Lord who said to the unregenerate, "Ye are 
of your father the devil, for his works ye do;" and "Ye 
will not come unto me that ye might have life." They 
forget his declaration, "As Moses lifted up the serpent 
in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted 
up, that whosoever believeth in him might not perish, 
but have everlasting life." They seem not to see that 



this teaches that all except believers will perish and that 
the thing to be believed is the ransom effected through 
our Redeemer's death on the cross. 

The above utterances by our Lord are remarkably 
clear and explicit when we remember how few of his 
utterances are recorded; and that because it was not 
due time until Pentecost to pour out the holy Spirit, 
so it was not due time until then to clearly explain the 
"mysteries of the Kingdom," and hence it is written that 
our Lord opened his mouth in parables and dark sayings, 
leaving to his Apostles, later, under the ministration of 
the Spirit, to understand and explain to others "all 
things whatsoever he had spoken" darkly,— "the deep 
things of God." 

Recently a German professor made a bitter attack 
upon Paul along lines above indicated, and another, 
Professor Feine, answered him quite well. We below 
quote from that answer:— 

"It must be regarded as the settled conclusion of 
honest research that Christianity, from the outset, was 
a religion that aimed at man's redemption. Not Paul, 
but the founder of Christianity, put this stamp upon the 
faith. It is true that the great apostle, in his elaboration 
of the doctrine of justification, nowhere directly 
appeals or refers to an utterance of Jesus on this subject. 
Even in his discussion with Peter at Antioch (Gal. 2:14-21), 
we do not find that Paul recalls for the benefit of 
Peter any particular word of Jesus on the topic under 
discussion. But notwithstanding all this, the germ of 
Paul's doctrine of justification is to be found in the 
teachings of Jesus himself. 

"Jesus recognized the universal depravity, and was 
constantly calling men to repentance. He preached, as 
John the Baptist did before him, not that certain classes, 
or a few, must enter into the Kingdom of God through 
repentance, but that all, without exception, must do so. 
(Matt. 18:23 seq.) In this thought lies the foundation 
of Paul's doctrine of justification, altho he developed 
this doctrine more emphatically than Jesus himself did. 

"Again, the fundamental, Pauline doctrine that the 
call to Christianity and, indeed, our entire Christian life, 
are a gift of God's grace, has also been taken from Jesus. 
The latter spoke of the Kingdom of God as a gift from on 
high, to be given to all for whom it had been prepared. 

"According to Jesus, the Kingdom of God is something 
already attainable in the present life, while Paul 
maintains that judgment by justification has already 
been determined. But even in this apparent contradiction 
may be recognized two sides of one and the same 
doctrine. 

"The essential contents of Paul's doctrine of justification 

R3481 : page 7 

can be traced back to Jesus himself. It was not 

Paul who raised up the cross of Christ as the only means 



of salvation. Jesus himself had declared his death to be 
necessary for the salvation of mankind." 



R3481 : page 7 

"WE HAVE FOUND THE MESSIAH." 

--JOHN 1:35-51. -JANUARY 15.- 

"Thou art the Son of God: thou art the King of Israel." 

JOHN'S Gospel was written after the other three, and 
quite evidently with a view to setting forth matters 
not set forth in the other Gospels. Thus we find 
that it does not attempt to give a full history of the Lord's 
ministry in all particulars, but chiefly deals either with 
matters omitted or with details not given by the others. 
Our present lesson furnishes details respecting the gathering 
of the first apostles to the Lord. Much of its interest 
centers in the fact that it well illustrates the diversity 
of the Lord's dealings and providences as these are still 
exercised in the world in the drawing of others to himself, 
some in one way and some in another. 

While the Scriptures inform us that at the time of 
the Lord's presentation "All men were in expectation 
of him," of Messiah, nevertheless we are to remember 
that all were expecting something totally different from 
what the Lord presented. They were expecting a personage 
of high rank, of great influence, of striking and 
commanding character; and our Lord, if he had been an 
impostor, would have sought to fill this public expectation. 
Either he would have given them to believe he 
controlled wealth and influence, or he would at least 
have been boastful and heady, thereby making up for 
any deficiencies along the line of their expectation. By 
a studied exclusiveness of manner, and haughty disdain 
of the poor and the sinful, an impostor would have 
sought to rank himself in the public estimation by claiming 
the possession of every noble and lofty sentiment 
above others. He was of the royal tribe of Judah— 
more than this, he was of the royal family of David— 
and had he been an impostor we may be sure that this 
relationship to the kingly line, and references to divine 
prophecy respecting the same, would have been flaunted 
on every possible occasion. On the contrary, we find 
our Lord "meek and lowly of heart"— not bombastic, 
not boastful, not self-obtrusive. Bearing these things 
in mind we see all the more clearly why he attracted 
special characters for his disciples, and why he failed 
to attract the masses: we see that it was the Father's 
design that he should attract to himself as disciples the 
meek and lowly of heart, the reverential, the sincere, 
and that he should more or less repel the worldly wise, 
the rulers, and the masses who subsequently crucified 



him. Let us note, too, that these same principles of 
attraction and repulsion have persisted throughout this 
Gospel age and are still operative. The masses may be 
temporarily influenced, and even say "Never man spake 
like this man," or again, "When Messiah cometh can 
he do greater works than this man doeth?" But the 
masses will not be attracted, because the Lord does not 
wish to attract those whose hearts are not in the proper 
attitude of consecration and faith. Consequently, all 
down through the Gospel age, those who have been the 
Lord's followers in the highest and truest sense of the 
word, "forsaking all to follow him," have been comparatively 
few, and, as described by the Apostle, "Not many 

R3482 : page 7 

great, not many wise, not many learned, not many noble 
according to the course of this world, but the poor of 
this world, rich in faith"— shall be heirs of the Kingdom. 

LOVE BOASTETH NOT-VAUNTETH NOT ITSELF. 

Notice the quiet, unostentatious, meek manner in 
which our Redeemer began the announcement of his 
mission. Quietly he presented himself to John for baptism, 
and after receiving there the anointing of the holy 
Spirit he went into absolute seclusion in the wilderness 
for more than a month, for forty days studying what the 
divine plan had arranged to be his course. True, he 
did not have the Bible, but he had the perfect memory, 
and for thirty years he had heard the reading of the Law 
and the prophets in the Synagogue and was thoroughly 
familiar with them. He had the entire matter before 
his mind, and under the light of the holy Spirit he weighed 
the various declarations of the Law and prophets, noted 
the course of sacrifice which these meant, his temptation 
lying in the suggestion that easier, less sacrificing 
courses seemed to present themselves as feasible. He 
triumphed over all the Adversary's allurements and 
blandishments— determined not to do, Satan's will, nor 
even follow his own judgment, but strictly and implicitly 
follow and obey the outlined program which the Father 
had laid down in the Word. He returned to John, seeking 
companionship with those who were nearest to the 
Lord and waiting for divine providence to guide in his 
affairs. 

It was at this time, in the presence of his disciples, 
that John prophesied of Jesus, saying, "Behold the Lamb 
of God which taketh away the sin of the world." Andrew 
and John were disciples of John the Baptist, and when 
they thus heard his testimony respecting Jesus and the 
declaration that he had a witness from God that Jesus 
was the Messiah, they sought the Lord's acquaintance. 
They followed after him, overtook him, and inquired 
where he was stopping. Apparently their object was to 
learn of him, to ascertain what further blessings the Lord 



had, and what further service than that they had engaged 

in with John the Baptist. They wanted the best 

that was to be had. They had not the partisan spirit to 

say, "We belong to John the Baptist and must stand up 

for him," as some of the Lord's dear people are inclined to 

do in respect to the various denominations. There were 

some of John's disciples who heard his testimony who 

did not seek to become followers of the Lamb of God, but 

who were quite content to remain John's disciples. We 

may properly enough suppose that being content with 

the lesser blessing and privilege implied that they were 

not so worthy of the higher privileges and blessings. 

They doubtless never became apostles, though some of 

them, probably, became followers of Jesus after the imprisonment 

of John. 

John does not mention the other disciple that went 
with Andrew on this occasion, but this seems to have 
been his modest style of omitting special mention of 
himself. The two spent the remainder of the day with 

R3482 : page 8 

the Lord, and doubtless "learned of him," much to 
their comfort and joy and the establishment of their 
faith. The record is "They abode with him." This may 
refer to the temporary stay of one day, but it may with 
equal propriety be understood to mean that they remained 
with the Lord as his disciples thereafter— to the 
very end of life. We remember on one occasion, when 
some took offence at certain teachings of our Lord which 
they did not understand, how our Lord addressing the 
twelve said, "Will ye also go away?" But Peter answered, 
"Lord, to whom should we go? thou hast the 
words of eternal life," we must abide with you. So it 
should be with all of us who have become the Lord's 
followers. We are not his disciples for a day, but for all 
eternity. We abide with him in loyalty of heart whether 
we go to seek others or whether we listen to words at 
his feet, and he abides with us, as expressed in his own 
statement, "Lo, I am with you always, even to the end 
of the age." 

"Not a brief glance I beg, a parting word; 
But as thou dwell'st with thy disciples, Lord; 
Familiar, condescending, patient, free, 
Come, not to sojourn, but abide, with me!" 

On the basis of that brief acquaintance, John and 
Andrew started forthwith to find others and bring them 
to the Master. The intimation of the Greek text is that 
Andrew and John both started out, each to find his own 
brother and bring him to the Lord, and that Andrew 
found his brother first, implying that John found his 
brother, James, a little later. 

There are some points here that are well worthy of 
our attention: 



(1) Andrew and John were not content to have 
the great blessing of fellowship with the Lord alone; 
they desired to make known their great find. 

(2) They did not attempt to influence others until 
they were fully satisfied themselves and could give a 
definite, positive message, saying, "We have found the 
Messiah"— the Christ. (Messias is the Greek spelling of 
the Hebrew word Messiah, and is the equivalent of the 
Greek word Christ, which means the Anointed One.) 

(3) They did not go to benighted heathen, speaking 
a different language. They did not say, "Our brethren 
and all the Jews here are already God's people and 
good enough and instructed enough by the scribes and 
Pharisees, and we will go and hunt up some outside Gentiles. 
They did not even say, "We will go and look up 

some of those sinners who are coming to John for baptism, 
and who ought to know about Messiah, the great 
Sin-Bearer." They did better than either of these things 
—they thought first of all about their own brethren, 
brethren according to the flesh, and in this case brethren 
also in religious faith and effort. There is a lesson here 
for us, easily applied: Our first duties lie toward those 
who are near to us as neighbors, friends, and especially 
as members of our own family circles. We should begin 
the proclamation of the Messiah whom we have found 
with them; then, after they fail to hear, or after they 
have heard the way of God, proclaim it to the next in 
turn, and so on and on. 

This is the very plan we are pursuing at the present 
time, and to which some of our dear friends in the various 
denominations object. They say, "Take your tracts and 
books to the sinners, or go to the heathen." We reply 
that the message ought to go first of all to those who 
ought to be the most ready for it. They answer us that 
they have Moses and the prophets and the doctrines 
of the Dark Ages, but we reply that these only obscurely 
disclose the real character and the plan of God, and the 
real Messiah and his great work. We fain would tell 
all of them who have ears to hear and hearts to appreciate 
the lengths and breadths and heights and depths, that 
they may appreciate with us the love of God which 
passeth all human understanding. This is our proper 
course, too, whether they hear or whether they forbear, 
and as the testimony goes on the circle will widen. It is 
widening, as reports in our last issue show. The knowledge 
of the King of kings and the Kingdom which he 
is about to establish is scattered throughout Great 
Britain, Scandinavia, Germany, France, Italy, Australia, 
etc. We seek to cultivate the best fields and find them 
nearest home, but as the numbers and implements increase 
we extend operations in the name of the Lord, 
and with the firm conviction that ultimately in this harvest 
time he will find every true heart, every one fitted 
to be a disciple. 

KNOWING JESUS AS THE MESSIAH. 



Many have seen or heard of Jesus as those who were 
with John the Baptist heard of him, but have not learned 
to know him as the Messiah— the Christ. This word 
Messiah covers a particular thought that to-day is very 
generally ignored amongst the Lord's professed followers. 
Remarkably few Christians know Jesus to be the 
Messiah at all. The word Messiah as already pointed out 
signifies the Anointed. The Jews, under the great promise 
made to Abraham, had been expecting a Messiah, 
a King, a Deliverer, who would exalt them as his special 
people and assistants, and use them in presenting the 
law of God to all peoples, nations and languages, and as 
authorized and empowered co-laborers to enforce those 
laws with rewards and penalties. 

The word Messiah, or Anointed, thus signifies the 
great King who was looked for— the great Prophet, 
Priest and King— for prophets, priests and kings under 
the divine arrangement were anointed to their offices, 
and thus signified that in due time Christ would combine 
all three of these qualities in himself, and associate his 
Church with himself in the exercise of the various offices 
as joint-heirs in his Kingdom. The Scriptures show us 
that Israel as a nation was found unworthy to enter 
into all these blessings and privileges, and that, after 
selecting the Israelites indeed from that nation, the Lord 
has been gathering to himself and associating with him 
as his Church, as his spiritual Israel, the faithful ones 
who have ears to hear and hearts to obey the same message 
from every nation, kindred, people and tongue. 

Thus we see that to recognize and speak of Jesus 
as the Messiah means to speak of him as the great King 
who ultimately shall reign to bless the whole world, 
as the great King whose joint-heirs in the Kingdom we 
hope to be,— members of his Bride. This grand work of 
the Redeemer and the grand privileges to which the 
elect are being called have been lost sight of under the 
delusions and misrepresentations of the Dark Ages, 
which have worked the minds of many of the Lord's 
people into a frenzy of confusion and fear of eternal 
torment, and led them to believe that escape from that 
torment was the salvation offered, causing this erroneous 

R3483 : page 9 

idea to take the place of the gracious hopes set before us 
in the Gospel, that if faithful we shall be heirs of God, 
joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord in the great Kingdom 
for which he taught us to pray, "Thy kingdom come, 
thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven." 

JESUS FOUND PHILIP. 

Note the varying methods of bringing the blessing 
to different persons. John the Baptist announced Jesus. 
Andrew and John heard him and sought the Lord. In 



turn they sought Peter and James, and now note a 
third method in Philip's case— the Lord himself found 
Philip. Particulars are not given, but we may be sure 
that in all these various findings the Lord had a hand, 
he was supervising. We are not to imagine that the 
Gospel work is left to chance. The Lord knoweth the 
heart, the Lord knoweth them that are his, and the 
Truth is specially sent to the Truth-hungry. We may 
safely say, all of us, that the Lord found us, else we 
should not be where we are or what we are. The poet 
has expressed this, saying, 

"Yet he found me; I beheld him bleeding on the accursed 

tree; 
And my wistful heart said faintly, 'Some of self and 

some of thee'." 

Nathanael's case was still different. Philip found 
him, but he was naturally sceptical, fearful that his 
friend was being led astray by a false hope to follow a 
false Messiah. Philip's message to him briefly summed 
up was, "We have found him of whom Moses in the Law 
and all the prophets did write." His name is Jesus, and 
he comes from a place called Nazareth. Nazareth did 
not have a very savory reputation for wisdom and piety. 
On the contrary, the Nazarenes were looked upon as 
rather a fanatical people, and Nathanael sceptically 
answered his friend Philip, Did you ever hear of anything 
good coming out of Nazareth?— what you say of this 
man seems to contradict any reasonable hope or expectation 
you may have. 

All along, in every sense of the word, the Lord has 
allowed his Truth and his plan to come through channels 
more or less impaired. Our Lord Jesus seemed to have 
something of this kind in mind when he said, "I thank 
thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou 
hast hid these things from the wise and prudent and hast 
revealed them unto babes: even so, Father; for so it 
seemed good in thy sight." (Luke 10:21.) The Lord hides 
his Truth in the sense of permitting it to come through 
unpopular channels. Sometimes the unpopularity is deserved 
and sometimes undeserved, but it always serves 
to keep away those who are not in the right attitude of 
heart. They are not, however, stumblings to the pure 
in heart, because the Lord will help them over these 
difficulties as he did in the case of Nathanael, under 
consideration. 

A WORTHY MAN'S CHALLENGE. 

Philip's answer was, "Come and see;" test the matter 
for yourself if you are not satisfied— I have nothing 
more to say. Although nothing is said specially respecting 
Philip's character, we may reasonably assume from 
this incident that he was a man whose word and manner 
and general character had weight, that he was not given 



to foolishness of thought or word or conduct, otherwise 
Nathanael would have said within himself, if he had not 
said it to Philip, "I know you anyway to be rather 
flighty, always going off at a tangent," or, "I know you 
to be a man of poor moral character, and the thing which 
would commend itself to you would be discredited in 
my judgment in advance." 

Alas, that such arguments should be forceful as 
against some of the Lord's followers who presume to 
invite others to him. In several instances we have 
known of the Present Truth being much injured by being 
advocated by some who were not of good character as 
well as by some not wise. It would be in the interest 
of the Truth that any such who have given their hearts 
to the Lord, and therefore have passed from the foolish 
and sinful condition to the justified relationship, should 
make well known the fact of their radical change, of 
their thorough conversion from sin to righteousness, 
from folly to wisdom, before they begin to invite their 
neighbors and friends to the Lord. 

Repentance and reformation are therefore placed in 
the forefront in the instructions given us through the 
Lord's Word respecting our coming to him and our discipleship 
and service. "To the wicked [the unrepentant, 
those not seeking to live according to the Lord's way, 
those walking after the flesh and not after the Spirit] 
God saith, What hast thou to do to take my name into 
thy mouth, seeing thou hatest instruction and castest 
my words behind thee." 

"THE MEEK WILL HE GUIDE IN JUDGMENT." 

When Jesus saw Nathanael he made the way very 
clear for his faith to accept. His salutation was, "Behold 
an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile." This 
gives us a suggestion that it is entirely right for us to 
express at proper times our confidence in the religious 
character of those with whom we are conversing. We 
are neither to say, neither to think, nor in any sense of 
the word to manifest a doubt of the sincerity of all who 
are not fully with us in every point of faith and doctrine. 
On the contrary, we are to realize that any one whom we 
may expect to find interested in the message we have to 
present must beforehand be an Israelite indeed, without 
guile, without hypocrisy— otherwise the Truth would 
not appeal to his heart and the Lord would not bless 
him in connection with our service and message. 

Nathanael evidently took it that the Lord was 
flattering him, and he rather repelled at first this forwardness 
on the Lord's part to speak of him in such 
praiseworthy terms without a knowledge of him, and 
he answered, "Whence knowest thou me?" Our Lord's 
answer shows clearly the divine care over all who are 
in the right attitude of heart, and how the Lord himself 
has the direction of his message and his ministers that 
they may find all the true wheat. With this in mind 



we have every assurance that not a single grain will be 
left with the tares in the field— that all will be gathered 
into the "barn" condition of glory. 

The Lord's answer was, "I saw thee under the fig-tree 
before Philip called thee." How much that meant 
to Nathanael! He doubtless had already heard about 
his friend Philip having accepted one who was proclaimed 
the Messiah, he doubtless was fearful for himself 
as well as for Philip; and under these circumstances 
went to a fig-tree as a closet for prayer, for the fig-tree 
has foliage which hangs low and would constitute it 
quite an arbor or shelter and a very suitable place for 
privacy and prayer. 

R3483 : page 10 

We are not told of what took place under the fig-tree, 
but we are at some liberty to imagine that an 
Israelite indeed in whom was no guile there prayed to 
the heavenly Father for wisdom, for guidance, for instruction, 
for protection from deception, whether it 
came through his friend Philip or however it might come, 
that he might not be misled into following a false Messiah. 
And now to hear this one refer to his very prayer, 
his very petition, of which not a soul in the world had 
knowledge, and to tell him that this was before Philip 
had called him, meant to Nathanael that the Lord had 
supervised in the matter and had full knowledge of all 
his affairs, and therefore he had the assurance that the 
one he had come to under the guidance of Philip was none 
other than 

"THE SON OF GOD, THE KING OF ISRAEL." 

Addressing Nathanael and the other disciples incidentally, 
our Lord said, "Because I said unto thee, I 
saw thee under the fig-tree, believest thou? thou shalt 
see greater works than these," than this sure evidence 
of my Messiahship. As an Israelite indeed you are in 
the attitude of heart which would permit you to receive 
the Lord's blessing and to have the eyes of your understanding 
opened wider and wider to an appreciation of 
the lengths and breadths and heights and depths of the 
Lord's great plan of salvation which centers in me. 
"Verily, verily I say unto you, hereafter ye [all of my 
disciples, all who will follow me in the narrow way] 
shall see heaven opened and the angels of God ascending 
and descending upon the Son of man." 

Our Lord evidently by this expression called the 
attention of his hearers and of all his followers back to 
the days of Jacob and the vision which he had at Bethel, 
in which he saw a ladder reaching from earth to heaven 
on which angels of God were ascending and descending. 
Our Lord would have us understand that Jacob's vision 
was a pictorial illustration of the methods of divine grace: 
that our Lord himself was the ladder upon which communication 



between heaven and earth would be reestablished. 
And so, as our eyes of understanding open, we 
increasingly see this is the case. Upon this ladder, upon 
this connecting link between heaven and earth, between 
God and man, have descended to us the angels of divine 
favor, messages of love and mercy, forgiveness and adoption, 
and on this same ladder are messages returned to 
the Father, our prayers. We are accepted in the Beloved, 
we enter into the holies by faith, we receive the incoming 
and send back again the outgoing messages and messengers, 
and all of them upon the ladder, the connecting 
link, the Son of man, our Lord and Master, through 
whom alone we have access and relationship to the 
Father, and receive from him the exceeding great and 
precious things not only of this present life but also of 
that which is to come. 



R3487 : page 10 

MY BEAUTIFUL SECRET. 

"I have learned a beautiful secret, 
I know not how or where— 

But I know it is sweet and precious, 
And true, and glad, and fair; 

And that God in heaven reveals it 
To all that have ears to hear. 

"And I know that ere I learned it, 
My way was weary and hard, 

And somewhere in life's music 

There was always that which jarred- 

A hidden and dreary discord, 
That all its sweetness marred. 

"But my harp of life was lifted 
By One who knew the range 

Of its many strings— for he made it, 
And he struck a keynote strange; 

And beneath the touch of the Master 
I heard the music change. 

"No longer it failed and faltered; 

No longer sobbed and strove; 
But it seemed to soar and mingle 

With the song of heaven above; 
For the pierced hand of the Master 

Had struck the keynote— Love. 

"Thy heart's long-prisoned music 
Let the Master's hand set free! 

Let him whisper his beautiful secret 
To thee, as he hath to me: 

'My Love is the Golden Keynote 



Of all my will for thee.'" 

— E. D. Cherry. 



R3484 : page 10 

FILLED AND TRANSFORMED. 

--JOHN 2:1-11. -JANUARY 22.- 

"Whatsoever he saith unto you, do it." 

CANA of Galilee was the home city of Nathanael, 
one of the latest additions to the number of our 
Lord's disciples. He was one of six who had now 
given their adherence to Jesus as the Messiah. Apparently 
Nathanael had invited our Lord and the other disciples to 
be his guests at Cana, where a marriage feast was about to 
be held. Mary, the mother of Jesus, was present at the 
feast, doubtless as a very close friend of the family, as 
indicated by her knowledge in advance that the wine 
supply was running short. The customary hospitality 
of the Jews on such occasions would make it a serious 
breach of etiquette not to supply an abundance for their 
guests, as well as for neighbors and passers by, who, in 
the name of the bridegroom, would be urged to enter 
and partake of the hospitalities freely. Jesus and his 
disciples were amongst the specially invited guests. 

Our Lord's mother brought to his attention the 
shortage of wine, and from this it has been assumed that 
she anticipated the miracle. We cannot agree to the 
reasonableness of this suggestion, because it is particularly 

R3484 : page 1 1 

stated that the miraculous creation of wine on this 
occasion was the beginning of Jesus' miracles. We 
must suppose, therefore, that Mary's long acquaintance 
with and dependance on her son had made her aware 
of his superior judgment and resourcefulness in all 
events and on all occasions. The matter was beyond 
her control, and, as was often the case with those in 
moderate circumstances, the bridegroom had probably 
spent all that he could afford to expend in preparations. 
Probably also, in anticipation of our Lord's presence at 
the marriage feast, a larger number of neighbors called 
on his account— to see the stranger of whom they had 
heard more or less through Nathanael and others. 

JESUS SOCIABLE IN THE HOME. 

This narrative gives us a little glimpse of the social 
side of our Lord's character, and convinces us that the 
asceticism illustrated by monks and nuns was not a part 
of his teaching either in word or example. His consecrated 



life was lived in the midst of the ordinary social 
conditions bearing upon any member of a moral and 
religious community. There is no suggestion of revelry 
or foolishness in our Lord's conduct, but it is reasonable 
to assume that he participated in the proper joys 
and fellowships and social amenities of such an occasion. 
This was in harmony with his own injunction to his followers, 
"Rejoice with those that do rejoice, and weep 
with those that weep." 

What every home needs is not only a visit from 
Jesus, but that it should be his home, his abiding place. 
It would be a safe rule of life for all of the Lord's followers 
to desire to go to any place they would have 
reason to believe the Lord would go if he were again 
present in the flesh; it would be a safe rule for us to do 
or say such things as we would have reason to expect 
that our Lord would do or say were he present in our 
stead. Blessings, we may be sure, went with the dear 
Master wherever he went, specially to those who like 
Nathanael were Israelites indeed, in whose hearts there 
was no guile. 

When we remember that the word disciple means 
pupil or learner, and that all of the Lord's people are 
his disciples (though not all apostles), it gives us a suggestion 
that each disciple represents the Lord— that where 
we go he goes, that we are his representatives or "ambassadors. 
With this thought before our minds how 
careful we each should be to properly represent our 
glorious Lord;— to "show forth the praise of him who 
hath called us out of darkness into his marvelous light." 
To this end how we need to pray, not only with our lips 
but also with our hearts, "Let the words of my mouth 
and the meditations of my heart be acceptable in thy 
sight, O Lord, my strength and my Redeemer." Verily 
"as he was so are we in this world." (1 John 4:17.) 
"The world knoweth us not, even as it knew him not," 
but our duty on all occasions is just the same: his message 
is that we shall let our light shine before men, that 
they seeing our good works may glorify our Father in 
heaven. 

"PEACE BE TO THIS HOUSE." 

A suggestion respecting the influences accompanying 
the Lord's disciples— which influences, we believe, 
surely accompanied his own presence on all such occasions 
—is represented by his commission to his apostles 
when he sent them forth. They were to say, "Peace be 
upon this house," before entering. We do not take it 
that this is a command that we should openly and formally 
make such a declaration before entering any building, 
but we do believe that this should be the heart 
sentiment of every one of the Lord's consecrated people 
—their desire, their effort, their aim— that peace and 
blessing may accompany them wherever they may go, 
resting, refreshing and uplifting the hearts of the poor 



groaning creation with whom they come in contact. 

There are plenty of strife-breeders in the world 
whose entry of the portals of any home means, Strife be 
within these walls, whether they realize it or say it or 
not. Full of anger, malice, hatred and strife, their 
hearts speak forth of the abundance within, breeding 
discontent and unhappiness. With others who have 
passed that condition of bitterness of soul in malice and 
strife, and who have set their faces to walk in the Lord's 
footsteps, after the Spirit and not after the flesh, and 
who therefore are putting away those works of the flesh 
and the devil, some time will surely elapse before they 
are filled with the spirit of love: and in that interim, 
before they are so filled with peace and joy and the fruits 
of the Spirit as to overflow these in blessings wherever 
they go, there is apt to be a period in which evil speaking, 
back-biting, evil insinuations, evil surmisings, unkindnesses, 
ungentleness of word and conduct, impatience, 
etc., will be manifested. 

The influence of such, even though they be pupils in 
Christ, is a carnal influence, highly injurious to spiritual 
development, calculated to stop growth in the various 
graces and to disturb the peace and joy of their own 
hearts and the hearts of others who are seeking the right 
ways of the Lord. The lesson for us of the Lord's followers 
is not only to turn from sin to righteousness and 
from anger and envy and malice to love, but to keep the 
heart fully filled with the latter, so that out of its abundance 
of love and joy and peace our mouth may speak 
and our conduct may show our relationship and likeness 
to our Lord, that men may take knowledge of us 
that we have been with Jesus and have learned of him. 

"HONOR THY FATHER AND THY MOTHER." 

Our Lord's reply to his mother's suggestion appears 
rather cold and harsh, but this is largely the result of the 
translation. While the word "woman" is a proper translation, 
it does not give the elegant shading of the Greek 
original, which would more nearly signify lady. The 
word is the same, for instance, that the Emperor of 
Rome used in complimentary address to the Queen of 
Egypt, "Take courage, O woman." We may be sure 
that neither by word nor act did our Lord violate the 
commandment of the Law, "Honor thy father and thy 
mother." We may be sure that in all his words and 
conduct he was a very model of the meekness and gentleness, 
patience and love which his doctrines inculcated. 

The expression, "What have I to do with thee?" 
would seem more properly to signify, "Do not attempt 
to dictate to me— I will know what to do when the 
appropriate time comes." Mary probably was intent 
upon hiding the fact of the shortage of the wine: Jesus 
on the other hand recognized that the miracle he was 
about to perform was less for the assistance of the bridegroom 
of the occasion than for a great lesson which, 



through the servants, probably became known to the 
entire company. Jesus therefore waited until the supply 

R3484:page 12 

was not only running low but exhausted, until there 
was no wine, so that the miracle would not be minimized 
by the admixture of the new with the old. 

Mary's word to the servants, "Whatsoever he saith 
unto you, do it," was a further evidence that she was on 
terms of very close intimacy in that home. The servants 
properly enough would need such instructions, for otherwise 
they would not be prepared to take orders from 
one of the guests. Mary probably had no knowledge of 
what the Lord would command the servants to do, but, 
as before suggested, she had confidence in her son's resourcefulness 
and wisdom, and that as one of the guests 
whose entertainment had helped to exhaust the wine he 
would be pleased to take some steps to assist in replenishing 
the supply. 

Here a question arises respecting the kind of wine 
provided by the bridegroom of which Jesus and his disciples 
evidently partook, and also respecting the kind of 
wine which the Lord subsequently produced and of 
which he probably partook. We know of nothing to 
indicate that this was merely grape juice unfermented. 
Everything seems to teach the reverse of this, that it 
was slightly alcoholic— the alcohol being produced in the 
wine through the processes of fermentation, resulting in 
what is known as "light wines." The remark of the 
governor of the feast that the wine which Jesus made 
was better than that at first supplied would, we think, 
support this theory, but it would not imply that the 
people were drunk, intoxicated, and that they had thus 
lost their taste or judgment. 

In our view there is a great difference between 
present conditions and those of our Lord's time. Those 
people of a warmer country were accustomed to drinking 
light wines, in very much the same manner that we 
to-day drink water, tea, coffee, etc., and they had no 

R3485 : page 12 

deleterious effects, and the same may be said of the 
people of some parts of Europe to-day. Besides, it was 
in a slower age and amongst people more moderate in 
every way. In our day, with everything done under 
pressure and nervous excitement, alcoholic stimulants 
of every kind seem to be poisonous to very many; it 
seems to be next to impossible for people to use such 
stimulants moderately. 

It is for this reason alone that total abstinence may 
be recommended— because of the "present distress," because 
of the increased expenditure of nervous energy 
and consequent increased danger of inebriety, and not 
because the Scriptures specially enjoin total abstinence. 



It is our conviction that if the Lord were present in the 
flesh to-day under our present conditions, circumstances, 
etc., he would rank amongst the most abstemious, because 
if such abstention were not necessary for himself, 
we believe that his love and sympathy for the weak, 
fallen race would impel him to avoid being anything 
like a stumbling-stone in the way of any of them. 

WATER-POTS FILLED FULL. 

In those days they did not have hydrants, pumps, 
etc., but kept the water for family use in large earthen 
vessels called water-pots. On such an occasion as this 
an extra quantity would be needed, and quite probably 
water-pots had been borrowed from neighbors. They 
were of different sizes but all quite large, two firkins 
represented by eighteen gallons and three firkins by 
twenty-seven gallons, or nine gallons each firkin. It 
was the custom to use this water supply specially for 
washing the vessels of the household and the hands and 
feet of the guests, hence the need of so great a supply. 

When the proper time came for the performance of 
the miracle our Lord instructed that water be fetched 
and that these six water-pots be filled to the brim. This 
use of the ordinary water -jars would prevent any suspicion 
of their containing any powders or mixtures that 
might constitute a basis for the miracle, and the filling 
of them to the brim would likewise hinder anyone from 
thinking that something was added to the water by our 
Lord. Besides, the water thus rising to the surface 
where it could be seen would show its own clearness and 
purity. 

The change from water to wine was evidently instantaneous, 
for our Lord at once directed them to draw 
the wine and serve first the governor of the feast, who 
would thus have a knowledge of the fresh supply. The 
latter commented upon the new wine as superior to the 
first, and remarked to the host that usually the best was 
given first, when the palate would be the more keen to 
detect the quality. This was a testimony to the excellence 
of the wine which Jesus made. We cannot think 
that at an ordinary feast simple grape-juice would be regarded 
as superior wine, nor on the other hand need we 
suppose that the wine which Jesus made contained such 
a proportion of alcohol as would make it injurious to the 
users. 

But there was another reason why the vessels were 
filled to the brim with the pure water: they were symbolical, 
they represented the Lord's people in this present 
time. Water is used in the Scriptures as a symbol of 
life, the "water of life." It particularly figures or illustrates 
natural or human life, as, for instance, in Revelation 22:17, 
where the symbol is given of the Spirit and 
the Bride during the Millennial age saying to the world 
of mankind, "Come, partake of the water of life freely." 
It represents the restitution work, the revival of mankind 



from the power of death, the infusion of the restitution 
life. 

OUR TREASURE IN EARTHEN VESSELS. 

In these earthen vessels the water had been considerably 
exhausted, there was very little remaining in 
each vessel. So with us as members of the human family, 
our life forces are well exhausted through the fall. The 
Jews, as God's favored people under the typical Law 
Covenant, were justified to a certain extent, but not in 
the full sense of the word— not justified to life— and the 
filling up of the water-pots with water to the brim represented 
or foreshadowed the full and complete justification 
to life, to all human rights and privileges reckonedly 
granted to all who become the Lord's followers. As 
the Apostle expresses it, "Being justified by faith we 
have peace with God." 

But the figure or illustration goes further and shows 
us the transforming of these justified lives, the impartation 
of a new nature by miraculous change. The 
thought is expressed by the Apostle when he says that 
we are transformed by the renewing of our minds, we 
become New Creatures. 

The change of the water to wine, therefore, represents 
the change of the justified being, constituting him 
a new creation in Christ Jesus. As the water will represent 
the justification, so the wine will represent the 

R3485 : page 13 

superior joys of the Spirit granted to those who through 
faith and a full consecration attain to the begetting of 
the Spirit— an adoption into the spiritual family. True, 
these joys at present are not as real as they will be by 
and by— they are joys of hope, of anticipation, which 
we have in earthly vessels, as the Apostle declares. By 
and by, however, according to the Lord's promise, a 
share in the Lord's resurrection will give us the new 
vessels, the golden vessels, the perfect conditions in 
which our joys and favors will be realized and appreciated 
to the full. There is a hint of this in our Lord's 
declaration at the last supper that those who would 
drink of his cup of suffering and self-sacrifice in the 
present time would by and by share with him the new 
wine, the divine nature and life and joys in the 
Kingdom. 

This discernment of a spiritual signification in the 
wine is in full accord with the statement of our last verse 
of the lesson, which assures us that our Lord's miracles, 
etc., manifested forth— that is, beforehand— his coming 
glory and the blessings which he will then bestow upon 
his faithful. 

"The best is yet to be, 
The last of life, for which the first was planned." 



R3485 : page 13 

ESSENTIALS TO A SHARE IN THE KINGDOM. 

--JOHN 3: 1-16. -JANUARY 29.- 

"For God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten 
Son, that whosoever believeth on him should not 
perish, but have everlasting life." 

THE visit of Nicodemus, a Jewish ruler, to our Lord 

was evidently early in our Lord's ministry. We 

know little of the man, except that on various occasions 

he manifested sincerity and considerable faith in our 

Lord and sympathy with his cause. It was this same man 

who defended our Lord in a discussion amongst the 

Pharisees and priests respecting him. He said, "Does 

our Law judge any man before it hear him?" whereupon 

his fellow-rulers said, "Art thou also one of his 

disciples?" Nicodemus was not ready to affirm discipleship 

even then, but that his sympathy continued 

with the Lord is evidenced by the fact that he was one 

of the prominent men who requested the privilege of 

burying our Lord's body after the crucifixion. We know 

not what may have been the end of his course, but we 

fear that while he was too good to be an opponent of the 

Truth he had not enough stamina of character to be one 

of the Lord's disciples. Herein we have a lesson which 

each should apply to himself. The Lord is seeking disciples 

who are willing to take up their cross and follow 

him, after having counted the cost. Such as shrink from 

paying the cost of discipleship cannot be disciples, cannot 

share the Kingdom, whatever blessings the Lord 

may have in reservation for them in connection with or 

under the Kingdom. 

We cannot reasonably find fault with Nicodemus 
for coming to Jesus by night. Throughout the day our 
Lord was busy teaching, and a visit then would have 
been more or less an interruption; besides, Nicodemus 
had no right to cast the influence of his presence and 
office on the side of our Lord until he had in some 
degree satisfied himself on the subject. Nevertheless, 
the entire character of Nicodemus seems lacking 
in courage, for even at the time he presented himself to 
our Lord on this occasion he declared his conviction that 
he was a teacher sent from God and that he believed the 
miracles to be genuine. With that much evidence in 
hand he would have been fully justified in going to our 
Lord in a public way, acknowledging as much as he saw, 
and asking for further proofs. 

BEGOTTEN AGAIN-BORN AGAIN. 



Nicodemus had the Jewish hopes, and evidently was 
one of those in expectation of Messiah, and the Kingdom 
which Messiah was to establish for the blessing of 
Israel and the world. The entire conversation is evidently 
not given, but the Lord's answer implies that the inquiry 
of Nicodemus was along these lines— the Messianic 
Kingdom and the conditions of membership therein. 

Our Lord promptly put the matter in a very plain 
light, assuring his visitor that no one could have the 
Kingdom unless born again. A little later in the conversation 
he added that no one could enter into the 
Kingdom except by being born again, (v. 5.) The 
word "born" is properly enough used in both these 
instances, and thus we learn that the Lord had reference 
to the future— reference to the resurrection birth 
described by the Apostle in 1 Corinthians 15:42-44— 
born from the dead to the glory, honor and immortality, 
and a share in the Kingdom, assured to those who have 

R3486 : page 13 

part in the first resurrection. These all will be spirit 
beings, and with their Lord will constitute the spiritual 
Kingdom, which will be invisible to mankind in general 
—invisible to all its earthly subjects, as Satan the prince 
of this world is invisible to mankind. 

Nicodemus discerned that there was something here 
far beyond anything he had contemplated. As a Jew 
he had been looking for and waiting for an earthly kingdom 
and an earthly King, but now he was informed that 
only by passing through a change, a begetting and a new 
birth to a new nature, could he hope ever to participate 
in or even to see the Kingdom of God. No wonder he 
was astonished and inquired further respecting the new 
birth. Would it be like the first birth? Would those 
who would be heirs of the Kingdom be born again as 
they once had been born of a mother? 

Our Lord's answer to the query is given. To be begotten 
of an earthly father and later to be born of an 
earthly mother would insure that the progeny would be 
earthly also— that which is begotten and born of the 
flesh is flesh. There is, however, a likeness between such 
an earthly birth and the new birth necessary to a share 
in the Kingdom. There must be a begetting, "not of 
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, 
but of God." (John 1:13.) There must also be a period 
of gestation for this spiritual new creature that will 
precede its resurrection birth. Thus all who will share 
in the spiritual Kingdom as spirit beings must first be 
begotten of the Spirit and subsequently be developed of 
the Spirit, growing in all of its fruits and graces, and ultimately 
be born of the Spirit, born from the dead a spiritual 
being like the Lord and a sharer in his glory, honor 

R3486 : page 14 



and immortality. That which is begotten and born of 
the Spirit is spirit, is not flesh— "flesh and blood cannot 
inherit the Kingdom of heaven." 

Nicodemus still marveled at such teaching. Could 
it be possible that himself and all the great teachers of 
the Jewish nation had such a misconception of the Kingdom! 
This was indeed true, and similarly we might say 
that a great many to-day have equally erroneous conceptions 
of the Kingdom, although not in every particular 
the same errors that beclouded the mind of Nicodemus 
and others of the prominent Jews. The difficulty 
to-day in this harvest of the Gospel age is that our Lord's 
words above quoted and which seem so plain are misunderstood, 
and supposed to refer not at all to the resurrection 
but entirely to the begetting of the present time. 

This is in part at least the fault of the translators 
of our common version Bible, who, knowing that the 
same Greek word is translated both "begotten" and 
"born" in our English language, have not properly distinguished 
between these, nor given English readers the 
proper knowledge that there are two thoughts behind 
this one word— the thought of begetting and, after gestation, 
ultimately birth. Few enough of Christian people 
have any clear conception of what begetting of the 
Spirit signifies, and their confusion is doubled when they 
are told that they are now born of the Spirit. No wonder 
that the majority of Christian people are in such 
perplexity on this subject, and would not know what to 
say if asked whether or not they were begotten of the 
Spirit, or what they mean when they express the hope 
that they have been born of the Spirit. 

Every Christian should know of the Lord's promise 
to accept him to a new nature through begettal of the 
holy Spirit;— should know that his justified heart has 
been fully consecrated to the Lord, should know that 
he has been begotten of the holy Spirit, which is the 
earnest or begetting to the new nature, which, if maintained, 
will ultimately be born of the Spirit in the 
resurrection. 

AN ILLUSTRATION OF A SPIRIT-BORN BEING. 

Our Lord admonishes Nicodemus that he must not 
be too much surprised at the great mistake he and others 
had made in regard to the terms and conditions which 
would qualify them for a place in the Kingdom; they 
should marvel not, but realize the necessity of being born 
again— of attaining to the first resurrection if they would 
be members of the Kingdom class. 

Our Lord's illustration respecting such Spirit-begotten 
ones is very clear and explicit. Nicodemus could 
understand about the blowing wind, which had power 
but was invisible. Our Lord explained to him that this 
illustrated the character of the beings born of the Spirit; 
they will be like the wind, which can go and come, can 
be heard and to some extent felt, but which cannot be 



seen— "Thus is every one that is born of the Spirit." 
Likewise Nicodemus, or whoever else would be an heir 
of the Kingdom, must experience such a great change or 
transformation, such a birth of the Spirit, which would 
make them like the angels, invisible, able to go and come 
without being seen of men. 

Nicodemus, marveling still more at this explanation 
of the first resurrection and the character of those 
who would have part in it, exclaimed, "How can these 
things be!" Is it possible! Our Lord's answer was 
that a ruler in Israel should have comprehended these 
things. Evidently, therefore, a proper study of the matter 
from the scriptural standpoint might have led true 
Israelites indeed to more or less of an appreciation of 
the character of the Kingdom in advance of its coming. 
While they would not have been able to appreciate any 
of its details, they might have understood better than 
they did. They were content to live on too low a plane; 
they did not enjoy all the knowledge available because 
probably too self-satisfied, because they did not sufficiently 
hunger and thirst after the Truth. 

This our Lord declares is the reason why Nicodemus 
and his fellow officials, the Doctors of the Jewish Church, 
were not ready for his message, not ready to receive the 
Truth— "We speak that we do know, and testify that 
we have seen, and ye receive not our witness"— our 
message. 

Our Lord continues: You would like to have me 
explain about this spiritual Kingdom, its operations, etc., 
but this I cannot do; you are not in condition to receive 
my word. "If I told you earthly things and you believed 
not, how shall you believe if I tell you of heavenly 
things?" The person who cannot grasp with clearness 
and distinctness the features of God's plan which relate 
to the world in general, certainly need not expect that he 
would be in any condition to understand or appreciate 
the things which pertain to the spiritual conditions, which 
are higher and therefore more difficult of comprehension. 

NATURAL VS. SPIRITUAL THINGS. 

Evidently Nicodemus was inquiring particularly respecting 
the heavenly Kingdom to which the Lord had 
referred. He was desirous of measuring with his judgment 
the probabilities of such a Kingdom as our Lord 
had announced. Many of our day look at the matter 
similarly, and refuse to believe the things beyond the 
range of their natural senses— they lack the sixth sense of 
faith, or spiritual apprehension. As our Lord explained, 
the difficulty lies in the fact that they have not thoroughly 
believed the Lord's testimony in respect to earthly 
things— they have not thoroughly subjected their minds 
to him. Only after faith and obedience respecting earthly 
things, and a full consecration of our hearts to the 
Lord, need we expect the begetting of the Spirit, which 
would enable us to grasp mentally by faith some of the 



exceeding great and precious things which God hath in 
reservation for them that specially love him— for the 
Church as the Bride, the Lamb's Wife. 

Neither need those who have the spiritual sense 
expect to understand spiritual things with the full comprehensiveness 
with which they grasp earthly matters. 
The things not seen as yet— which "eye hath not seen 
nor ear heard, neither hath it entered into the heart of 
man"— are "revealed unto us by his Spirit," as the Lord 
declares. He does not go into particulars with us, but 
in general terms tells us of glory, honor, immortality and 
joint-heirship with his Son as Kings and Priests and 
Judges of the world. In a general way we may grasp 
this matter after we have come into proper relationship 
to the Lord; we grasp it as a whole and not in its details, 
which are not revealed. What we do see, however, is 
almost overwhelming in its grandeur, and with the Apostle 
we assure ourselves that these are indeed exceeding 
great and precious promises, by which we may attain to 
the divine nature.— 2 Peter 1:4. 

NO MAN HATH ASCENDED UP. 

Continuing his argument, that Nicodemus must 
receive by faith whatever he would know about heavenly 
things and that he would be entirely dependant upon 
Jesus' word, our Lord remarked that no man ever ascended 

R3486 : page 15 

up to heaven, and that himself, the Son of man, 
who alone had come down from heaven, was alone able 
to speak with knowledge and authority respecting heavenly 
matters. This is still the case. There is but one 
testimony respecting these heavenly things— our Lord's 
own words while in the flesh and his subsequent revelations 
through the holy Spirit by the apostles. We 
must accept this testimony, for there is no other. 

Here we note the peculiar and unsatisfactory condition 
of the world in general— not only of the heathen 
but also of the learned professors of Christendom, who 
deny our Lord's prehuman existence and deny the revelations 
he has since made through his apostles. (John 16:13,14; 
Rev. 1:1.) The heathen believe things pertaining 
to an invisible realm, a spiritual or heavenly 
state, but without evidence except such as comes to 
them through the fallen spirits. In civilized lands those 
who reject our Lord's revelation on the subject have 
nothing whatever to base their faith upon, except such 
unsatisfactory evidences as they obtain through Spiritualists 

R3487 : page 15 

—whose knowledge and manifestations we hold, 
according to the Scriptures, are from the same evil origin 
as those of the heathen— the fallen angels who personate 



the human dead. Respecting the latter our Lord in 
this verse distinctly tells us that they have not ascended 
to heaven: elsewhere (John 5:29) he tells us that they 
are in their graves— that they are dead, and will so remain 
until his power and authority shall call them forth 
again to being. The Apostle Peter's testimony respecting 
the Prophet, David, one of the ancient worthies, is 
along the same line. He declares, "David is not ascended 
into the heavens."— Acts 2:34. 

The last three words of the 13th verse are spurious. 
They were not in the original manuscript, and are not 
found in the oldest Greek manuscript discovered about 
half a century ago, the Sinaitic. These words were 
doubtless added by some well-meaning person who wished 
to express his faith that the Lord had risen and ascended 
on high; he did not notice that the addition of 
these words makes nonsense as they are placed— they 
would make Jesus say that he was in heaven at the time 
he was talking to Nicodemus. How important it is that 
we have a knowledge of the unadulterated Word of God. 
We must neither add to nor take from it; and when we 
find, as in this case, that some one either intentionally 
or unintentionally added these words to the original text, 
we should cancel them and thus free ourselves from the 
confusion they would otherwise create. A similar instance 
of an improper addition to the Lord's Word is 
found in the last verse of John's Gospel, which is a most 
palpable untruth, and is omitted from the oldest Greek 
manuscript, the Sinaitic. Another similar case is the 
first sentence of Revelation 20:5. Concerning this latter 
see MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. I., page 288, foot note. 

UPLIFTED LIKE MOSES' SERPENT. 

Our Lord did not stop with a mere answer to his 
visitor's questions about the Kingdom being heavenly, 
but proceeded to give him in brief form an outline of the 
entire plan of salvation. He reminded him of the Israelites 
bitten by the fiery serpents in the wilderness, and 
that God had directed Moses to lift on a pole a copper 
serpent, to which the Israelites who would exercise faith 
might look and receive healing. Our Lord announced 
that he was to be the antitype of this; that he would be 
lifted up on the cross and thus made to appear as the 
sinner— to take the place of the sinner— so that the 
whole world of mankind, bitten by sin and dying as a 
result, might look unto him by faith and be healed. 

What a wonderful condensation of a great truth the 
Lord here expressed! It was the typical lesson of his 
own substitution as man's Redeemer and sin bearer, 
and clearly taught that faith in him as such is essential 
to a recovery from the fall and its results. This 
blessed privilege of looking to the Lord and being healed 
is already accorded to such as hear the message and 
accept it— "Look and live!" Believers who now by 
faith can realize their sins forgiven are thrice blessed. 



But we thank God that his provision is not merely for 
those who now have the hearing ear and the eye of faith, 
but that eventually all the blind eyes shall be opened 
and all the deaf ears unstopped, and the message, "Look 
and live!" and again, "Partake of the water of life freely," 
will be heard by every member of Adam's race, that 
each may have a full and fair opportunity of acquiring 
his share of the blessings secured for Adam and all his 
race by Christ's death. 

Thus eventually it will be not only whosoever believeth, 
but all who will have the necessary conditions 
to permit them to believe, to permit them to enjoy their 
share of the gift of God, eternal life through Jesus Christ 
our Lord. 

THE GOLDEN TEXT. 

Our Golden Text is a wonderful verse, and all the 
more wonderful the more we understand of the lengths 
and breadths and heights and depths of the divine plan 
of salvation. Luther, who grasped the Gospel message 
more fully than many of his day, and yet less fully than 
we see the reality to be, called this verse the "little 
Bible." We would express the same in the words, "the 
Gospel in a nut shell." The whole message of God is 
contained in a condensed form in these words: 

(1) Man's need is shown— his perishing condition, 
his need of divine help. 

(2) God's love is declared, and the proof of it is 
pointed out to be the gift of his Son. 

(3) Our Lord's willing cooperation in the Father's 
plan is evidenced. 

(4) The lengths and breadths of this love and redemption 
are declared to embrace the whole world, and 

not merely a section, a family or class. 

(5) The limitations of divine grace are plainly stated: 
only through a true acceptance of Christ can any 
obtain this great blessing— release from the perishing 
conditions of the curse and full reinstatement in the divine 
favor and its blessed reward of life everlasting. 

Thus this Gospel statement assures us that there is no 

hope for the heathen in their ignorance, and points us, 

as do other Scriptures, for all hope respecting them to 

the future, when the voice of the Son of man who redeemed 

them shall call all from the grave, to the intent 

that all may attain to resurrection perfection under the 

judgments of the Millennial age. "When the judgments 

of the Lord are abroad in the earth, the inhabitants 

of the world will learn righteousness;" and many 

who have gone down into the tomb under the curse, and 

in ignorance of the only name given under heaven and 

amongst men, shall ultimately be blessed as they shall 

hear of the great salvation God has provided, and if they 

shall accept it upon God's terms. 



page 17 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
VOL. XXVI. JANUARY 15, 1905. No. 2 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 19 

Jewish Comment on Mr. Zangwill's Mission 19 

The Scotch Presbyterian Church 19 

The New Hell 20 

British Workmen Criticized 21 

Church Federation Within Ten Years 21 

Poor Russia's Pitiable Plight 21 

Election vs. Free Grace 21 

Increasing Influence of Spiritism 23 

The Purpose of Miracles 28 

The Satisfying Water of Life 30 

Public Ministries of the Truth 32 

Special Items 18 

page 18 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2 l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



YOUNG'S CONCORDANCE IN GREAT BRITAIN. 



By a special arrangement we can for a limited time 
make a very special price for Young's Concordance to 
friends residing in Great Britain. We can supply the 
cloth edition for 3s. 6d.; the same in half leather binding 
for 12s. 6d. Any of the British friends wanting 
these books should order them at once, as the price may 
be advanced on us any day. These prices are less than 
half the regular retail rates and include carriage. All 
orders should be sent to British Branch, 24 Eversholt 
St., London, N.W. These books cannot be imported 
into the United States on account of copyright laws. 
Prices on the American edition, for friends in this country, 
will be found in issue of Dec. 1, '04. 

PILGRIM REQUESTS. 



In our issue for Dec. 15, 1903, a series of questions 
was given for use of those desiring Pilgrim visits for last 
year. A new set of questions will appear in April 1st 
issue. All requests for Pilgrims filed last year will hold 
good until new questions are published. 

"HEAVENLY MANNA" IN STOCK. 



This new Table-Talk Text Book was somewhat delayed 
in printing, but is now in stock, and all orders are 
being promptly filled. Besides the cloth edition at 20c 
postpaid, we have a leather edition— full gilt, side, back 
and edges— very handsome also, 60c postpaid. 

Heavy correspondence at this season has hindered us 
somewhat in promptly acknowledging orders and remittances. 
We trust the friends will have patience until 
we are fully caught up again. 

SOLON JOURNAL DELAYED. 



All fully paid TOWER subscriptions for 1905 will include 
4 months' issues of the Solon Journal, with every 
privilege accorded to "Solons" for same period. The 
Solon Journal publishers, we understand, are being hindered 
from mailing their issue for January by Post Office 
official who do not understand the large increase in 
the Solon lists occasioned by our liberal "clubbing" arrangement. 
We feel sure that our readers will appreciate 



our zeal for their interests. 

LOOK AT YOUR ADDRESS LABEL. 



DO YOU WANT YOUR WATCH TOWER CONTINUED? 

If so write to us at once, as we are about to free our 
list of the names of the uninterested, so far as possible. 

If poor you are welcome to it free, paid for out of a 
special fund provided for the purpose. If you are short 
of money now and want it on credit say so. Postal 
card requests will do. The address shows the date at 
which we should have heard from you at least by card. 



INSTEAD OF FOREIGN TRACTS, hereafter use Foreign 
TOWERS. Order all the sample copies you can use judiciously, 
FREE. 



R3487 : page 19 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
JEWISH COMMENT ON MR. ZANGWILL'S MISSION. 



ISRAEL ZANGWILL, the author and playwright, 
has come to this country to interest leading 
Jewish citizens in the establishment of a Zionist 
colony in British East Africa. The plan he advocates 
was projected at the last Zionist congress in Basle, 
and has a practical interest, in view of the British 
Government's declared willingness to set aside a large 
tract of land on the Nandi Plateau, Uganda, for purposes 
of Jewish colonization. As Mr. Zangwill explains 
(in an interview reported in the New York 
Times): 

"This is not merely a dream in the air. It is an 
actual offer of the Government, made under the auspices 
of Joseph Chamberlain. 

"The first Jews who went to Palestine did not go 
there straight. They wandered for forty years in the 

R3488 : page 19 

wilderness, and the old and feeble dropped away. 
Those who arrived were the strongest and fittest. The 
striking thing is that the Jews have not possessed an 
inch of land for nineteen centuries. This tract on the 
Plateau of Nandi is the first thing that has ever been 



offered."... 

The Jewish papers in this country do not look at 
all kindly on Mr. Zangwill's plan. The American 
Hebrew (New York) says: "We doubt very much 
whether Zionists will subscribe to Mr. Zangwill's new 
definition of Zionism. It sounds like Hamlet with 
Hamlet omitted." To this The American Israelite 
(Cincinnati) adds: 

"Of course he will succeed in getting more or less 
money; there never was a scheme so wildly foolish 
that a glib talker could not get some support for it. 
That this money will be absolutely wasted there can 
be no question, and if this were all there would be no 
great harm done." 

Jewish Comment (Baltimore) says: 

"Our English correspondent thinks that Jewish 
East Africa would become an ordinary English colony 
with a Jewish governor, and this seems to be all that 
is in it at present.. ..It may turn out to be quite 
as successful an enterprise as the colonies in Argentina 
(and that is a modest hope), with the great advantage 
of being under the supervision of the English 
Government, the colonizing power par excellence. If 
the whole aim of the Zionists were to get a legally assured 
home, East Africa offers a prospect of an early 
realization of their fondest dreams; but if at the same 
time they hope for reinvigoration, intellectual and 
moral, through the influence of the spiritual glories 
and memories of Zion, East Africa will be as impotent 
as New Jersey or Winnipeg. Badly as the Jews need 
a place to rest in peace, they need an influence that 
will make for culture and for the awakening of the 
instincts that we are so ready to believe lie at the 
basis of Jewish character." 

THE SCOTCH PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH. 



The fact has been already referred to that the 
House of Lords, the court of last resort in Great Britain, 
decided that the United Free Church did not acquire 
right in the property of the denomination and 
gives title to all to what is termed "The 'Wee' Free 
Church," which still holds fast to the original creed, 
refusing modification necessary to union with others. 
The House of Lords as a court decided that the moneys 
and properties accumulated for centuries for the 
propagation of a special faith or creed should not be 
diverted at the wish of any majority, however large. 
Doubtless this will be a spoke in the wheel of Church 
Union and turn the attention more to federation as 
easier, quicker and less hazardous. 

How this matter marks the error of all the denominational 
creed fencings! None of them are of 
such a size as to permit all true Christians and only 



such to stand upon them. A writer in the Independent 
Review truly says: "The pious citizen of Antioch 
who lent his house for the assembling together of 

R3488 : page 20 

those first called Christians would be much startled 

could he see and hear the mass as it is performed today 

either in St. Peter's, Rome, or St. Paul's, London." 

The Duke of Argyle remarks that thus the 

recent decision affects "all British churches that do 

not by their constitution formally allow their members 

to 'agree to differ,' a liberty seldom given to 

churches in words, though nearly always practised in 

action." A writer in The Contemporary Review sees 

the error of present creedal methods, but evidently 

does not see that the Apostolic Church was free and 

different in these respects. He says:— "The position 

of all churches which use or acknowledge doctrinal 

standards or maintain a collective policy is affected by 

the judgment. They are told, in effect, that the law 

does not recognize churches where property is concerned, 

but only beneficiaries under a trust, powerless 

to alter its terms, incapable of declaring the purposes 

for which they exist, restrained from taking any step 

which may even be held by a civil court to involve a 

change of doctrine. Churches that exist on such 

terms, bound to the intellectual methods of the past, 

forbidden under ruinous penalties to think out the 

issues of Christian faith for themselves, place themselves, 

surely, in a position of fatal inferiority and 

disability." 

The decision is just, as respects the donors of the 
past, and works hardship only in proportion as unscriptural 
creedal fences have been erected. The fellowship 
of the early Church was built doctrinally on 
faith in Jesus as the Son of God and Redeemer of men, 
in the justification of true believers who forsake sin 
to "follow the Lamb," and who through a full consecration 
of everything are begotten of the holy Spirit. 
All the Lord's true people could stand on that platform 
today and to add to or take from it is ungodly 
and the constant cause of trouble, as it has ever been. 
The Quarterly Review sums up the loss of "United 
Free Church" in these words:— 

"A large and flourishing church, comprising 
nearly a quarter of the population of Scotland, with a 
national influence even greater than her numbers represent, 
and prosecuting extensive missions in Europe, 
Asia, and Africa, has been suddenly decreed to have 
lost her identity, through her union with another 
church and certain changes in her formulae which this 
union required; and to have forfeited in consequence 
all her invested funds and the bulk of her real estate." 

THE NEW HELL. 



The professor of Christian Theology in Tuft's 
College (Prof. G. T. Knight) not long since, in The 
North American Review, said:— 

"As for Protestants, there is still to be heard on 
occasion a thorough-going expression of the old doctrine, 
but a more common opinion, even among conservatives, 
is reported in the words attributed to Dr. 
Patton, of Princeton. He said, according to report, 
that the number of the finally lost will probably be in 
about the proportion of those now confined in prison 
on earth. Dr. Briggs, who is reckoned somewhat less 
conservative, said that the number would be 'inconsiderable.' 
And it is by extending 'probation' to the future 
world, as Luther did, or by some substitute for the 
Roman Catholic doctrine of Purgatory, that provision 
is made and opportunity is given for doing so much 
more than the Church on earth can do.... 

"To the question whether the blessed in heaven 
will not be saddened by seeing their nearest and dearest 
ones tortured in hell, Luther answered: 'Not the 
least in the world." Jonathan Edwards said: 'The view 
of the misery of the damned will double the ardor of 
the love and gratitude of the saints in heaven.' Andrew 
Welwood thought: 'The saints will be overjoyed in beholding 
the vengeance of God.' Samuel Hopkins expressed 
the opinion that the sight of hell would be 'most 
entertaining' to all those who love God, and would 
give them the highest and most ineffable pleasure. The 
great Dr. Bellamy capped the climax by an elaborate 
calculation, based on science and philosophy, in which 
he estimated that the happiness of the blessed in heaven 
would be increased 9,600,000,000 times on account of 
the misery of the damned." 

He notes a great revulsion of sentiment on this 
subject of late years, and in evidence quotes the expressions 
of several prominent clergymen as follows: Dr. 
Farrar said: 

"These wanton exercises of the imagination 
assume the aspect of deadly blasphemy against him 
whose name is Love... .We can scarcely refrain 
from the question which one has asked: 'What 
crimes of men can merit the endless tortures here set 
forth, except the crime of conceiving such tortures, 
and ascribing the malice of their influence to an all-wise 
and holy God?'" 

Dr. Briggs said: "The preachers preach the 
damnation of the heathen; and the hearers hear and 
accept. But they do not believe it in their hearts. If 
they did, they would be more worthy of damnation 
than the heathen themselves— unless they should at 
once give their whole lives and property to the missionary 
cause." 

John Wesley once said: "Calvin's God is my devil." 



Dr. A. H. Strong said: "Christ always suffers with us. 
He (who is God) began to suffer when the first sin 
was committed, and he will always suffer so long as 
men sin." 



It is profitable for us to note these comments, not 
as endorsing any of them but by way of calling attention 
again to the fact that the increase of knowledge 
and heart enlargement of our day are sure to lead into 
error unless the Bible teaching on the subject be 
clearly seen. How thankful this makes us for the 
light now shining into our hearts and upon our Bibles; 
and how earnest it should make us in communicating 
this blessing to all who have "an ear to hear." 

R3488 : page 21 

BRITISH WORKMEN CRITICIZED. 



Rev. R. J. Campbell of London City Temple, who 
recently charged that British workmen are "often 
lazy, unthrifty, improvident, sometimes immoral, foul-mouthed, 
and untruthful," spending their Sundays 
in "idle self-indulgence or drunken rowdyism," is 
being criticized by Labor journals and others— among 
them ministers. Nevertheless, "faithful are the 
wounds of a friend." Among other things quite 
scathing Mr. Campbell said:— 

"Two thirds of the national drink bill is incurred 
by the workingman. His keenest struggles are for 
shorter hours and better wages, but not that he may 
employ them for higher ends. He is often lazy, unthrifty, 
improvident, sometimes immoral, foul-mouthed 
and untruthful. Unlike the American worker, he has 
comparatively little aspiration or ambition. 

"Conscientiousness is a virtue conspicuous by its 
rarity. Those who have close dealings with the British 
workingman know he needs watching, or work 
will be badly done, and the time employed upon it 
will be as long as he can get paid for. It is as Ruskin 

R3489 : page 21 

puts it, that joy in labor has ceased under the sun. 
The worker does not work for the work's sake, but 
for the pay's sake, and his principal aim is to work as 
little as possible and get as much as possible, both in 
money and leisure. Such a workingman's Sunday, 
therefore, is exactly what we should expect, a day of 
idle self indulgence or drunken rowdyism. He does 
not go to church, and the churches are blamed for it; 
but his reason for abstention is not because his ethical 



standard is higher than the churchgoer's— far otherwise. 

These are facts, the statement of which may 

be unpopular, but which there is no gainsaying. Let 

it be understood that as stated here they are not intended 

to apply to workingmen as a whole, but to 

large classes among them, which classes it is to be 

feared, constitute a majority." 

The Labor Leader (London) grants that "genuine 
Christianity" is on the decline, but thinks that ministers 
and Christians in general are doing little or 
nothing to "turn the downward rush." It says:— 

"Are we to have more ministers standing by the 
side of oppressed labor, or is our fashionable preacher 
still to offer us words, words, words, which break no 
bones, fill no mouths, and end no iniquities? Is the 
pulpit still to keep its eye upon the rich subscribers in 
the pews, or is it to see nothing but justice, truth and 
mercy? The most eloquent and convincing condemnation 
of drink which we have heard came from a 
habitual drunkard who was getting intoxicated at 
the time. Is Mr. Campbell's denunciation of society 
also to be nothing more than the eloquence of Satan 
reproving sin? 

"Though we feel how unsatisfactory a tu quoque is 
in such serious matters as this, we think the dishonest 
plumber and the lazy bricklayer may well turn to the 
preachers and say: 'Prithee, sirs, do not I do my 
work as well as you do yours? I look after my master's 
interests much more loyally than you look after 
those of your Master: and I assure you if I disregarded 
the fundamental principles of my craft as much 
as you disregard yours, my bricks would not stand a 
gale and my pipes would run nowhere at all.' The 
preacher who gets such a rebuff, if he be a wise man, 
will go away sorrowing. He will then pass out of the 
Pharisaical stage of enlightenment." 

CHURCH FEDERATION WITHIN TEN YEARS. 



Commenting on the recent "National Council of 
Congregational Churches," the N.Y. Independent 
says:— 

"This note of unity called forth the most remarkable 
scene in the meeting of the Congregational Council, 
when the report was adopted with the utmost 
enthusiasm for steps looking to final complete union 
with the Methodist Protestant and United Brethren 
bodies. ...Already the Methodist Protestants and 
the Congregationalists have accepted the plan of union, 
and it remains for it to be accepted by the United 
Brethren at their general conference next spring. 
Then the plan will have to be approved by the local 
conferences of the two before it can begin to be put 
into operation. It anticipates, for a while, the union 



of the three bodies in one general council, and the 
union of their missionary agencies, while plans are 
being prepared for complete consolidation. These 
things take time, as there are separate interests to be 
cared for and protected. We may expect that within 
the next ten years very much of the scandal of a disunited 
Protestant Christendom will be removed." 

POOR RUSSIA'S PITIABLE PLIGHT. 



Russia's disasters in the war with Japan, followed 
by the insurrection of her chief cities, presents a picture 
of severe retribution upon a haughty nation. 
"Pride goeth before destruction and a haughty spirit 
before a fall." The fall of Russia is not yet, and 
doubtless in the interim the sufferings will be still 
more intense. The pity is that under present conditions 
the innocent suffer with the guilty and often 
more severely. Our special sympathy is for the poorly 
fed and but partly clad soldiers who are suffering at 
the front and for their poor families at home, and for 
the poor creatures whose unwisdom, joined with love 
of liberty and a desire to better their conditions, has 
brought them into conflict with the merciless Cossacks 
of the Czar's army. By and by— ere long now, it 
will be different. Then he who sins most shall suffer 
most, and the ignorant seeking the right way shall be 
guided to it by the great King and his joint-heirs. 



R3489 : page 21 

ELECTION VS. FREE GRACE. 

REV. DR. PATTON OPPOSES UNION. 

THE Rev. Dr. Francis L. Patton, Presbyterian, 
President of the Princeton Theological Seminary, 
preached in Pittsburg recently in the Third 
Presbyterian Church to a congregation crowding the 
church, made up of representative ministers and laymen 
from all parts of the two cities. As was expected, 
he opened the active campaign against union 
with the Cumberland Presbyterian Church. 

R3489 : page 22 

Dr. Patton preached from the words, "If therefore 
the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is 
that darkness." He said:— 

A SENSATIONAL SERMON. 



"The minister is the attorney general of God Almighty, 
charged with the commission of presenting 
the claims of eternal truth in relation to the common 
things of life. He holds a brief for the supernatural. 
Some say that a minister must not touch secular 
things. I do not agree with them. It is his business 
to do what he can to bring men in their 
every thought into captivity and obedience to 
Christ. 'What is truth?' asked jesting Pilate, and 
he did not wait for an answer. If he had waited 
until today he would have got the answer from Chicago 
or from Oxford— 'Any old thing is truth that 
works, that satisfies, that meets the exigency.' They 
say, 'You can convince a man if he will only be respectable 
and listen.' But he does not listen. If you 
cannot convince the one obstinate man in a jury, what 
is your argument worth? If Kruger could only have 
foreseen, do you think he would have declared war? 
If the Church of Scotland could have foreseen the 
action of the house of lords, do you think they would 
have gone into the union? 

BAD CONSCIENCE A BLIND GUIDE. 

"The worst thing that can happen to a man is 
to have a bad conscience. It is a blind guide leading 
him astray. Our Lord says we are the light of the 
world. If the world is ever to have a high ideal it 
must get it from the church. If men are ever to be 
lifted above the level of selfish desires, it is when they 
come into the house of God. The church has become 
corrupt in times past, and why not again? The rank 
and file think very much as their leaders. We are a 
gregarious people and go like a flock of sheep, men 
and women alike, and when the church follows blind 
guides, and the blind lead the blind, both fall into 
the ditch. You and I belong to the Presbyterian 
church, a great church with a great history— great 
moral and missionary history— a history which has 
marked the progress of this continent. 

BEFORE "HIGHER CRITICISM." 

"In 1789, when the general assembly was formed, 
there was no geology upon which to found attacks on 
the creation, no archaeology to upset early records, 
no higher criticism, no biology to attack statements 
as to the Garden of Eden, no sociology to make up a 
little sentiment to take the place of the old gospel. I 
often wonder how the old preachers got along when 
they had no telegraph wires nor wireless telegraph, 
when wars were fought and ended before they heard 
of them, and they had nothing to preach but the old 
fundamental gospel of Jesus Christ. But I had rather 
preach today with its magnificent opportunities when 
we stand face to face with great problems. There was 



a division in '37 on psychological lines, but the gravitating 
influence of good fellowship brought us together 
in 1870. 

UNIONS WITHOUT FAITH. 

"This movement for union goes on and people are 
making less of doctrine than polity, and they say, 
what is the difference, if we can come together. And 
the movement is for union, not with a Calvinistic 
body— not at all— but with an Arminian body. They 
say there is not enough difference between this Calvinistic 
confession of yours and that Arminian confession 
to keep the two bodies apart, and they say, 
'Come together and disregard the difference, and unite 
on the basis of evangelical faith.' When this comes 
about how much broader do you want to be? 

CALVINISM AND ARMINIANISM INCOMPATIBLE. 

"You are morally committed to a polity that will 
embrace Arminianism. Great movements are going 
on— don't you forget it. I know what I am talking 
about. We are in danger of great defections in the 
Methodist church, in the Episcopal church, in the 
Congregational church, in the Baptist church and in 
the Presbyterian church— don't you forget it. 

"We have the hard proposition— on the one side 
old-fashioned prayer-meeting, monthly concert, Sabbath 
observance religion, and on the other side out-and-out 
unmitigated rationalism. Men are saying 
this old-fashioned religion is what they want, and 
must hold on to, but there are intellectual difficulties, 
and they fear the stress and struggle and say, 'We 
will take the middle of the road.' 

SEES THE CRISIS. 

"When the great defection comes in all the 
churches, out of this storm and struggle a new church 
may arise. Before we go much further the time may 

R3490 : page 22 

come when the remnants of the faithful will come out 
and reorganize. When you get down to mere emotional 
subjectivity I will come around some Monday 
morning and ask you to let me have that subjectivity 
and send it off to have it analyzed by some professor 
of psychology, and I think you will not like to see the 
color of it. 

"In the nation the rank and file follow the lead 
of the ministers, professors, editors, and if you tell 
what these say I will make a confession of faith. 
What the rich do the poor feel they have a right to 
do. The hope of the nation is not in big armies, big 



navies, new markets, but in righteousness. 

"Darkness is bad enough, but blindness is far 
worse. What is needed is conscience in the individual, 
in the church and in the nation."— Pittsburg 
Gazette. 



Dr. Patton is a theologian and sees, as many do 
not see, that Calvinistic theology and Arminian theology 
take opposite sides and are mortal foes to each 
other. Peace prevails for some years and neither denounces 
and shows up the other, but it is only for a 
time; the differences can never be ignored without 
the sacrifice of every distinctive theological principle 
and dogma. Nevertheless, the masses will not grasp 
the theological distinctions, because not taught theology 
in recent years; and because, for fear of a "theological 
war" such as formerly prevailed, Dr. Patton 
and others dare not speak out plainly their view of 

R3490 : page 23 

matters. For instance, the pith of the foregoing 
would scarcely be discerned by many of our readers 
without our added sub-headings. 

Would that Doctor Patton could see with us the 
divine plan of the ages, in which both Election and 
Free Grace have their places. From that standpoint 
full and absolute union on the basis of the Truth 
would be a simple matter. 



R3490 : page 23 

INCREASING INFLUENCE OF SPIRITISM. 

FOR twenty-five years we have sought to forewarn 
the Lord's people against the public influence of 
the fallen angels, the wicked spirits in high positions. 
(Eph. 6:12.) The pamphlet we publish treating 
this subject* has had a wide circulation. We have been 
much encouraged by the many reports received, showing 
that its influence has been widely felt for good, not only 
among the Lord's people, restraining them from "curious 
and dangerous investigations," but also amongst those 
who had been partially ensnared by the "wiles" of these 
adversaries— some of them "mediums." 

We remind our readers afresh that the Scriptures 
expressly show that the fallen spirits would be held under 
restraint for a long time, and that those restraints would 
gradually be relaxed in the closing of this Gospel Age, 
in the lapping of the Millennial Age. The record is that 
they were "restrained [in Tartarus, our atmosphere] in 
lasting chains of darkness unto the judgment of the great 



day." (Jude 6; 2 Pet. 2:4.) As now the "great day" 
nears, it is not surprising to watchers to note that the 
chains are being gradually loosened, and that these 
"wicked spirits" have greater liberties than ever before. 

"BE NOT HIGH-MINDED, BUT FEAR." 

There is still danger to those who "don't believe 
in spirits," and who regard as superstitious the Bible 
narratives of how our Lord and the Apostle cast out 
demons, and how all wizards, witches, necromancers 
and others who proposed to hold intercourse with the 
dead were strictly prohibited in Israel. There is more 
danger to the self-confident, who "dare investigate anything,' 
and who boast "a mind of their own," than of 
the humbler ones who say "let us fear to tamper with 
what God has forbidden." To many of the boldly 
self-confident curiosity is the demon trap. Before they 
are aware of it they are snared. The beginning of the 
trap is a bait to curiosity— a visit to a "medium," 
"a seance" with friends, or a "planchette" at a neighbor's 
home. 

The Scriptures forewarn us that we are no matches 
intellectually for the wicked spirits, and need to give 
heed to the protections afforded us in the counsels of 
the Lord's Word. In the end of the Jewish age many 
were afflicted with evil spirits, and a considerable part 
of our Lord's work and that of the Apostles was referred 
to by the latter when reporting to our Lord— "Even the 
demons were subject unto us in thy name." (Luke 10:17.) 
So prominent is this matter in the four gospels that they 
contain forty-two references to these demons— mistranslated 
"devils" in our Common Version. 

THESE ARE THE "STRONG DELUSIONS." 

The Apostle points out that in the end of this age 
the Lord will "send," or permit to come upon Christendom, 
"strong delusion, that they may believe a lie,— 
that they all may be condemned." (2 Thes. 2:11,12.) 
Thank God we see clearly that they will not be condemned 
to everlasting torture. Oh, no ! That blasphemous 
misrepresentation of God's Word is one of the devices 
of these "wicked spirits," by which they would drive 
men away from God, by which they would blind them 
to his real character. But we are now in the "harvest," 
and the wheat must be separated from the tares, and 
these "strong delusions" will be permitted to demonstrate 
who have loved and obeyed the Lord's counsel 
and who, not doing this, are to be adjudged unworthy 
of the high rewards soon to be given to the "overcomers." 

The context shows this, declaring in so many words 
that the "delusions" will ensnare them because "they 
received not the truth in the love of it." The "truth" is 
that the dead are dead, and cannot re-live except by 
divine power exercised for their awakening from this 



death-sleep. This plain truth, so abundantly set forth 

in the Scriptures, is not relished by any except the truth-hungry. 

Others tell us that they do not like to believe 

thus;— that they prefer to think of the dead as not being 

dead, but more alive than ever. Rejecting the plain 

truth as God presented it, and preferring Satan's lie, 

"Ye shall not surely die" (Genesis 3:4), these are easy 

marks for the demons who are constantly striving to 

perpetuate the lie which deceived Mother Eve in Eden. 

They will now be permitted to personate the dead so 

successfully as to be a "strong delusion," which "if 

it were possible [if the Lord did not protect them by the 

'armor of God'] would deceive the very elect."— 

Matt. 24:24. 

HYPNOSIS, TELEPATHY.-MODERN DEMONISM. 

Spiritism cunningly feigns, for a time, that its manifestations 
are the exercise of human powers. Thus it 
gains access to the hearts of men and women who dread 
demonism instinctively. Gradually, however, it comes 
to be conceded that the spirits are at the bottom of these 
powers, which are at least partially "occult." For years 
we have been almost alone in opposing hypnotism, 
telepathy, etc., as Spiritism in a new form; but now no 
less a celebrity than Professor J. H. Hyslop formerly 
"Teacher of Logic and Ethics" in Columbia University 
and now a leading light in The American Society for 
Psychical Research, seems to concede that spirits have 
to do with such matters;— not demons, but in his supposition 
"spirits of dead humans." 

Prof. Hyslop is quoted in the New York American 
thus:— 

"Telepathy is not a matter of thought waves. The 
solution is so simple as to be astounding. Messages are 
carried from mind to mind by the spirits. Mediumistic 
qualities are necessary, but, possessed of these and able to 
get in touch with the spirit world, telepathy should become 
as easy of accomplishment as the telegraphing of a message 
with wires. 

"None but scientists should tamper with the weird 
phenomena of nature represented by telepathy," said Dr. 
Hyslop. "Every investigation should be made sanely and 
every experiment approached with a mind clear, impartial 



*"What Say the Scriptures About Spiritualism?" 128pp. 10 cents. 

R3490 : page 24 

and prepared to weigh and balance every fact as carefully 
as though it were a precious gem. 

"Our experiments in telepathy I regard as convincing, 
if not wholly satisfactory in number or in the ability to repeat 
them at will. 



"In these experiments we used Mrs. Piper, who was sent 
to England in care of the British society. She was allowed 
to come into contact with no one not in league with the 
persons making the experiments. We began our experiments 
in long distance telepathy in the hope of eventually getting 
a message across the Atlantic, but failed time after time. 

"Finally we scored a success. It was as remarkable as 
it was unexpected. The message was sent across the ocean 
in a way to demonstrate perfectly the possibilities of long 
distance telepathy. The experiment was conducted in a 
manner to eliminate any trace of fraud or deception. It was 
sent in English and delivered in Latin." 

"COMMUNICATION WITH THE DEAD." 

In an article over his own signature in "The World 
To-day," Prof. Hyslop says:— 

"That there would be great difficulties in communicating, 
if spirits actually exist, would naturally be taken for 
granted by intelligent people. The silence of so many discarnate 
spirits through the ages if they exist, would be 
sufficient proof of that fact, as well as what we know of the 
difficulty of communications between living people when they 
have no common language as a means of it. But there happen 
to be additional reasons for this difficulty, and they should 
be mentioned, in order that the layman (I ought not to 
mention it to the scientist) may see and appreciate the reasons 
why the communications take the form which they show. 
The first of these is the abnormal mental and physical condition 

R3491 : page 24 

of the medium, specifically to illustrate, as in the case 

of Mrs. Piper. But this is not the chief reason that the communications 

are trivial and confused, or lacking in the kind 

of information wanted. The reason for these characteristics 

is deeper still. It is that the communicator is himself in an 

abnormal mental condition while communicating. It may 

be compared to a delirious dream, or to certain types of 

secondary personality in the living, or even to the trance of 

Mrs. Piper, in some of its aspects." 

REV. I. K. FUNK, D.D. "TOUCHED." 

Rev. I. K. Funk, D.D., of New York City, the widely 
known Methodist minister, has had some thrilling experiences 
with spirits, and has published them to the 
world, asserting, however, what even Spiritualists will 
admit, that some of the so-called manifestations are 
frauds; that others are by deceiving or "lying spirits." 
His investigations, like those of Prof. Hyslop, show the 
trend of our times, and give a hint of what we may 
expect when shortly the whole world will turn to the 
investigation of Spiritism as "the only proof that the 
dead are not dead." 



REV. R. HEBER NEWTON'S VIEWS. 

Discussing psychical science in an address to-night before 
the American Institute for Scientific Research in the home 
of C. Griswold Bourne, the Rev. R. Heber Newton made the 
assertion that the spirits of the dead communicate with the 
living: that telepathy is a power possessed by many men and 
women, and that clairvoyance is an established scientific 
fact. Said he in part: 

"Clairvoyance was nothing but a will o' the wisp, but 
it is now a confessed power of certain organizations. Mollie 
Fancher, over in Brooklyn, has proved stronger than the 
incredulity of our savants. The belief in the existence of 
unseen spirits and of their power of communication with us 
in the flesh is one of the oldest, most widespread and most 
insistent beliefs of man, and it has revived strangely in our 
day. 

"For the first time in the history of man these powers 
have been scientifically investigated in our day. Already 
the result is that a considerable number of eminent men of 
science have had the courage to avow that, after allowing 
for illusion, fraud and every possible hypothesis of interpretation, 
they have been driven up to the ultimate solution 
of the problem— the belief in the actual communication of 
the spirits of those whom we call dead with the living. 

"Anyone who walks with his eyes open, ready to hear 
what men have to tell, will find stories pouring in upon him 
from men whom he cannot mistrust as liars, and whom he 
knows to be sane and sensible, which will stagger him. These 
experiences are not at all confined to the seance and the 
medium. Their most impressive forms occur in the privacy 
of the home without a professional medium present."— 
Pittsburg Gazette. 

The standing of Dr. Newton in the Protestant 
Episcopal Church will carry a weight of influence, and 
is being published and discussed in every quarter. 

EX -JUDGE A. S. DAILEY EXPLAINS. 

Great has been the interest aroused among those who 
are avowed Spiritualists by the statements of Dr. George 
Savage and Dr. Newton. The real enthusiasm has been among 
those who for years have acknowledged their belief in clairvoyance, 
clairaudience and telepathy between the dead and 
the living, although the word "dead" is one the true Spiritualist 
never uses. One man who for a quarter century has 
proclaimed himself a Spiritualist is former Judge Abram S. 
Dailey, of Brooklyn. Judge Dailey said he had read with 
interest the published statements by Dr. Newton, and felt 
that by him Spiritualism and Spiritualists had received 
recognition which would do more to gain for them and their 
creed the respect of the world at large than anything that had 
taken place since the founding of the Society for Psychical 
Research 20 years ago. 

"Let me tell you a story which never has been given to 
the world," said Mr. Dailey. "I know that many will scoff 



at it, but I know it to be true, for it was told me by the man 
whom it chiefly concerns. It is how the Leland Stanford 
Junior university came to be founded. We all know it was 
built in memory of Leland Stanford's only son, but that is 
not all. It was known to me for many years that Mr. Stanford 
and his wife were interested in Spiritualism. They at times 
consulted mediums, not believing much of what they learned. 
In 1883, a year before their son died, they were warned by 
a noted psychic that if they permitted their son to remain in 
Florence, Italy, where he was studying, he would die. The 
warning was not heeded, and in May, 1884, he died. The 
parents for a while were numbed with grief. Then came to 
them the warning, and once more they engaged the services 
of the psychic. 

"Mr. Stanford told me himself that through the medium 
they were able to get in communication with the son who had 
gone 'over the border.' I myself have been with them when 
a seance has taken place, and in the psychic language I have 
heard that boy talk with his parents. At one of these seances 
Mr. Stanford told me the spirit of their son came to him and 
made the suggestion that the great property, valued at 
$20,000,000, which would have come to him, be given to the 
founding of a place of learning. A year later, on the first 
anniversary of the boy's death, the corner stone of that great 
university was laid. 

"When the university was opened, on October 1, 1891, 
the words of the founders were: "The idea of the university 
came directly and largely from our son and only child, 
Leland, and we hold the belief that had he been spared to 
advise as to the disposition of our estate he would have 
desired the devotion of a large portion thereof to this 
purpose." 

HELPED CONVINCE REV. NEWTON, D.D. 

"I may say without breach of confidence," continued 
Mr. Dailey, "that this story is known to Dr. Heber Newton, 
and is believed by him. When he resigned his Church in this 
city he went at once to Mrs. Stanford and has been with her 
constantly since. It is my belief this great truth that came 
to the founders of Stanford university was largely responsible 
in settling for all time any doubts that Mr. Newton had. 

"That Spiritualism is gaining ground every day I know 
well. Only a month ago two clergymen in Brooklyn came to 
me late at night and said they represented 13 other pastors 
who secretly had been making an investigation of Spiritualism, 
but that they had got out of their depth in the mysteries and 

R3491 : page 25 

wonders of it. Would I help them? That was not the first 
time such a thing had happened. Under the surface there is 
a great quest of knowledge. People to-day are afraid to be 
known as Spiritualists, but there will come a day when a man 
will be afraid not to be known as one."— Pittsburg Times. 



SUGGESTIVE FACTS NOTED. 

It does not surprise us that Spiritism, like Christian 
Science, is aiming for the influential. Whatever else the 
fallen angels may be they are "wily," cunning. The 
Lord's people, on the contrary, number "not many wise, 
not many great, not many learned, not many rich, not 
many noble, but chiefly the poor of this world, rich in 
faith."— Jas. 2:5. 

A lady who has but recently come into the light of 
Present Truth, and who previously was a Spiritist, tells 
of how she had developed the "clairaudient ear," or the 
power of hearing the spirits when others heard nothing. 
(And, by the way, all should avoid everything of this kind 
as they would avoid a plague: they should if approached 
thus at once turn their hearts to the Lord in prayer 
for aid to resist the intrusion). This woman's relatives have 
been interested for some years in Present Truth, and 
pointed out to her that her communings were not with 
dead friends but with the fallen angels, "demons," 
and finally got her to the point of reading MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. This displeased the "spirits," who almost for 
a time prevented her study by an incessant opposition, 
such as "Don't read that," "That's not true," etc., etc. 
Gradually she asserted her will, calling on the Lord for 
help, and we understand that now she is quite free from 
their intrusions. 

Another case which recently came to our attention, 
is that of a boy of 19 years, in Eastern Pennsylvania, 
who is terribly oppressed by demons. One of the brethren 
hearing of the case called to see him, taking a copy 
of the "SPIRITISM" pamphlet and a copy of ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER. The presence of the papers so aggravated 
the boy that they had to be removed before the 
brother could talk to the possessed one. The spirits 
having him under their control nearly set him wild until 
the books were removed. "The darkness hateth the 
light." We do not doubt that these evil spirits would 
do injury to the servants of the Truth if permitted. 
Evidently they are under some restraint as respects the 
Lord's people. Later on they may be permitted to 
operate through others, as Satan entered into Judas 
before the betrayal. 

OFFER REFUSED-VOICE LOST. 

A few years ago a lady living in Canada, a Methodist, 
prominent amongst that people as a choir singer, 
became interested in spiritism and developed the clairaudient 
ear. She suspected no harm until, by and by, 
the spirits proposed that if she would yield herself 
entirely to their control they would develop her voice 
and make her the best and most famous singer in the 
world. They knew of her ambition and used it as a 
bait to get her to surrender her will,— for apparently the 
human will is an impenetrable barrier. 



The lady saw the bait, but was alarmed at the proposal, 
rightly reasoning that an evil being with an evil 
motive lay behind such a proposition, to sacrifice the 
most valuable gift of God— the will. She spurned the 
offer, and thenceforth would have no communion with 

R3492 : page 25 

what she had learned to fear without understanding. 
Not long afterward her fine voice began to fail and to-day 
she has none of it. But she has something infinitely 
better— she has the Truth. It was but a short time after 
she took her stand against Spiritism that the Lord 
graciously guided her to the "Dawns." She chose the 
better part and rejoices in it. We are not able, however, 
to explain to her how or why the evil spirits were permitted 
to spoil her voice: possibly it was through their 
influence that formerly she was so gifted, to the intent 
that it might be a snare for her. In any event, now that 
she understands who her tempters were, she is full of 
gratitude to God for her deliverance at any cost. 

"EXPERIENCES IN SPIRITUALISM." 

We clip the following from an exchange, "The 
Prophetic News." It may serve to further emphasize 
the foregoing. 

I was induced to yield my hand to be controlled by a 
spirit, in consequence of reading what Mr. Stead wrote in 
the Review of Reviews about Spirit- Writing. Thus was the 
first step taken on this forbidden yet fascinating course. 
I look back on that first step and remember that I never 
uttered, in the perplexity that filled my mind, a prayer to 
God. I should have at once sought the guidance of God. 
Before I thought of so doing, I was seized with the desire to 
seek this newly-found source of help. I fear much I am not 
alone in being foolishly misguided by the perusal of spiritualistic 
literature which is now being circulated far and wide 
in England. 

The spirit that came and offered me his aid forbade my 
praying to God, assigning as a reason that I was now under 
special heavenly guidance superseding the need of prayer, and 
that my heavenly inheritance was sure. That was strange 
counsel, and it was still stranger that I should have for one 
moment harbored it; but harbor it I did. 

But, in addition, this messenger of Satan forbade my 
study of the Scriptures, for I had lately commenced a methodical 
reading thereof. The reason for this on the part of 
my evil counsellor was that the work I was now under so 
strong an obligation to execute, was so urgent that no time 
could be spared for other mental occupation. 

Under the pretence of aiding me I was now "interviewed" 
by other spirits, who declared themselves to be the 
spirits of departed mortals. One assumed the character of 
what I might call ultra piety, and warned me from coming 
into association with and under the influence of a certain 



minister of the Gospel residing in the neighborhood— one 
who would certainly have counselled me in my perplexed 
state of mind with wisdom— but against him my "interviewer" 
uttered base slanders. This spirit hindered me 
greatly by making long discourses. 

OF AN IRRELEVANT CHARACTER. 

Another spirit declared himself to have been the former 
English ambassador to the nation of these persecuted Christians 
concerning whose distressing condition my heart was 
bleeding; and in language befitting a statesman he related his 
remarkable experience in the executing of his ambassadorial 
office. Then he desired my work to take a form which I 
subsequently found to be the worst under the circumstances, 
and that I should communicate it to an important public 
functionary. This was so opposed to my judgment that I 
could not yield assent to it. 

After this the first spirit that came to me under the garb 
of a guardian angel declared that the spirit of my beloved 
mother had been permitted to visit me for a few minutes, 
and that she entreated me to transmit a message to a relative 
residing abroad, and that, though I was ignorant of the 
purport of this message, she would herself guide my pen in 
writing it down. I took the pen into my hand, holding it 
loosely for her to guide it. A strong wish came upon me to 
see my mother's form. Then, to my great astonishment, her 
portrait was instantaneously and with consummate skill, 
drawn on the paper before me. I now watched with breathless 
interest the writing of the message. It was traced in 

R3492 : page 26 

her well-known (to me) handwriting. Only two words were 
written, but they were written three times. The words 
written with tremulous haste and urgency were SAVE 
SOULS, and with a quick movement the pen was made to 
drop. 

Such a message from such a source smote my heart with 
its deep solemnity. But I could not bring myself to send 
the message. I felt it would be wrong to send it. The relative 
for whom it was intended was already engaged in Christian 
mission work, and somehow I shrank from bringing on his 
mind the influence of a message from whence I hardly knew. 
I felt a total disinclination for any further communications 
from spirits, and I determined to receive no more from so 
dubious a source. But I was not to be so easily disentangled 
from this net into which in an evil moment I had deliberately 
placed my feet. 

THE SPIRITS BETRAY THEIR EVIL INTENTION. 

In disgust, and as if to take a plunge out of the vortex 
into which I had been stealthily drawn, I threw into the fire 
the portrait of my mother and all the spirit-writing. I would 
not believe that the spirit of that dear Christian— my mother 



—was wandering on this earth in company with others who 
gave me such disastrous counsels, and failed in their promise 
to strengthen and aid me. I even came to the conclusion 
that these spirits had attempted an impersonation of that 
departed saint, and had written that solemn message in order 
to induce me to believe in their celestial character and the 
sanctity of their intentions, that I might be induced to follow 
their perilous injunctions. 

To justify their proceedings they were apt in misquoting 
Scripture. There was a terrible mystery in this, and it filled 
me with dire forebodings. I then said to myself, half aloud, 
"Can it be possible that there are evil spirits who have power 
to communicate with mortals and deceive them?" 

A spirit answered "Yes," and added that they themselves 
would now act evilly towards me and that I was in their 
power to be punished, since I had sought to obtain knowledge 
forbidden to mortals. 

With this startling declaration they changed their 
character and conduct to me. 

I now believed that I had committed a sin in consulting 
them; but it was done in ignorance (it was a culpable ignorance, 
nevertheless) and with innocent intent. Surely I 
could trust in divine mercy to pardon me. 

But the spirit answered my thought by declaring that 
the Divine mercy should not reach me, but that he would 
accuse me before the Recording Angel of this deadly sin- 
intercourse with spirits,— and would call for immediate 
judgment! 

Let it be remembered that these very spirits by their 
lying deception had induced me to cease from prayer and the 
study of Scripture, and had declared that my heavenly inheritance 
was sure. They left me to execute their threat. 

A REMARKABLE VISION. 

Soon after this a remarkable vision appeared by the permitted 
instrumentality of these tormentors. One night the 
wall at the end of my room seemed to vanish, and a large 
open space appeared. At one side was a dais with steps 
which appeared to lead up to an exalted throne, half hidden 
by clouds. Before the dais a number of celestial beings stood 
in a semi-circle, and, apart from the rest, at the foot of the 
dais, was a terrible form. I knew this was the prince of 
darkness, and I instinctively felt he was there as my accuser, 
and I seemed to have no advocate. This terrible vision at 
first seemed a confirmation of the spirit's threat, yet there 
was one essential difference. It was not, as they said, an 
avenging angel, but Satan, who accused me. I wanted to 
reflect on this vision and the new conditions environing me, 
but spirit voices continually interrupted me, so that I could 
neither think nor pray, but only repeat to myself some 
such words as "O Lord, in Thee have I trusted; let me never 
be confounded." 

I could not stop their verbal communications, their 
small but intensely clear voices followed me everywhere. 

The spirits told me that the torments of hell, in which 



I had not believed, awaited me, and that in the internal 

fires of the earth souls were in torment; and that the intensity 

of the punishment was proportioned to the guilt of the offender. 

They declared that I should know by experience 

the reality of eternal punishment that very night. The fact 

that I was still in mortal flesh would not impede them; 

there appeared to be some truth in their threat that they 

could cause death— or rather, the cessation of mortal existence, 

for they gave me an immediate and startling demonstration 

of their power in causing violent spasms and palpitations 

of the heart, while I was quite calm in mind. Indeed 

my imperturbable calmness caused them to remark that I 

was one of the bravest of mortals, but they would yet overcome 

me with greater terrors. But I ultimately found that they 

possessed no supreme power over the "King of Terrors." 

They then left me, and in the darkness and the silence of 

the night I waited, expectantly, believing that a terrible 

ordeal awaited me, for I knew that my enemies were powerful 

and malignant. 

The wall of my room again seemed to disappear, and I 
was conscious that a spirit had entered and touched me, and 
a voice declared that he who had entered was an administrator 
of justice in the infernal regions. He demanded of 
me if I knew 

WHY HE HAD BEEN SUMMONED TO ME. 

I replied that I only knew that my enemies accused 
me, and that if he was the servant of God I desired him to 
tell me what it was the will of God that I should now do, 
for I desired only to know, and do that will. 

He answered in some such words as these; "You are 
free; you cannot come within my province. I only punish 

R3493 : page 26 

those who will not obey God, and now I leave you." 

I was inexpressibly thankful to be delivered from such 
threatening peril, and that a powerful spirit had acknowledged 
that Divine Power overruled in hell, and that he 
acted in subservience to it. 

All these spiritualistic manifestations were far from 
being the phantasmagoria of dream or fancy— they too 
evidently belonged to the stern and abiding realities of life. 
They were manifestations of that great, and potent, and 
eternal realm of spiritual power which mortal vision may 
not yet behold. Throughout this ordeal I was calm, and 
possessed that intensification of consciousness that is aroused 
by tragic circumstances. 

I resolved that as I had encountered these unique and 
tragic conditions not from personal needs or seeking personal 
aims, that the result of this experience should also have a 
wider range of influence. 

I had more to learn and to endure. I was even to learn 
that my deliverance from the power of demons, like my 
faith, was of an imperfect character. 



SATAN'S SCHEME FOR THE SUBVERSION OF CHRISTENDOM. 

The remainder of the night I passed in peace. In the 
morning I recommenced the study of Holy Scripture; it 
became to me the most important concern of my life. 

But to my great distress the evil spirits immediately 
returned to me with ceaseless interruptions to prevent my 
study. They determined to keep me from the knowledge of 
a full deliverance. 

They compelled me to listen to their account of an insurrection 
on earth against Divine power which they had 
long been planning, but which was ere long to be carried out. 
They asserted that their mighty potentate and chief had 
obtained the vicegerency of earth, that he was the prince 
of this world, and that he would subjugate it as it never yet 
had been subjugated to his control, and that he would raise 
a storm of persecution against the followers of Christ. There 
was, in fact, to be a new putting forth of hellish influence 
upon the earth. 

I was compelled to hear from these spirits the unfolding 
of their diabolical scheme. They brought many proofs to 
substantiate the fact that their power on earth was already 
greatly increased and was increasing. The prospects, therefore, 
that seemed in store for the world overwhelmed me with 
dismay. They asserted that their great potentate— the god 
of this world— had so subverted Christendom that at least 
the great ecclesiastical systems known as the Roman, Greek, 
and Anglican churches would more entirely be subservient 
to him. I was inclined to disbelieve their statements, I 
wished that they could have been disproved, but facts appeared 
to corroborate them. I then for the first time observed 

R3493 : page 27 

that the Church of Rome was gaining great power, and 
as for the Greek Church in Russia, it was then inflicting terrible 
persecutions on the true followers of Christ— Christians— 
who would not practise idolatry. 

It was now made apparent to me that these spirits who 
had hypocritically proffered their aid for the persecuted 
Christians had themselves instigated idolatrous Churchmen 
to persecute them. I gathered further that the servants of 
the great potentate of darkness had sown error and discord 
freely, in the other churches in Christendom and that these 
would advance in error and distance from God; that they 
had power to distract the attention and to deaden the perceptions 
of men who otherwise would 

ARREST THE PROGRESS OF EVIL. 

The spirits then spoke with sardonic triumph of their 
school of materialistic philosophy and their teaching on 
Cosmogony as opposing that of the Book of Genesis— a 
system that modern science has found so acceptable as 
appearing to fit in with what the bowels of the earth have 



displayed, but which entirely leaves out of its thoughts the 
operation of God's hand in judgment at the fall of man, 
when not only man was morally and physically ruined, but 
that which was once pronounced "very good" fell with the 
first man, so that the "whole creation"— material and immaterial 
—groans for deliverance. 

A spirit calling himself Lord Beaconsfield declared that 
he would aid me by dictating a work of fiction that should 
surpass all his earthly efforts and would produce a small 
fortune for me, and that I should thus obtain the reputation 
of being a great genius by simply acting as his amanuensis, 
and he added the more alluring temptation to me— that the 
spirits could and would confer on me such knowledge and 
power that I myself should be considered by the world as a 
brilliant writer, and 

WIN FAME AND FORTUNE. 

Perhaps his offer has been made to and accepted by 
some of our present writers of brilliant but pernicious fiction, 
especially those who have popularized and dignified Satan 
himself; some of whom I know are students of Occultism. 

One spirit professed to be the originator of such systems 
as Theosophy and Gnosticism. They had previously declared 
that "thought-reading" was under their domination 
and effected by them. I gathered, generally, though it was 
not very clearly expressed, that mesmerism and hypnotism 
were likewise agencies in their hands. 

I learned, too, that in the world's pleasures Satan had 
set snares of almost infinite variety in order to keep men 
apart from God. Some persons he could degrade to the 
gross sins of the flesh, others of a more lofty and aspiring 
nature he could uplift by theosophy into a region of high 
and vain imagination. 

I am aware that all this and much more I might write 
of what I gathered from the spirits was not necessarily true: 
but when compared with all the Scriptures have written as 
to the power of evil spirits to lead men astray, and when we 
see how marvellously successful the schemes for seducing 
the allegiance of the human mind from the authority of God 
and His Word has been, I am compelled to say that the spirits 
from the pit did not in their declarations contradict the experiences 
of the hour or the evidences of the Scriptures. 
I do not pretend to be able to understand why they supplied 
me with this information. It may be they knew not that I 
was eventually to be delivered out of their hands; but they 
wished, nevertheless, to glory in their mighty achievements 
in the world at large. 

I was greatly impressed with the evident truth of much 
that I heard from them. O how potent were and are these 
"world-rulers of this darkness!" These were spirits of what 
I may call a highly intellectual order, whose language seemed 
unrivalled in its beauty of expression. I could not doubt 
their power to initiate mortals into any earthly knowledge 
if God suffered it. It may be that this excellence of power 
and understanding in spirit exists, as a remnant, in their 



fallen state, of those lofty faculties which belonged to them 
ere they fell; but about such matters so little can be known 
that the less I conjecture the better. 

THE TRIUMPH AND DEFEAT OF SATAN. 

And now, as another confirmation of the ascendancy the 
spirits still had over me, they fulfilled their previous threat 
to call blaspheming demons to madden me. At their bidding 
these base spirits came and uttered horrible blasphemies, 
until it seemed as if all hell was let loose upon me for a little 
while. 

Then the spirits used one last awful device to overthrow 
me, and nearly succeeded. 

In the midst of all these difficulties and dangers by 
which I was well-nigh overwhelmed, a commanding voice 
from an invisible spirit called me, saying words to this effect, 
"That I had become so environed and besieged by evil 
spirits that there was no deliverance for me on earth, and 
that he— an angel of the Lord— had descended from heaven 
to bear me this command from the Lord Jesus— that I must 
die by my own hand to escape my persecutors, and that my 
soul should then find rest in heaven." I had so strong a desire 
for life that nothing less than a Divine command, as I believed 
it could have induced me to take my life. 

I did not question the words proceeding evidently from 
so high an authority. I could not conceive it possible that 
the spirits would command mortals to die by using the sacred 
name of Christ. Yet it was the device of the devil, and I 
fell into it. 

I was perfectly calm in my mind and determined I 
would obey the Divine command, and trust in the Lord. 
Then, in the last prayer I thought to breathe on earth, I 
protested to the Almighty that I took my life believing I 
was acting at the bidding of the Lord Jesus Christ. Thereupon 
I drank a poisonous draught and quickly fell into a 
comatose state, but I did not awake in hell or in heaven, 
for I was allowed to recover, though only after much difficulty 
and suffering. 

But whilst I was recovering, the inexorable voice repeated 
the previous message, upon which I seized an instrument; 
the only instrument at hand was a very small dagger, 
with which, having failed to cut my throat, I severed the 
temporal artery. Determined to make death swift and sure 
this time, I endeavored to cut another artery, and with the 
blood streaming from my head I fell to the ground insensible. 

Again the spirits were foiled in their intention. The 
noise of my fall instantly brought assistance, and I recovered. 

My recovery was, I might almost say, a miracle. I am 
convinced that God did in a very remarkable way interpose 
His healing hand that I might be 

PHYSICALLY HEALED. 

But, above all, I was delivered from the tormenting 
presence and persecution of these demons. Christ, who 



R3494 : page 27 

when on earth healed those who were demonized, and "healed 
all that were oppressed of the devil," mercifully healed me. 
He commanded them to leave me. I recognized the supreme 
need of a Redeemer. I believed His Word that "No man 
cometh unto the Father but by Me, and he that cometh unto 
Me I will in no wise cast out." I know of the Blood of Jesus 
which cleanses from all sin— of that ONE offering perfected 
on the Cross by which Christ has perfected His believing 
people. This blessed knowledge dawned upon my soul despite 
all the efforts of the powers of darkness to prevent me from 
obtaining it. 

I beg every reader of this to fly from Spiritualism. Do 
not play with tools such as "Planchette," "thought-reading," 
etc. I feel that my life has been preserved that 
I might use this personal experience and knowledge of Satanic 
power that I have passed through, and witness against the 
snares of Spiritualism, declare its Satanic nature, and the 
potency of Christ as a Deliverer from it. 



The above shows something of the ingenuity and 
versatility of the demons. To some, on the contrary, 
they report that there is no hell. To Swedenborg they 
gave visions of seven hells and seven heavens, which 
helped him frame a new religion to entrap honest souls. 
How evidently we all need to "hold fast the faithful 
Word." The Apostle forewarned us we should specially 
need this "armor" as the "evil day" draws on. 



R3494 : page 28 

THE PURPOSE OF MIRACLES. 

John 4:43-54.-Feb. 12. 

Golden Text:— "The same works that I do, bear witness 
of me, that the Father hath sent me."— John 5:36. 

IN a previous lesson we considered our Lord's first 

miracle at Cana in Galilee. A considerable length 

apparently intervened between that miracle and 

the one recorded in this lesson. Evidently our Lord in 

the interim had been at Jerusalem, because we read that 

he was well received by the Galileans, who had "seen all 

the things that he did at Jerusalem at the feast: for they 

also went unto the feast." It is evident, therefore, that 

the Lord performed miracles in Jerusalem at this time 

that are not mentioned in the direct order of their occurrence. 

Jerusalem was the representative city of the 

nation, and properly enough our Lord's principal miracles 



and teachings would thence reach the whole people 
better than from any other locality— especially as the 
whole nation was accustomed representatively to gather 
at Jerusalem at certain religious feasts every year. The 
Lord's principal ministry was evidently first conducted 
in Judea, and there aroused such a storm of opposition 
on the part of the rulers (vs. 1-3) that he was obliged to 
go to Galilee to continue his ministry. In this he illustrated 
his instruction to his disciples— "When they 
shall persecute you in one city, flee ye to another." 

"A prophet hath no honor in his own country," 
and it may have been in recognition of this proverb that 
our Lord commenced his ministry at Jerusalem rather 
than in Galilee, which was his "own country,"— he and 
his disciples being recognized as "Galileans." Anyway 
the knowledge of his mighty works and teachings in 
Judea had by this time reached Galilee. He had honor 
amongst his own countrymen because of his fame in Judea, 
and hence, as we read, they received him more respectfully 
than they otherwise would have done. He probably 
now found a better opportunity for public ministry than 
he did on the occasion of his first visit to Cana. 

Human nature is much the same in all ages and in 
all places: it esteems that which is distant as grander, 
more wonderful than that which is near. We have all 
seen the same fact illustrated under various circumstances. 
The poet, the philosopher, the teacher, the 
talented, are not first recognized at home. How little 
those who heard our Lord realized the privileges they 
enjoyed— that the very Son of God was amongst them, 
that the Teacher of Teachers was addressing them, that 
the special Ambassador was in their midst. To a limited 
extent the same thing has been true throughout the 
Gospel age, for the Lord's consecrated people have been 
all the way down his representatives, as he said, "He 
that receiveth you, receiveth me." The Apostle reminds 
us along these lines that "The world knoweth us not, even 
as it knew him not." The world recognizes not the Lord's 
humble saints as being the children of the Highest, 
"Heirs of God, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord, 
if so be that we suffer with him, that we may also be 
glorified together."— Rom. 8:17. 

NONE PERFECT, NO, NOT ONE. 

Some one has remarked, "When a hero or a saint is 
seen to eat and drink, live and dress, like an ordinary 
man, weak where some are strong, ignorant of some 
things that others know, it is almost impossible to look 
over these things and recognize the hero or saint." It 
is the ability to look over these things and to appreciate 
their relationship to the Lord that enables the Lord's 
consecrated people to recognize themselves and each 
other as members of the Royal Priesthood. It is the 
ability to see things thus from the divine standpoint, 
being "taught of God" to recognize each other by the 



heart, the will, the intention, but not according to the 
flesh with its weaknesses and blemishes. Such a correct 
view from the Lord's standpoint is necessary before we 
can "love as brethren," and have this love of the brethren 
as one of the evidences that we have passed from death 
unto life— that we have been begotten again as new 
creatures in Christ Jesus. 

A nobleman whose name is not given, whose son 
lay at death's door, heard of our Lord's coming into 
Galilee, and recognized him as the one of whose mighty 
works in Judea he had previously heard. He at once 
went evidently a considerable journey to see the Lord 
and to request that he visit his home and heal his son, 
who was sick. Our Lord, by the way of testing his faith, 
said, "Except ye see signs and wonders ye will not 
believe." Apparently this was a refusal of the nobleman's 
request and had his faith been slight he probably 
would have accepted it thus. On the contrary so great 
was his confidence that our Lord was able to heal his 
son that he entreated that the Lord go in haste, lest the 
boy should be dead on their arrival. Having thus tested 
his faith and made it stronger, our Lord answered the 
request and healed the son, but in a manner calculated 
still further to strengthen his faith. He told him to 
return home and he would find his son cured. The fact 
that the nobleman at once set out for home is an evidence 
that he had great confidence in the Lord— a faith worthy 
of reward. 

DIVERSE DEALINGS, ONE PROVIDENCE. 

A lesson for us in this connection is that our Lord 
deals similarly with all of his people at times. (1) Often 
he does not answer our prayers immediately, but, delaying 
the answer, tests our faith, our earnestness, our confidence 
in him. He is pleased to have us hold on to him 
by faith, which strengthens our own hearts, by reiterations 
of his promises and reflections on his goodness and 
power. (2) When he does grant our requests the blessing 
frequently comes to us through a different channel 
or in a different manner from that we had in mind. As 
an illustration, a dear brother remarked to us recently 
that for an entire year the principal element of his prayer 
to the Lord had been for increase of heavenly wisdom, 
and that in no year had he seemed to be more unwise as 
respected earthly things— in no year had he been less 
prosperous from a worldly standpoint. Another remarked 
that the special feature of his prayer for a year 
had been for an increase of patience, and that in no year 
had he seemed to have so many trials and difficulties and 
testings of patience. The lesson is obvious— "whom the 
Lord loveth he chasteneth." 

If the Lord would teach heavenly wisdom it must 
imply just such lessons as would win our hearts from 
temporalities and place them more and more upon the 
riches of his grace, the heavenly wisdom; if the Lord 



would teach patience it must be by showing us our own 
lack of this quality and permitting us to pass through 
trials and difficulties in which he is pleased to place us, 
and assist us in overcoming and gaining patience. 

R3494 : page 29 

Similarly with all the fruits and graces of the Spirit; 
they must be developed, and the school of experience is 
a severe one. Nevertheless we would not be without 
such experiences, such lessons, for unless we are taught 
of God, unless we learn the lessons due to be learned in 
the present time we would not be fitted and prepared 
to be the Lord's instruments in blessing and instructing 
the world during the Millennial age about to be ushered 
in. Let us learn these lessons of faith and patience and 
wisdom. Let us learn to look to the Lord and accept 
his way, and not expect him to gratify our whims and 
fancies. The true prayer of the consecrated is, "Thy 
will be done." 

Another lesson for us is that while sickness, pain, 
sorrow and death are all parts of the great penalty for 
sin, yet the Lord is able to turn all these painful experiences 
into valuable lessons for his people— for those who 
trust him and seek to learn the lessons in his school. 
Our Lord did not heal all the sick nor awaken all the dead 
of the Jewish nation at his first advent. That great work 
belongs to the future, to the Millennial Kingdom. What 
he did do in these directions was merely to illustrate his 
power. They were miracles, intended more for the instruction 
they would give than for the blessings they 

R3495 : page 29 

contained. Had our Lord merely been intent upon comforting 
the bereaved, healing the sick and awakening 
those in the sleep of death, he might have accomplished 
a thousand-fold more than he did. He might at one word 
have healed all the sick and awakened all the sleeping 
ones, but he had no such purpose. That glorious work 
is future; and what our Lord did was merely a sign, an 
indication, a wonder to the people to attract their 
attention to him, to establish in their minds the thought 
that he was indeed the Son of God, and thus to prepare 
their hearts for the spiritual truths which he uttered in 
parables, and which after Pentecost were plainly stated 
through his mouthpieces, the apostles. 

WHAT MIRACLES ARE. 

There are many different views of miracles. Some 
call them violations of the laws of nature, and deny that 
nature's laws ever could be set aside. The numbers of 
those who deny that the Lord performed miracles or 
that any miracles ever were performed seem to increase 
daily. We are living in a very sceptical age. From the 



standpoint of faith, from the standpoint of the scriptural 
teaching, we must believe in miracles; but such belief 
does not imply that miracles set aside the laws of nature. 
In our view miracles are entirely co-operative with the 
laws of nature. More and more we should learn that all 
the forces of nature are under spiritual control. We may 
not understand this, but we can believe it nevertheless. 
We have illustrations of such mental or spiritual control 
all about us, as also in our own bodies for instance. 
The human mind, the will, is of itself invisible, yet it 
controls the nerves, muscles, sinews, bones, our entire 
human anatomy. 

And if this be true, if the human will can move the 
human hand, the human foot, and if without the will 
these could not move, does that will interfere with the 
laws of nature either in moving or in staying the hand 
and the foot? Assuredly not: it is part and parcel of 
the laws of nature that the will should control and direct 
the physical system. Likewise we may see that the 
divine mind or will has control not only of the divine 
being but also of all things in the universe. How fully 
this is true, to what extent the divine will can control 
all the forces of nature, it is impossible for us to appreciate 
because of our weakness of intellect and our limited 
knowledge of the forces all about us. We may have a 
slight conception, however, of these matters to-day that 
could not have been had a few years ago. The telephone, 
for instance, is as nearly a miracle as could be found— 
an invisible agency operating in a mysterious and unseen 
manner at great distances, and contrary to what we 
might have supposed to have been the laws of nature. 
We are merely asserting that there are many laws and 
operations of nature which are not understood, all of 
which are subject to the divine power. 

"THEN WE SHALL KNOW IF WE FOLLOW ON TO KNOW THE 
LORD." 

Not until we shall experience our "change" and 
know as we are known shall we be able to fathom all 
the mysteries connected with the miracles of Jesus and 
the miracles which we see in ourselves and all about us 
to-day. Meantime, however, let us be on our guard 
against the devices of the Adversary, by which he would 
ensnare those who are merely looking for earthly blessings, 
relief from earthly troubles. We are living in a 
time when, apparently in order to hold his dominion, 
the great Adversary is going into the healing business in 
a wholesale manner. Through spirit mediums, hypnotists, 
Mormon elders, Christian Scientists and others, 
Satan is making a bid for power in the world. He is 
seeking to use such power as he possesses in a manner 
that will allure and ensnare those who are selfishly seeking 
merely for earthly blessings, ignoring the great 
spiritual lessons of the Lord's Word. The Lord's consecrated 
people should be on their guard against the 



Adversary's methods and the snares of false doctrines 
into which he would lead them by this means. 

Our Lord's remark, "Except ye see signs and wonders 
ye will not believe," implies that the highest order 
of faith would be that which would not require such 
ocular demonstrations of divine power— that could trust 
the Lord without the proofs of miracles. So we find it 
to-day and so we believe it has always been. A similar 
lesson is found in our Lord's words to Thomas, who, 
after having seen the print of the nails, believed in the 
resurrection of Jesus. Our Lord there observed, "Because 
thou hast seen thou hast believed; blessed are they 
who not having seen yet have believed." Miracles were 
necessary for the introduction of the Gospel message to 
identify our Lord with the prophecies and to prepare the 
nucleus of the Church for the Spirit baptism; but in 
later years, throughout the Gospel age, the Lord has 
given his people the opportunity of still greater blessing 
by withholding the miracles and allowing us to 
believe in him and to accept him without the attestation 
of wonders. 

One of the greatest wonders, one of the greatest 
miracles, one that is more convincing to us than any 
other could be, is the change which the divine message 
has wrought in our own hearts— transforming us through 
the power of the holy Spirit. Not only do we see this 
transforming power at work in others, changing them 
from glory to glory and preparing them for the final 
glorious change of the First Resurrection, but additionally 
we experience it in our own hearts and appreciate 
the fact that the things that we once hated now we love, 
and the things we once loved now we hate. The poet 
gave the right thought here when he exclaimed, "I am 
a miracle of grace." 

Our Golden Text bears out this thought, that the 

R3495 : page 30 

miracles which our Lord did were only intended to be 
sufficient to establish his identity, and were not with the 
view of establishing a precedent for the healing of the 
world nor of the Church. The Lord's great healing time 
is designated in the Scriptures, "times of restitution." 
(Acts 3:21.) When those times shall come, when the 
Millennial Kingdom shall be established, the healing of 
the nations will be the great work; and it will not merely 
be a physical but also a mental and moral healing, which 
will gradually bring all in proper condition back to all 
that was lost in Eden, with increased knowledge through 
experience. 



R3495 : page 30 

THE SATISFYING WATER OF LIFE. 



John4:5-14-Feb. 5. 

Golden Text:— "Whosoever will, let him take 
of the water of life freely."— Rev. 22:17. 

THE SAMARITANS were descendants of those 

heathen peoples planted in Palestine by the 

Babylonian government when the Israelites were 

deported to the countries of Babylon. Gradually these 

mixed people, "Samaritans," acquired a love for the 

land in which they were dwelling, and its ancient history 

became theirs. They realized that the Jews had been 

God's favored people, but thought of them as rejected 

from divine favor and of themselves as having become 

their successors, not only in the possession of that portion 

of the Israelites' territory called Samaria, but also 

to some degree their successors in the blessings of Abraham, 

Isaac and Moses. They accepted the five books 

of Moses, the pentateuch, but rejected the remainder of 

the Old Testament Scriptures, which the Jews recognized. 

There was even a greater religious antipathy existing 
between Samaria and the Jews than between Jews 
and other heathen peoples, because the Samaritan faith 
came closer to the Jewish faith and was, therefore, in 
some respects more actively antagonistic to it than were 
some of the heathen faiths which permitted of no competition. 
For these reasons there were no dealings 
between Jews and Samaritans— that is, they might 
trade one with the other but had no social fellowship. 
The Jews regarded the Samaritans as impostors, not the 
children of Jacob at all. True, a few "scalawag" Jews 
had mingled with the Samaritans, but in so doing they 
had alienated themselves from their brethren and the 
religious faith of the nation. The Samaritans, coveting 
the promises and blessings made to the seed of Abraham, 
strove to convince themselves that they were now the 
heirs of those promises, and called Jacob their father, 
thus making themselves the children of Abraham and 
heirs of the Oath-Bound Covenant. 

JESUS' HUMILITY AND TACT. 

Our Lord and his apostles, journeying from Judea to 
Galilee, passed through the territory inhabited by the 
Samaritans. They had probably been on their journey 
since early morning, and at noon time Jesus rested at 
Jacob's well while the disciples went to a near-by village 
to purchase food. Water wells in Palestine, as in many 
parts of the world, are comparatively scarce. Jacob's 
well, dug fourteen centuries before our Lord's time, was 
a remarkably good one, deep, abundantly supplied with 
water and well curbed at the top, with a small mouth 
about fourteen inches in diameter. It seems to have 
been considered almost a miracle in its day, and even at 
the present time it is definitely located, although much 



filled up and to some degree dilapidated. 

A Samaritan woman came to the well for water 
while Jesus was resting there, and the account of our 
Lord's interview with her constitutes one of the most 
striking presentations of divine truth found in the 
Gospels. It is remarkable that on so many occasions 
our Lord said remarkable things to not very remarkable 
people under not very remarkable circumstances. There 

R3496 : page 30 

is encouragement in this for all of his followers: indeed 
we find that the Lord's principal communications all 
through this Gospel age have been with the humble— 
"not many wise, not many great, not many learned hath 
God chosen, but the poor of this world, rich in faith, to 
be heirs of the Kingdom." As then, by the grace of 
God, we have heard the voice divine speaking peace 
through Jesus Christ, let us rejoice, yet let us feel humble 
too, remembering that he is taking of the ignoble things 
of the world with a view to making of these things the 
noble, that will reflect his glory and show forth his praise 
through all eternity as marks of his grace. 

Our Lord's request of the woman, that she would 
allow him to have a drink of the water she had drawn, 
was a most tactful method of approach to her heart. In 
so doing he put himself in a measure under obligation to 
her. Thus in one sentence he broke the icy barrier which 
had always existed between the Jews and the Samaritans. 
The Jews claimed superiority, and while the 
Samaritans did not acknowledge this, they nevertheless 
felt it to some degree, just as colored people are apt to 
feel toward the whites. The woman was now ready to 
talk, but, standing on her dignity, she hasted not to 
give the drink, but parleyed to ask why a Jew of seemingly 
high character should act so differently from the 
custom— should ask water of a Samaritan woman, be 
willing thus to place himself under obligation to one of 
those usually treated as inferiors. 

Jesus, while probably thirsty, was more anxious to 
give the word of Truth than to receive the natural water, 
and instead of allowing himself to be drawn off by the 
woman's question into a discussion of the rights and 
wrongs of the Samaritans, he turned the conversation 
by saying, "If thou hadst known the gift of God and who 
it is that saith unto thee, 'Give me to drink,' thou 
wouldst have asked of him and he would give thee living 
water." The force of this expression is only partially 
seen until we learn that the words our Lord used, "The 
gift of God," were the very words customarily used by 
the water-carriers, who, with water-skins filled with 
water from such wells, went about the cities crying out 
in their own language, "The gift of God!" "The gift 
of God!" Water was thus termed the gift of God, and 
the woman presumed our Lord's meaning to be, If 
you had known about the water, the gift of God, etc. 



Of course the woman did not discern any deeper 
meaning— how could she? She at once retorted that he 
had no leather bucket, with camel's-hair rope, to let 
down for water, and therefore he could not give her to 
drink— "Whence then hast thou that living water? 
Art thou greater than our father Jacob, which gave us 
the well, and drank thereof himself and his children and 

R3496 : page 31 

his cattle?" Is there any other water as good as this? 
Have the Jews got as good a well in all their country? 

The value of water is much more appreciated in 
oriental countries than with us. It means the cooling 
and refreshment of the blood, the cleansing of the skin, 
the comfort of life in every way. The poet has expressed 
its value in the words:— 

"Traverse the desert, and then you can tell 
What treasures exist in the cold, deep well. 
And then you may learn what water is worth. 
The gnawing of hunger's worm is past, 
While fiery thirst lives on to the last. 
The hot blood stands in each gloomy eye. 
And 'Water, O God', is the only cry." 

"Let heaven this one rich gift withhold, 
How soon we find it better than gold." 

Our Lord's answer to the woman was, "Whosoever 
drinketh of this water shall thirst again, but whosoever 
shall drink of the water I shall give him shall never 
thirst; but the water I shall give him shall be in him a 
well of water springing up into everlasting life." How 
wonderful this statement must have appeared to the 
woman! How wonderful it appears to us even after we 
have learned its real depth and meaning. How we are 
continually learning more and more about this water of 
life— appreciating it more and more each day we live, 
and finding still greater refreshment in it as we continue 
to partake of it. 

As our physical systems call for water continually 
and cannot do without it, so we have longings and ambitions 
and thirsts of a higher intellectual order. These 
the whole world is endeavoring to satisfy, but the thirst 
for wealth, for influence, for power, is insatiable. What 
a little farmer or merchant finds of restlessness and lack 
of satisfaction, the greater farmer and merchant and 
manufacturer and millionaire and prince and king and 
emperor find in their larger spheres. We remember the 
story of how Alexander the Great wept because there 
were no more worlds that he might conquer. We remember 
that Solomon the wise, after having tasted of all the 
streams of pleasure and novelty which the world could 
supply to the richest and wisest and most influential 
man of the time, cried out, "Vanity of vanities, all is 



vanity!" What the whole world is seeking for and failing 
to get, our Lord Jesus gives to his people— water of life, 
satisfaction. Those who receive his blessing have in 
them wells of water springing up in their hearts "A 
fountain ever springing." Their longing thirsts are 
satisfied as nothing else can satisfy them; they have 
more than ambition could ask. The divine bounties 
granted to them are exceedingly and abundantly more 
than they could have asked or thought. 

"JESUS HATH SATISFIED! JESUS IS MINE!" 

The whole world is seeking for happiness. The few 
who have truly found Jesus, and who have made a full 
consecration of their hearts to him, and to whom he has 
given the water of life— these few have found the happiness 
which the world is seeking in other directions in 
vain. They have found a heart satisfaction which is 
able even to offset trials, sorrows, difficulties and disappointments 
from other sources, and to glory in this 
realization, that their experiences are working to their 
advantage, proving them, preparing them for still greater 
riches of glory by and by. As the Apostle declares, this 
new life, this new relationship with Christ under which 
he furnishes the water of life, has the promise not only of 
the life which now is, but also of that which is to come. 

Quite a good many who bear the name of Christ 
have a hope toward God as respects the future, but very 
little of the joys of his salvation in the present time. 
Such are not living up to their privileges— they have not 
properly grown up into Christ, their living Head. They 
need to increase their faith by adding to it fortitude, 
knowledge, patience, godliness, love of the brethren and 
love in general. As they thus comply with the terms of 
the school of Christ they will more and more be able to 
say not only that the Lord has lifted their feet from the 
horrible pit of sin and death and placed them upon the 
rock Christ Jesus, but also to add, "He hath put a new 
song in my mouth, even the loving kindness of our God." 

THE GOLDEN TEXT. 

Those who prepared the lesson evidently supposed 
that they were providing a Golden Text which would 
be a very key to the lesson, but in this they erred after 
a very common manner. The Golden Text is part of a 
picture in Revelation which represents not the conditions 
of the present time but those of the future— those 
of the Millennial age. It pictures the Church, the Bride 
of Christ, complete and glorified, as the New Jerusalem 
filled with the glory of God; it pictures the water of life 
proceeding from this glorified New Jerusalem, the Church 
in Kingdom glory— flowing as a river with the trees of 
life on either side of it bearing fruits, whose leaves are 
for the healing of the heathen. It pictures the Spirit and 
the Bride in the future, saying, "Come"— inviting whosoever 



will to come and take of the water of life freely. 

That picture is future, as is evident not only from 
the connections of the narrative but because there is 
at present no Bride, but merely an espoused virgin. 
(2 Cor. 1 1 :2.) The "very elect" of this Gospel age, who 
have striven to "make their calling and election sure," 
await the marriage feast at the close of this age, that they 
may enter then into the joys of their Lord as his Bride. 
This scene, then, in which the Bride in conjunction with 
the holy Spirit will invite to the water of life, is one which 
pictures the effulgent blessings of the Millennial Kingdom 
and its blessed opportunities, which shall be extended 
without restriction to every creature. 

There is no such river of the water of life at the 
present time, and no one is commissioned to use the 
words of the Golden Text now. Now, as the Lord himself 
declared, "No man can come unto me except the 
Father which sent me draw him." The present, therefore, 
is the time for the special drawing of a special class 
to the Savior. It includes only those who have the ear 
to hear and the eye of faith to appreciate the grace and 
blessings which are now being offered. Blessed are our 
eyes for they see and our ears for they hear! We rejoice, 
however, that by and by all the blind eyes shall be opened 
and all the deaf ears shall be unstopped, and all shall 
then have the opportunity for drinking of the water of 
life to their satisfaction continually. 

We who are now favored need not continually to 
drink at any well or river; but, on the contrary, as explained 
by our Lord in this lesson, they each have in 
them a well of water springing up unto eternal life— a 
"fountain ever springing." O, how rich is our condition! 
How wonderful are the Lord's bounties granted to 
those who are of humble and contrite heart and who 
possess the hearing of faith! Let us indeed abide in 
him, in his love, and in possession of the bounties he has 
provided for our refreshment. 



page 33 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVI. FEBRUARY 1, 1905. No. 3 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 35 

Will the Welsh Revival Spread? 35 

What a Famous Preacher Sees 35 

What Rev. Carter, D.D., Thinks 36 

Bible Chronology and the Archaeologists 36 

Babel and Its Results 37 

Scientific Dates Too Long 39 

The Scholarly Fable 40 

The House of Mercy 40 

The Perfect Copy (Poem) 43 

"Ever Give Us This Bread." 43 

Public Ministries of the Truth 48 

Special Items 35 

page 34 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2 l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R3498 : page 34 

"DAILY HEAVENLY MANNA. 



This little book of 200 pages is, we feel sure, just the thing 
every WATCH TOWER reader will want to have on his breakfast 
table. It contains a Scripture text for each day of the 
year, and following it twelve to fifteen lines of comment by 
Brother Russell-pithy selections from WATCH TOWER 
articles, with references, so that you can turn and read 
further should you so desire. The selections were made by 
Sister G. W. Seibert and show her particularity and carefulness. 
They will last indefinitely, being without year date. 
At the Bible House breakfast table we first read the text, 
ask for questions on it and discuss it, and then read the 
TOWER extract as the closing comment. 

Wholesale prices to TOWER readers: 20c cloth bound, 
60c leather bound— postage included. 

page 34 

OUR OFFICE WORK DELAYED. 



Illness of office helpers and the usual rush of our correspondence 
department at this season have unavoidably delayed 
our replies to some of our esteemed correspondents, as 
well as delayed several issues of the WATCH TOWER. We 
are doing our best and believe that the Lord accepts this, 
and trust that all of our dear readers will be patient also. 



R3497 : page 35 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
WILL THE WELSH REVIVAL EXTEND? 



MANY earnest souls all over "Christendom" are 

asking this question and hoping that the answer 

in the affirmative may prove true. Conditions 

in Great Britain favor its spread. Experience shows 

that a time of adversity, when poverty humbles the 

hearts of the masses is more favorable to religious revivals 

than are prosperous times. 

It is stated on good authority that a million and a 
quarter (1,250,000) of the British people are out of work 
and on the verge of starvation: times are depressed and 
there is no work for them, we are told. Collections for 



their aid— to barely keep them alive— are being taken 
up in Great Britain and in Canada. People in that 
condition incline to look to the Creator. This, too, 
gives us the thought that the great "time of trouble 
such as was not since there was a nation" (in which this 
age will terminate and the Millennial age begin) will be 
the precursor of the mightiest and best revival that the 
world has ever known. As the Scriptures declare: 
"When the judgments of the Lord are abroad in the 
earth the inhabitants of the world will learn 
righteousness." 

The Welsh revival commenced in a little 
country church in Cardiganshire, and at once spread 
through the Glamorganshire coal fields— a region noted 
we are told for its irreligion. Editor Stead thus describes 
it:~ 

"The most remarkable thing about the meetings which 
I attended was the extent to which they were absolutely 
without any human direction or leadership. 'We must obey 
the Spirit,' is the watchword of Evan Roberts, and he is as 
obedient as the humblest of his followers. The meetings 
open— after any amount of preliminary singing, while the 
congregation is assembling— by the reading of a chapter or 
a psalm. Then it is go as you please for two hours or more. 

"And the amazing thing is that it does go and does not 
get entangled in what might seem to be inevitable confusion. 
Three-fourths of the meeting consists of singing. No one 
uses a hymn book. No one gives out a hymn. The last 
person to control the meeting in any way is Mr. Evan Roberts. 
People pray and sing, and give testimony; exhort as the Spirit 
moves them. As a study of the psychology of crowds I have 
seen nothing like it. You feel that the thousand or fifteen 
hundred persons before you have become merged into one 
myriad-headed, but single-souled personality. 

"Large numbers of 'sudden conversions' are reported, 
and men of careless or evil lives stand up and 'testify' to 
their faith in Christ. In some places the public houses are 
almost deserted, the police magistrates find their work 
materially reduced, and colliery managers are surprised at 
the steadier work and the absence of the accustomed blasphemies 
from the pit galliers. In not a few cases football 
matches, which in Wales not less than in many regions of 
England have been tainted by gambling and brutality, 
have been abandoned because the members of the teams 
were ashamed of their 'former conversation.' Even if we 
allowed for possible exaggeration by sensational journalists, 
and if we take into account the emotional nature which 
distinguishes the Welsh even more perhaps than the Celts 
of other lands, there can be no doubt that an extraordinary 
wave of religious enthusiasm is rushing over the principality 
and for the time, at all events, is changing the lives of thousands 
of its inhabitants." 



Other accounts which reach us seem to indicate a 



considerable degree of fanaticism and hysterics associated 

with the movement, and the suggestion has even 

been offered that it is the work of the evil spirits operating 

as they have done in the "holy rollers" and others who 

in the name of religion and the holy Spirit have caricatured 

these. However, we have seen no accounts that 

would seem to justify the latter view. It will nevertheless 

be well for us to watch the movement and thus 

"try the spirits, whether they be of God." One of the 

favorable features is that it has but few marks of Babylon 

and is carried on by the laity, rather than by the 

clergy. 

WHAT A FAMOUS PREACHER SEES. 



Rev. H. W. Thomas, D.D., formerly pastor of the 
People's church, now a resident of Florida, reached 
Chicago recently to conduct a funeral service. He 
remarked:— 

"My travels through the country, and my study of the 
trend of modern movements, show me that within the lifetime 
of the present younger generation three former dreams 
of mine will work into eventualities. World peace will 
shortly be realized, industrial education will rapidly develop, 
and the unification of religion is but a matter of time. The 
religion of Lyman Abbott will soon be general and attract 
the masses to worship." 

Hear, O "Christendom," the voice of another of 
thy famous prophets!— another of thy wise men! But 

R3497 : page 36 

know assuredly the word of the Lord, "The wisdom of 
thy wise men has perished, the understanding of thy 
prudent men vanished."— Isa. 29:14. 

The gentleman has dreamed of a "world peace" 
without the second coming of our Lord and the realization 
of his prayer— "Thy Kingdom come, thy will be 
done on earth even as it is done in heaven." His dream 
will never be realized, but the Lord's promise will be 
fulfilled. 

He dreams of industrial education: that we are 
having and will have with very different results from 
what he dreams. The industrial classes are indeed being 
educated, but not in the school of Christ; and the Bible 
clearly shows that they will soon be learned in all the 
branches of self-defence and aggression which ere long 
will sweep peace from the earth and involve the world 
in social chaos. 

He dreams of a unification of religion and may live 
to see a unification of sects "bound in bundles for the 
great day of trouble."— Matt. 13:30. 

He dreams of the atheistic or pantheistic views of 
Dr. Abbott attracting the masses, and will find that such 



a rejection of the Word of God has more attraction for 
the clergy than for the masses, who more generally 
will be repelled by such a cutting of all anchorage of 
faith within the vail. 

WHAT REV. CARTER, D.D., THINKS. 



Rev. Carter, not holding fast the Scriptures, has 
made shipwreck of his faith; but we are glad to see that 
his eyes are open to at least some of the inconsistencies 
of the creed he is still attached to. Indeed it evidently 
was these very errors that drove him to his present 
position. His wrong view of the Bible was induced by 
his faith that the Westminster Confession was a truthful 
representation of its teachings. This is the tendency 
of errors, and now God's people must be helped out of 
them— to see the true teachings of God's Word. 

A few of Dr. Carter's presentations we quote below, 
with the comment that the Bible is in harmony 
with common sense and that it is the creeds that are 
absurd: 

"I was brought up to believe that all the heathen and, 
in fact, by far the greater portion of all the dead generations, 
were consigned to a little hell of fire and brimstone, and 
forever and ever. How any kindly disposed man could 
really believe that and have another happy moment I fail 
to see. If the consciousness that he had escaped himself 
would be any consolation, then I am sorry for him. 

"The Westminster confession still remains the creed of 
the Presbyterian church. If an effort were made to depose 
it from its place there would be vigorous opposition. The 
men who oppose the revision would oppose the retiring of 
the creed. The confession remaining, with its remains this 
terrible teaching: That for the single sin of Adam the whole 
race of man— remember, millions upon millions, countless 
millions— were condemned by God to eternal torment, and 
that he intervened by His election to save certain ones from 
this awful fate. I do not believe that this is a true statement 
of the facts. I think that men in general do not believe that 
this is a true statement of the facts. I think that nobody 
does, unless he has been screwed up to it, or down to it, by 
a stiff theological training. I have unbounded confidence in 
the greatness and goodness of God, but if any man could persuade 
me that this is the true statement of God's management 
of the human race I should lose my faith in God. I think such 
a statement makes atheists, and how delightful it is that 
no word of Christ's ever hints at any such terrible fact. If 
this be so, it is a monstrous blunder to put this as the very 
foundation teaching of Christianity. 

"I hear men say that they are glad to live to-day because 
of the great modern improvements, schools, libraries, 
telegraphs and such like. I am glad to live to-day because 
our children are not taught this fire and brimstone teaching. 
The relief is incalculable. Neither does any sensible man 



believe that he can do wrong and escape the inevitable consequence. 
'Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap,' 
is true forever. Such truths time has no effect upon. They 
belong to eternity. But we are practically held, in the Presbyterian 
church, to the endless torment theory, though the fire 
and brimstone part has been dropped out. If we are allowed 
in the Presbyterian church, to hold conditional immortality, 
or any other reasonable modification of the endless torment 
theory, then I wish some one would say so. No one has as 
yet, and I fear the man would find himself in trouble who 
would rise in presbytery and say so. 
"A Presbyterian minister told me that some one put into 

R3498 : page 36 

the hands of the minister's daughter a catechism to learn. 
She came running to her father and flung the book upon the 
floor crying: 'I hate the wicked book.' 'Why, Susie, you 
don't hate the catechism?' 'Yes, I do. Hear what it says: 
"What are you by nature?" "I am an enemy of God, a 
child of Satan and an heir of hell," and it's a lie.' Fortunately 
the minister was a man before he was a minister. So he folded 
his arms and said: 'No, my daughter, you are not that.'" 

AN UNCERTAIN COMPLIMENT. 



"When Dr. Abbott was delivering his course of lectures 
on the Old Testament in Plymouth Church and printing them 
in "The Brooklyn Eagle," the late Bishop John F. Hurst 
paid the writer a visit. When asked what he thought of the 
lecturer and the lectures, the good Bishop said: 'What do I 
think of Dr. Abbott and his lectures? Why, who ever knew 
an Abbott that had any conception of logic or logical method, 
or of science or scientific method, or of anything but rhetoric? 
I have known Lyman Abbott many a time to become hypnotized 
by his own verbosity and to go kiting off into the 
regions of speculation and then enter his study and write 
it all down and send it out to the world as if it were God's 
truth! "--Bible Student. 



R3498 : page 36 

BIBLE CHRONOLOGY AND THE ARCHAEOLOGISTS. 

ARGUING against the theory of the "Higher Critics," 
that the Bible Chronology is thousands of 
years shorter than it should be, Rev. W. 
F. McCaulay says: 

The genealogies of the Hebrews taken in connection 
with occasional definite dates, enable us to determine 
with a good deal of accuracy the length of various periods. 
The suggestion that these genealogies are not always 



those of father and son in direct descent, but of ancestor 
and descendant immediate or remote, is contrary to the 
ascertained method of Hebrew genealogical record as 
shown by examples where we know that immediate succession 
is meant. The occasional omission of names, 
through copyist's errors, or for other reasons, could not 
affect the result more than a few hundred years at most, 
nor alter the fact that the word "begat" bears no other 
generic meaning than that of direct generation. 
The theory that dynasties are intended by the 
names of individuals involves us in the absurdity of 
translating, "And the dynasty Arphaxad lived five and 
thirty years, and begat the dynasty Salah. And the 
dynasty Arphaxad lived after it begat the dynasty Salah 
four hundred and three years, and begat male and female 
dynasties." Equally untenable is the idea that Abraham 
and Isaac were but the personifications of tribal 

R3498 : page 37 

histories, as though we should read that the tribe Isaac 
went out to meditate in the field at the eventide, and 
the tribe Rebecca alighted from her camel and put a 
veil over her face, and was brought by the tribe Isaac 
into the tent of the tribe Sarah. Would not a people 
gifted in producing such personifications observe also 
the incongruities of these statements? Evidently they 
understood the language to apply to individuals. 

There can be no question but that the early Hebrew 
records were intended to be a circumstantial account 
of the beginnings of human history. The tenth chapter 
of Genesis is the great ethnological register of the world, 
showing that the Hebrew writers had the necessary data 
and the true historians' interest in the facts. The very 
persons are named by whom the isles of the Gentiles 
were divided. Gomer is mentioned, whose radical letters 
GMR or KMR we find used in Cymmerians, and, by 
metathesis, in Crimea and Germans. Ashkenaz, by 
metathesis, Aksenaz, may be the name of the country 
lying upon the Black Sea, which the Greeks called 'axenos, 
euphemized into 'euxeinos, or Euxine. And Javan 
equals Iwan and the Ionians, or Greeks; not to speak 
of probable references to the Scythians, Medes, Thracians, 
Celts, Armenians, Etruscans, and others. These 
are Japhethites; and the record of the Hamites and 
Shemites is far more extended. 

The statement is made that in the days of Peleg 
the earth was divided. Peleg was born 101 years after 
the Flood, and died 340 years after. The confusion of 
tongues, leading to the division of the earth, therefore, 
occurred in his lifetime. That the early historian believed 
he knew the time when this division of the earth 
took place is shown by his associating it with this particular 
person. The rise of Babylonia is also clearly 
described. Nimrod, a Hamite, becomes a mighty hunter 
before Jehovah, and so ingratiates himself into the 



good will of the people by protecting them from the 

wild beasts that had accumulated in large numbers 

since the Deluge, that he becomes their leader in governmental 

affairs, and builds cities. The very names of 

these cities are given: Babel, Erech, Accad, and Calneh, 

the latter probably identical with the city now called 

variously Neffer, Nippur, and Nuffar. The conclusion 

of archaeologists that the latter city dates back to the 

earliest age corroborates the fact that the Hebrew Scriptures 

do describe the beginnings of history; and if their 

accounts of the remotest facts are definite and correct, 

why distrust their chronology? 

That Nineveh and its neighboring cities were founded 
after the Babylonian towns, is also set forth in the 
Bible. The hunting instinct of Nimrod or of his descendants 
led to the making of new conquests from the 
wilds of nature and the founding of outposts of civilization 
far beyond the plain of Shinar. The subjugator 
of beasts and men and refractory nature was, according 
to the Revised Version, the founder of Assyria as well 
as of Babylonia; and this early overflowing of the population 
has an important bearing upon the subject of 
chronology. 

BABEL AND ITS RESULTS. 

The historicity of the confusion of tongues is 
corroborated by the Borsippa inscription of Nebuchadnezzar, 
and elaborated by the tradition that the work 
was stopped by lightning from heaven— a strong proof 
for those who accept as true whatever comes from a 
heathen source, however much they may deny Bible 
authority. 

It is not necessary to suppose that every individual 
of the race joined in the migration from the vicinity of 
Ararat to Shinar. There is no evidence that Noah and 
Shem assisted in the building of Babel. Indeed, there 
is strong probability that the ancient Shemites did not 
suffer from the confusion of tongues as much as others. 
The Semitic tongues preserve to this day their general 
characteristics, as though symmetrically established in 
a remote age; but the jargon of Hamitic, or Turanian, 
tongues gives evidence of having originated in some 
such catastrophe as that of Babel. The Hebrews, with 
a constant language, preserved the true records, but the 
Hamites, losing their mother tongue, lost also the connected 
narrative of events and involved their history in 
myth and fable, producing also polytheism and idolatry. 

EARLY POPULATIONS. 

The claim that the dates of the Hebrew Bible do 
not give sufficient time between the Flood and Abraham 
for the rise of the great nations existent at the time of 
that patriarch, is based upon an assumption of the greatness 
of those nations. Resen is the only one of the ancient 



cities recorded as great at the time of the writing 
of Genesis. Nippur, where excavations have recently 
been made, was not a vast city. Its area within the 
walls, exclusive of its educational and religious section, 
seems to have included only 90 to 100 acres. The fact 
that Abram with 318 of his servants defeated the army 
of Chedorlaomer and the kings who were with him, and 
chased them from Dan to Hobah, (or "hiding place"), 
probably some forty miles, or perhaps further, if Dan in 
Gilead is meant, recovering Lot and his goods, with the 
women and people,— does not indicate that Chedorlaomer's 
foray was any more serious than the incursion of 
a marauding band of Indians upon frontier settlements. 
Enough people could come into existence in 150 years 
to attempt the building of the Tower of Babel; and it is 
reasonable to suppose that in 427 years, at the time of 
the call of Abram, the world might have had a population 
of 2,000,000 at least. If we assign 500,000 of these 
to Egypt, and an equal number each to Babylonia and 
Assyria, there would remain another half million for the 

R3499 : page 37 

beginnings of other nations. If half the inhabitants of 
the ancient world were gathered in cities, five cities of 
50,000 might have risen in each of the three leading 
monarchies, and five more of equal size among the scattered 
populations of other nations, leaving still a million 
for rural districts. 

The race began in the new world where it let off 
in the old. Tubal-cain had learned to work in brass and 
iron and Jubal to play upon the harp and organ. When 
the people journeyed from the hill country near Ararat 
they went west to Shinar, and finding there a country 
favorable for agricultural development, the building of a 
capital commended itself to them as an important step. 
There the lust of world-power found its first post-diluvian 
expression, of which Babylon became the symbol 
to this day, typifying the "Babylon the Great" of Revelation. 
After the confusion of tongues, the people still 
were Babel builders, and began to erect other works. 
When, by conquest, a city became a ruined heap, there 
they built again, kings making frequent use of the material 
of their predecessors. "Hundred-gated Thebes" 

R3499 : page 38 

seems to belong to an early Egyptian period, and 
Menes, the first king is credited with founding Memphis 
and building a dyke still to be traced. His son wrote a 
work on astronomy, and his grandson built a pyramid 
at Sakkara 394 feet square and 196 feet high. In the 
fourth dynasty, Cheops [?] erected the great pyramid of 
Ghizeh; and in the fifth, the Book of Egyptian Wisdom 
was composed, whose contents resemble in style the 
Proverbs of Solomon. Primitive man was not only a 



capable being but possessed sufficient literary training 
to enable him to record his deeds in written characters. 
The highest form of literary ability, as well as the highest 
regard for exact and truthful statement, we find among 
the theistic Hebrews. 

RAPIDITY OF CHANGE. 

Babylonia and Chaldea are studded with mounds 
from north to south. Mr. Layard found the whole country 
between the Tigris and the Khabour in upper Mesopotamia 
covered with mounds, the remnants of early 
Assyrian cities. Hilprecht says that at the time of 
Ur-Nina, Babylonia was divided into a number of petty 
states, and that first one and then another exercised 
hegemony over the rest. Frequent changes in government 
and population would thus be a natural result, 
and cities would be overthrown by conquest, and new 
ones rise in their places, with astonishing rapidity. 
Archaeologists follow a scientific method based upon 
the idea of slow processes, and overwhelm us with dissertations 
upon a remote past lost in the grey mist of 
fable. 

Rapid change is to be looked for in the early days 
of the race, when customs were plastic, and when great 
migrations like that of the Israelites from Egypt were 
possible. To predicate slowness of change of a formative 
period, is contrary to natural order. The startling conquests 
of the old world-rulers is proof of the mobile conditions 
that then existed. The world had in it the hot 
blood of youth, that has been cooling with age. 

The great antiquity claimed by heathen nations 
is no doubt due to their desire to trace their descent from 
the gods, and to appear the first of nations; but the Hebrews, 
having in their possession the ethnological register 
of the world, that showed all mankind to be of a common 
origin, and God to be their Creator, had no such 
motive, and adhered to the facts as laid down in the 
records. Exaggerated heathen chronologies are not relieved 
of oriental extravagance by being placed on monuments, 
or clay or alabaster tablets. Nor are the inscriptions 
otherwise always credible. For two hundred years 
after the Israelitish king Omri, Assyrian inscriptions 
speak of Canaan as the "land of Omri" and the "land of 
the house of Omri," and Jehu is referred to as the "son 
of Omri," though of another dynasty. We might no 
doubt go through the whole polytheistic polyglot of 
heathen tongues without finding anything reliable on 
which to predicate their origin. So prevalent is this 
tendency to fabulousness among them that some critics 
are misled into thinking that the origin of every nation 
is involved in fable, that of the Hebrews along with the 
rest. 

The Egyptian priests mentioned to Herodotus but 
two kings of historic note, the second of whom had not 
been dead 900 years when the historian visited that 



country. But they had a papyrus roll containing the 

names of 330 monarchs, who they said were of no importance. 

Many of these kinglets were perhaps contemporaneous, 

ruling over different parts of the country 

simultaneously, yet the priests filled up this space with 

341 generations lasting for 10,000 years. They also 

said that twice since Egypt was a monarchy the sun had 

risen where it sets and set where it rises! 

It seems that the Egyptians had no era from which 
to date events; and, notwithstanding the frequent oriental 
custom of a king associating his son with him on 
his throne in the latter years of his reign, it seems that 
they did not distinguish between a sole and a joint reign. 
It is said that, save in a few instances, the Egyptians 
were without the chronological idea. Rawlinson says 
that it was the unanimous confession of Egyptologists 
that chronology upon the monuments was almost non-existent. 
Even Baron Bunsen says that chronology 
can not be elicited from the Egyptians; and he was 
obliged to reduce the accession of Menes, the first king, 
from his former estimate of 3623 to 3059 B.C. Mariette, 
Director of Conservation of Egyptian Antiquities, says 
that the Egyptians never had any chronology at all. 
Even if they had, it would be difficult to compute the 
gaps of centuries, the times of convulsion or dismemberment, 
of weakness and internal or external troubles, and 
of obscure history of kings. 

Berosus, the chronicler of Chaldea, wrote about 
260 B.C. Of his writings, only some fragments are 
extant, and these give enormous distortions of facts, 
condemning Chaldean sources of information and by 
implication confirming the Hebrew Scriptures. The remark 
of De Wette, that where tradition leaves blanks, 
imagination steps in and fills them up, is exemplified in 
the chronological scheme of Berosus; which is: Ten 
kings reign 432,000 years; eighty-six kings, 33,080 (or 
33,091); eight Median kings, 224; and so on down to Pul, 
or Tiglath-pileser, who came to the throne 745 B.C. 
The whole historical period of Berosus reaches back 
only to about 2245 B.C.— well within the period of 
Hebrew chronology. The ten mythical kings, who 
reign an average of over 43,000 years each, correspond 
with the ten Hebrew patriarchs before the Flood, whom 
Chaldean tradition turned into fabulous characters; and 
the second list of kings, whose reign averaged less than 
four hundred years, corroborates the Hebrew account 
of the gradual shortening of human life subsequent to 
the Deluge. Comparing the modest and rational Hebrew 
chronology with the extravagant claims of other 
oriental nations, who for one moment could regard even 
the historical records of Chaldea as of equal credibility 
with those of the Hebrews? 

Sargon I. took pains to have the sacred books of 
the earlier Accadians translated, and thus preserved the 
Hamite, or so-called Chaldean, tradition of the Deluge, 
which is part of an epic poem, "The Adventures of 



Izdhubar"; but Sargon instead of being placed at 3800 
B.C. is assigned by another authority to a period nearly 
2000 years later. Hammurabi, of whose code we have 
heard lately, may possibly belong in the sixteenth century 
before Christ instead of being contemporaneous 
with, or previous to, Abraham. It was this king who 
overran the whole country down to the Persian Gulf, 
and called himself king of Sumir and Accad and the 
four nations. He was a builder and restorer of temples, 
palaces, and cities. He made Babylon his capital, and 

R3499 : page 39 

added to the magnificence of the worship of Bel, thus 
raising that idol to the chief position in the Babylonish 
religious system. He built the royal canal, one of the 
greatest in Babylonian territory. Sargon I. before him 
had ruled from the Persian Gulf to the Mediterranean 
Sea, but the country broke up into various states, affording 
a field for a new conqueror. This illustrates the 
tendencies of the times— frequent changes and conquests, 
the enslavement of nations, the grinding into ruin, and 
building again. The Book of Judges and the captivities 
of Israel throw additional light upon the storm-swept 
eras of antiquity. 

The Chinese carry back the history of the world for 
several hundred thousand years, but those who regard 
their literature most favorably believe that authentic 
accounts go back but to the twenty-second century B.C. 
and only respectable traditions carry back the history 
four centuries earlier. One of the native accounts 
places Yao at the beginning of their historic records. He 
ascended the throne 2357 B.C. A great deluge occurred 
in his reign. Our date for the Noachian deluge is 2348 
B.C., within the reign of Yao. His son and successor 
was Shum, which recalls the name of Shem. Another 
source of information makes Fohi, or Fuh-hi, to be the 
same as Yao, and makes him reign after the Flood to the 
very year that Noah died; while his successor reigns 146 
years after him, to within a few years of the death of 
Shem. The correspondence between these Chinese 
dates and Ussher's chronology is remarkable, and 
amounts to much more than mere coincidence. That 
the Chinese preserve some reminiscences of the beginning 
of human history, is partly confirmed by the fact that 
their word-symbol for "covet" is a woman under a tree- 
recalling the temptation in Eden. 

SCIENTIFIC DATES TOO LONG. 

In addition to all these facts and inferences, is the 
further consideration that, if the civilizations of Egypt 
and Babylonia existed for 7000 years or more before 
Christ, those countries ought to have overflowed and 
carried their civilizations to every part of Europe, Asia, 
and Africa. We can not think of such teeming populations 



R3500 : page 39 

as must in that case have existed as being confined 
to the narrow limits to which every argument shows 
that they were confined. It was not long, as we have 
seen, till Babylonia did flow into Assyria. This tendency 
ought to have spread civilization throughout the 
whole Eastern Hemisphere thousands of years before 
Christ, had there been such extensive lapses of time. If 
the dates of our Hebrew Bible are too short to account 
for all the changes traced, the dates of the archaeologists 
are too long. A possible solution of the question may 
be in the suggestion that some of the remains assigned 
to post-diluvian time may in fact be ante-diluvian. 

ANCIENT WRITING. 

The enormous difficulty of deciphering the inscriptions 
may well cause us to pause before accepting the 
translations as final. There are three kinds of cuneiform 
inscriptions. The Persian is the simplest, the Scythian 
more difficult, and the Assyrian, or Babylonian, the 
most complicated of all. One group of wedge-shaped 
characters may represent the noun "country" and the 
verb "to take"; it may also stand for the syllables mat 
lat, sat, kur, nat. This difference in reading depends 
upon whether the character is an ideograph or a phonograph 
—that is, whether it represents an idea or is used 
in the spelling of a word without reference to its inherent 
meaning. Older than the cuneiform, we find such a 
language as that stamped upon bricks of Ur of the 
Chaldees which only three scholars in the United States 
can read. It may be seriously questioned whether the 
cuneiform is not less ancient than has been supposed. 
The fact that the monumental cuneiform always runs 
from left to right would indicate that it is comparatively 
modern. In general, the Semitic races wrote from right 
to left, and the Aryan from left to right. The Assyrians 
did have a writing that ran the other way, but the cuneiform 
seems to have been reserved for monumental purposes, 
as representing their idea of the best development 
of the art— a modern method superseding the ancient. 
The hundreds of characters in the Assyrian cuneiform 
and "the great apparent laxity in the use of letters and 
the grammar" make the matter of decipherment one of 
difficulty. The liability to error in deciphering ancient 
inscriptions is shown in the mistake of the learned Professor 
Delitzsch, who claimed that Yahveh was Babylonian 
because he found it combined with a Babylonian 
proper name, Yahveh-ilu, which he translated, "Yahveh 
is God"; but it has since been proved that the 
word should be read Yapi-ilu. The theory that Hebrew 
monotheism developed from a Babylonian polytheism 
may receive a needed check by the discovery of this 
error. Even if scholarship were equal to the task of 



making infallible translations, we would still have to 
make allowance for the oriental tendency to extravagance 
in footing up the chronologies. 

HILPRECHT'S VIEWS. 

Professor Hilprecht's explorations at Nippur were 
conducted almost entirely by Peters and Haynes, though 
the professor translated the inscriptions. He was on 
the ground eleven weeks at one time, and ten at another, 
and devotes considerable space in his recent book to 
criticisms of Haynes and Peters, the latter of whom had 
taken the chief initiative in the explorations. However, 
Professor Hilprecht says that he had ignored personal 
attacks, and spoke only of "fundamental differences 
on important technical and scientific questions." While 
such differences exist among the savants, the rest of 
humanity may well wait for more light before accepting 
conclusions. You may look in vain in Hilprecht's book 
for an explanation of the method by which he arrives 
at his chronological deductions, unless it be the assumption 
of a working hypothesis. A sentence, in which he 
says that it doubtless took centuries for a certain people 
to subjugate another, reveals the general method— 
"doubtless." He found above Naram-Sin's pavement 
thirty-six feet of accumulations, supposed to represent 
more than four thousand years of Babylonian history. 
Below the pavement were thirty-one feet, representing 
another period— how long? He says: "I do not hesitate, 
therefore, to date the founding of the temple of Bel and 
the first settlement of Nippur somewhere between 6000 
and 7000 B.C., possibly even earlier." His method 
seems to be well comprehended by these two principles— 
"doubtless," and "I do not hesitate." It is said that 
to call Hilprecht, as some fulsome magazine writers do, 
the "foremost authority on cuneiform paleography," 
is some way from the truth, as he is yet too young a 
scholar to have surpassed certain others, among them 

R3500 : page 40 

his teacher, Delitzsch, who, as we have seen, is not above 
the possibility of error. 

THE SCHOLARLY FABLE. 

The disposition of scholarship falsely so-called to 
deny divine control in the development of the Hebrew 
national life and writings, and to regard all present faith 
as the result of a natural process of human thinking, 
is one of the refinements of evil. It is the application 
of the theory of physical evolution to the realm of mind 
and morals, to the practical exclusion of God from human 
history. Some scholars have no doubt followed 
the methods of this cult unconsciously, through not 
knowing the Scriptures and the power of God, while 



others have been allured by scientific mirage. Satan 

tried to destroy the world, first by lust, then by idolatry, 

next by self-sufficiency, and now by over civilization and 

unbalanced scholarship. (1 Tim. 6:20,21.) This scholarship 

does not necessarily attack the Bible, but presents 

a system of dogma as a substitute for it, as Gnosticism 

and Neo-platonism attempted to do in the early centuries 

of Christianity, but the effort will end only in 

failure, and will leave, like the buried cities of the past, 

only the titles of its former greatness. 



R3500 : page 40 

THE HOUSE OF MERCY. 

JOHN 5: 1-15. --FEB. 19. 

Golden Text:— "A great multitude followed him, 
because they saw his miracles."— John 6:2. 

THE word Bethesda signifies "House of Mercy." 
This was the name given to a large structure with 
five porches connected with a large pool of water, 
situated near to the walls of Jerusalem. The pool was fed 
by a spring whose underground reservoirs served as a 
trap for certain gases. When the gas accumulated in 
this reservoir it would force out the water, much after 
the same manner that oil wells sometimes flow out their 
contents. These flows of the water impregnated with 
the gases occurred at irregular intervals, and at such 
times the water in the pool would be disturbed or made 
to boil by the inflow as well as by the gases it contained. 

The phenomenon not being understood, many considered 
that the agitation of the pool was miraculous, attributing 
it to an angel from heaven. Partly by the 
energizing influence of faith and partly perhaps by some 
medicinal quality imparted to the water by the gases, 
cures were effected which caused the pool to have considerable 
fame throughout that district. Benefit from 
the gases is suggested by the fact that it was only those 
who entered the water immediately after the agitation 
who profited by it. The impregnating gases, when once 
in the pool, would be speedily combined with the atmosphere, 
and those entering the water first would not 
only have the benefit of the impregnated water on their 
persons but would also inhale some of the escaping gases 
—ozone, or what not. A number of such springs are 
known to-day in various parts of the world, and many 
of them have a medicinal quality without any suspicion 
of a miracle. The American Cyclopedia on this subject 
says:— 

"Medicinal waters are very common in many parts 
of the world, and people come to them from long distances 
to be cured. Priests, especially of Aesculapius, placed 



their sanctuaries near them, as at the alkaline springs 
of Nauplia, and the springs of Dodora. Phylostricus 
says that the Greek soldiers wounded in the battle on 
the Caicus were healed by the waters of Agamemnon's 
spring near Smyrna." 

There is a spring of the kind mentioned in our lesson 
at Kissingen which, after a rushing sound, about the 
same time every day commences to bubble, and is most 
efficacious at the very time the gas is escaping. There 
are geysers also in Iceland, Wyoming and elsewhere of 
the intermittent or "troubled" character. 

A COPYIST'S MARGINAL NOTE. 

The House of Mercy with its five porches was built 
for a public sanitarium for the benefit and convenience 
of those who desired to use the agitated pool, and this 
explains why a great multitude of the sick, blind, halt, 
withered, lay in these porches waiting for an opportunity 
to benefit by the agitation of the waters. In this 
connection it should be noted that old Greek MSS omit 
the last seven words of verse three and all of verse four. 
These are not inspired words, were not written by John 
the Apostle, but were added to his statement later on— 
quite probably as a marginal note explanatory of the 
views held by the people, or possibly the thought of 
the copyist who made the marginal note. Some later 
copyist, thinking the marginal note was omitted from 
the text, added it in, and his manuscript, copied in turn, 
has come down to us. Until within the last fifty years, 
since the discovery of the older Greek MSS, none could 
know that these words were not a part of the divine 

R3501 : page 40 

record but an addition thereto, perhaps accidentally. 

Our last lesson showed our Lord in Galilee and his 
second miracle at Cana. In this lesson we find him again 
at Jerusalem, drawn thither according to the Jewish 
usage to celebrate one of the great annual feasts. He 
was passing Bethesda, the "House of Mercy," and 
stopped to perform the miracle noted in this lesson. That 
our minds may the better grasp the situation, we quote 
descriptions of two such institutions given by modern 
writers: Bovet tells us of the bath of Ibrahim, near 
Tiberius, on the sea of Galilee, thus: 

"The hole in which the spring is found is surrounded 
by several porticoes in which we see a multitude of people 
crowded one upon another, laid upon couches or rolled 
in blankets, with immeasurable extremes of misery and 
suffering." Zola describes the crowds at the grotto of 
Lourdes thus, "A perfect cour des miracles of human woe 
rolling along the sloping pavement. No order was observed, 
ailments of all kinds were jumbled together; 
it seemed like the clearing of some inferno, where the 
most monstrous maladies, the rare and most awful 



cases which provoke a shudder, had been gathered 
together." 

A SIGN OR SYMBOL OF HIS POWER. 

Such a picture met the eyes of our dear Redeemer as 
he passed this House of Mercy. We can imagine better 
than describe the extent of his sympathy with the poor 
ailing ones before him. If such scenes of sorrow, pain 
and trouble touch our fallen hearts sensibly and deeply, 
how much more intense must have been the sympathy 

R3501 : page 41 

which our Lord experienced in the presence of such 
conditions. We may be sure that he who loved the whole 
world so much that he left the glory with the Father and 
assumed human nature, that he might die and redeem 
us and ultimately deliver us from the power of sin and 
its penalty, sickness and death, must have sympathized 
with the multitude of sufferers before him, crowding one 
upon another for the opportunity to receive benefit 
from the agitated waters. Nevertheless, despite all this 
sympathy, the record shows that our Lord healed but 
one of them. Indeed, so far as we may judge, this was 
his usual custom, as illustrated also in his discourse, in 
which he pointed out that while in God's providence there 
were many widows in Israel during the famine time, 
Elijah was only sent to the widow of Zarephath, and 
while there were many lepers in Israel, Elisha healed of 
leprosy only Naaman, the Syrian. Similarly, there were 
great multitudes of sick at this House of Mercy, but 
Jesus healed only one. 

The reason for this is not difficult to find. Our 
Lord at his first advent was in the world not to deliver 
it from the power of sin and death and Satan, but to 
redeem it, and any deliverances which he granted at 
that time were only partial and illustrative— demonstrations 
of his power intended to awaken faith in him and 
his redemptive work on the part of those who had the 
ear of faith to hear and the eye of faith to see. These 
few heard, but the rest remained blinded and know not 
the great Messiah unto this day. Thank God for the 
blessed assurance that in his due time all Israel shall be 
saved from this blindness (Rom. 11:25,26), and not 
Israel only but all the families of the earth— "All the 
blind eyes shall be opened and all the deaf ears shall be 
unstopped."— Isa. 35:5. 

SATAN INDIRECTLY THE OPPRESSOR. 

While freely admitting that all of humanity's 
difficulties, mental, physical and moral, are traceable to 
the original deception of Satan, practised upon our first 
parents— while therefore willing to concede that every 
case of sickness is more or less directly or indirectly the 



work of the Adversary, and that of all the diseased ones 

we might properly enough say of each that "Satan hath 

bound him," nevertheless we are not of those who understand 

that the time has fully come for the binding of 

Satan and for the loosing of his prisoners. That time 

by divine arrangement is future, fixed— it is the Millennium. 

Since our Lord did not perform miracles for all 

the sick, neither are we to expect all the sick of to-day 

to be cured either by natural means or by miraculous 

power. It comforts us to remember that Satan and 

every evil is subject to the Almighty's power, and that 

in the case of the Lord's consecrated and their interests 

he is both able and willing to overrule, so that what 

ever he permits them will result in their greater blessing. 

We are distinctly told that our Lord's miracles 
manifested forth beforehand his coming glory. They 
were thus lessons or pictures or illustrations of the great 
work of restitution from sin and sickness and death 
which our dear Redeemer will accomplish for the world 
very shortly— during his Millennial reign. Then we, 
his Church, associated with him, will share his power and 
great glory and privileges. Those who were beneficiaries 
of his miraculous power at his first advent evidently 
were but a mere handful as compared to all the sick, 
impotent and blinded of that time; and those miracles, 
aside from illustrating the future power of the Lord, 
were designed to testify of him and of his apostles as 
the representatives of the Father in the establishment 
of the new dispensation— the Gospel age, so different 
from its predecessor, the Jewish age and its law of 
Moses. 

THE HEALING OF THE ELECT. 

It is not improper for us to speak of the man who 
was the one favored out of a great multitude as having 
been elected or selected by the Lord as the person through 
whom he would manifest his power and coming glory. 
The narrative does not tell us why the Lord selected this 
one in preference to others. We may reasonably assume, 
however, that his thirty-eight years of infirmity 
had developed in him considerable penitence for sin, 
considerable desire for righteousness; that he had 
learned some valuable lessons during those thirty-eight 
years under the hand of affliction; and that it was 
because he had thus come into a condition where healing 
would be to his advantage that he was the favored one. 
Similarly, this is true in the favors of grace which the 
Lord is distributing during this age, and which are 
really much more valuable than any physical blessings 
that could be bestowed. 

We may not at first see why the Lord favors some 
more than others with the knowledge of his grace and 
truth, but we may safely assume that there is a lesson, 
and that lesson lies in the direction of honesty of heart, 
repentance of sin and a desire for or "feeling after God." 



When God has any special favors to bestow we may 
safely assume that they are not given out haphazard, 
but according to some partial conditions of faith or 
worthiness. In the case of this man who was healed 
let us notice that there was no record that he had more 
faith in the Lord than had the other ones about him. 
On the contrary, the context shows that he had no faith 
—that he did not even know the Lord, and did not learn 
until afterward who he was that healed him. 

"WILT THOU BE MADE WHOLE?" 

As already intimated, our Lord's words to his 
followers, "Greater works than these shall ye do because 
I go unto my Father," have been fulfilled throughout 
this Gospel age in that it is a greater work to open the 
eyes of the understanding than to recover sight to the 
natural eyes; it is a greater work to open the ears of 
the understanding than to recover the natural hearing; 
it is a greater work to heal from sin than to heal from 
its type, leprosy; it is a greater work to recover from 
the lameness and weaknesses which have come upon the 
entire race through the fall than to restore strength to 
the natural limbs. In accordance with this thought we 
now remark that as our Lord queried the one whom he 
healed, asking, "Wilt thou be made whole?" and as he 
thus let the matter depend upon his own will, so it is 
with those who are now being healed of moral ailments, 
of those who are now being spiritually enlightened, 
etc.— the assistance is with themselves. If they have 
the ear to hear and the eye to see, to appreciate, to 
understand the gift of God in Christ, the question then 
is "Wilt thou be made whole?" 

How many there are morally leprous, mentally 
blinded and partially deaf, who can see and hear and 
comprehend a little of the grace of God, and who, by 
accepting this little which they understand and by 

R3501 : page 42 

desiring to be made whole, might go on from grace to 
grace, from knowledge to knowledge, from triumph to 
triumph, ultimately to the full attainment of the great 
blessing which the Lord has proffered to his "little 
flock"— to become heirs of God, joint heirs with Jesus 
Christ our Lord, in his Kingdom, if so be that we suffer 
with him, that we may also be glorified together. 
In harmony with this thought, let us all use our 
influence with all with whom we come in contact, with 
all who have no power to see or hear or understand or 
appreciate the grace of God, to urge upon them their 
acceptance of divine aid as we ourselves have experienced 
it— "grace sufficient for every time of need." Only with 
those who answer this question affirmatively is it worth 
our while to expend effort. The will must be pointed to 
the Lord or his blessing cannot come upon the heart and 



the life; we cannot hope that the Lord will work a miracle 
of grace in the hearts of the sin-sick unless they are 
ready to answer this question in the affirmative, "Wilt 
thou be made whole?" Only those who so will can be 
benefited in this age, for this is the divine order— 
the Lord seeketh such and such only to worship him in 
spirit and in truth. Our Lord at the first advent testified 
again on these lines, saying to many of those who 
heard his preaching, "Ye will not come unto me that ye 
might have life." To come unto the Lord means to 
accept his arrangements, to answer his query, saying, 
Yea, Lord, I would be made whole. 
The healing of such is not instantaneous but gradual. 

R3502 : page 42 

They grow in grace, knowledge and love, and the completion 
of the work of grace will be in the First Resurrection 
"change," which the Lord promises to all those 
who in the present time answer his question affirmatively, 
and show that they are in earnest by seeking to walk 
thenceforth not after the flesh but after the Spirit. 
These come under the care of the Good Physician, and 
eventually he will make them whole, complete, perfect 
in his likeness. 

THE GREATER HOUSE OF MERCY. 

Ere long the present election of the Church, the 
present favor and privilege of being made whole, will 
reach its accomplishment in the First Resurrection, and 
then, thank God, a still more general blessing will be 
open for the world. The promise of the Scriptures is 
that in God's due time the tabernacle of God shall be 
with men and he shall dwell with them. This is not yet. 
The race is still under the curse, Satan is still the "prince 
of this world," we are still waiting and praying, "Thy 
Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is done 
in heaven." The establishment of God's tabernacle or 
house in the world will be during the Millennial age. 
It will be a house of mercy, not merely for the elect few, 
but, according to the great Oath-Bound Covenant, 
God through his elect Church, the Christ, Head and 
body, the antitypical seed of Abraham (Gal. 3:29), 
shall "bless all the families of the earth." 

Ah, yes; what a grand day that will be! "God shall 
wipe away the tears from off all faces"— yea, also, the 
reproach of his people shall be done away. No longer 
will it be a reproach to be of the Lord's people, no 
longer can it be said to the Lord's mouthpieces, "You tell 
of the love of God and his mercy and of the value of 
the great atonement, but we see sin and suffering, 
sorrow and death, continually reigning over the world." 
The reproach will be ended, Satan will be bound, the 
knowledge of the Lord will fill the whole earth and the 
wiping away of all tears and sorrows and aches and pains 



will begin. And to all who will rightly receive these 
favors and fall in line with them, the blessings will 
ultimately be completed in the full perfection of restitution 
accomplished at the end of the Millennial age, 
at the ushering in of the everlasting epoch, while for 
those who will then neglect, refuse the divine arrangements 
a merciful blotting out of existence has been 
arranged.— Acts 3:23. 

IT WAS ON THE SABBATH. 

In performing the miracle our Lord instructed the 
healed one to take up his bed and walk, and he did so. 
The bed probably was a very light mattress or comforter, 
after the custom of that time, and there was no real labor 
connected with this injunction. It was not the violation, 
therefore, of the Sabbath restrictions of the Jewish 
Law, which our Lord neither violated nor taught others 
to violate, for he was a Jew and subject, therefore, to 
all the terms and conditions of that Law as much as 
any other Jew. His object in instructing the man to 
carry the bed was probably twofold:— 

(1) The act of itself would be a witness to the 
miracle; not only directly but 

(2) Indirectly it would attract the attention of 

the doctors and scribes of the Law, because they had 
formulated certain restrictions respecting the day which 
were not the Mosaic requirements. Our Lord would 
make use of this opportunity to teach a lesson, not only 
respecting his power but respecting a proper observance 
of the Law— that it was designed of the Lord to be for 
the benefit of mankind and not a moral fetter. Our Lord 
explained this on one occasion, saying to the scribes and 
Pharisees that their interpretation of the Law made it 
burdensome to the masses of the people— that they 
exaggerated the small features of the Law unduly, and 
that the greater principles of it, pertaining to righteousness, 
justice, love and mercy, they overlooked entirely. 

From this narrative we see that just this result was 
attained. The scribes and Pharisees reproved the man 
for carrying his bed, and he returned that he was fully 
justified in so doing, because the person who healed him 
of his thirty-eight years' ailment must have been wise 
enough and good enough to be an authority on this 
subject and he was merely following his directions. 
Thus our Lord's miracle was made prominent to the 
class that he specially wished to have recognize him, 
namely the leaders and representatives of the nation, 
who specially were on trial at this time whether or not 
they would receive him; and, secondly, the difference 
between his teaching and good works and the teaching 
and no works of the Pharisees would be more manifest 
on the other hand. 

It would appear that the healed man was so astonished 
by the incidents connected with his relief that for 
the moment he forgot to look for or inquire particularly 



about the one who had performed the miracle: and our 
Lord, not wishing to refuse the great multitude of sick 
ones there gathered, quietly withdrew, so that by the 
time the miracle was known the healer was not to be 
found. He had performed the miracle for the glory of 
God, to call attention to the new dispensation, and to 
himself as the divine representative in it, and incidentally 
he had healed, we may assume, the most worthy one of 
that multitude. The fact that Jesus specially met this 

R3502 : page 43 

man again in the Temple, where he had probably gone 
to express his thanks and praise to the Lord for his 
relief, implies that he had seen in the man something of 
more than ordinary character, which not only led him 
to heal him but also to reveal himself to him. 

"GO AND SIN NO MORE." 

Our Lord's salutation to the healed man in the 
Temple must have been very significant, showing the 
latter that he was not only able to heal but that he had 
knowledge of the sins which had led up to the diseased 
condition thirty-eight years previously. He said to him, 
"Behold thou art made whole: sin no more lest a worse 
thing befall thee." There is a valuable lesson in our 
Redeemer's counsel— helpful not only for that poor man, 
but still more valuable and helpful to those who have 
by the Lord's grace been healed of sin-sickness, those 
who have been justified, those who have been accepted 
into God's family as sons of God. The penalty for 
original sin has been a severe one and has attached itself 
to every member of Adam's race; yet for this original 
sin God has provided a great atonement, and ultimately 
every creature shall have the fullest opportunity for 
escape from all its penalties and wages. But when thus 
liberated a fresh responsibility is upon us. As the apostle 
declares, if we sin wilfully after we have received a 
knowledge of the Truth, there remaineth no more a 
sacrifice for sins, but we may surely look for judgment 
and fiery indignation which will devour us as adversaries. 
(Heb. 10:27.) The wages of original sin which the 
whole race has tasted is death, with its accompaniments 
of sorrow and pain— dying. The wages of wilful, deliberate, 
intentional sin, after we have been justified from 
all our sins— that penalty would be a worse thing, very 
much worse than the original penalty; for although it 
would be the same penalty of death, it would be the 
second death, for which God has assured us he has made 
no provision for recovery— Christ dieth no more. If 
after being released and justified we sin wilfully, and 
yet with a measure of weakness and imperfection tempting 
us, we may expect stripes; but if we sin wilfully and 
deliberately, aside from a particular temptation or 
weakness, we may expect nothing further in the way of 



divine mercy and forgiveness, because having enjoyed 
these in respect to the original sin we would thus come 
under a new and personal condemnation, for a new and 
inexcusable violation of righteousness whose penalty is 
death without hope of recovery. 



R3505 : page 43 

THE PERFECT COPY. 

-ROMANS 8:29.- 

Memory wakens mental pictures 
In the calm and solemn night; 
Teaching all-important lessons 
In a new and clearer light. 

On a scroll I see a "copy" 
Chosen from "the book" divine;— 
Written by a master penman 
On a bright initial line. 

Under it a fair creation 
Of the skilled engraver's art; 
Graceful lines and shades, assuming 
Life and form,— a human heart! 

Drawing near with deepening interest 
To observe it carefully, 
I discovered "words" I hastened 
To commit to memory. 

Imitate (they said) the "copy" 
Written on the line above; 
For the Golden Rule it follows 
Is the perfect law of love. 

Might I, heeding this instruction, 
Duplicate the pattern well? 
For, although my spirit's willing 
Yet "the flesh," so weak, would fail. 

Fearful lest I mar its beauty 

I inclined to pass it by, 

When the Master Artist whispered, 

"I will help you if you try. 

"Trusting you will e'er remember 
My approval to obtain; 
You should keep your copy stainless 
Following closely to 'the line.'" 

Need I tell of blotted pages? 
Here a tear-drop, there a stain; 



Or of all my clumsy tracings 
That appeared below the line? 

Need I here repeat the failures 
Which have caused my grief and pain; 
Or the kindness of my "Teacher" 
When He bade me "try again?" 

In His wisdom gently prompting 
Lest I should discouraged grow; 
"Keep your eye upon my copy 
I forgive mistakes below." 

Covering my many failures 
With the mantle of His love; 
As my "copy" grew in likeness 
To the perfect one above. 



R3502 : page 43 

"EVER GIVE US THIS BREAD." 

JOHN6:l-14.-FEB. 26. 

Golden Text:— "I am the living bread which 
came down from heaven."— John 6:51. 

CONSIDERABLE periods are sometimes covered by 
the opening expression of this lesson, "After 
these things." How long after our previous 
lesson depends on which feast is referred to. If it was 
Purim, only a month had elapsed; if it was Passover, 
a year. As previously pointed out, John's Gospel, 
written after the others, was evidently designed not so 
much to give a history of our Lord's life as to mention 
incidents omitted in the other Gospels. The miracle 
of the feeding of the five thousand, which is the basis 
of this lesson, stands prominently before us as the only 
miracle that is particularly described in all four of the 

R3502 : page 44 

Gospels. John's account of it brings to our attention 
some features not so clearly presented in the others. 

From other accounts we learn that our Lord's 
crossing of the Sea of Galilee at this time was for needed 
rest. His preaching and teaching and traveling were 
practically continuous; his hearers, going and coming 
from morning until night left him little opportunity for 
privacy and rest, and he was quite willing thus to lay 
down his life in feeding the sheep— not only exhausting 
his vitality through the healing of the diseases of the 
people, but also through the exhortations and public 
speaking, which are particularly enervating in the open 



air and when prolonged. 

Another reason for leaving Galilee was that his 
disciples, whom he had sent forth two by two through 
the various cities to teach and to heal as he was doing, 
had now returned to him, and doubtless he desired rest 
for them also, and a measure of quiet and privacy in 
which he could hear from them reports and give them 
needed instructions respecting their work. The third 
reason was that at this time the news had just reached 
Galilee that Herod had caused the beheading of John the 

R3503 : page 44 

Baptist, and the further news that the army of Herod 
had been vanquished by that of Aretas. The news 
had unquestionably stirred the people and aroused their 
imaginations respecting the future, and to some extent 
had unfitted them for the hearing of the Lord's message. 
Some had even said to our Lord and the Apostles, 
"Depart from Herod's dominions, lest he slay thee as 
he has slain John the Baptizer." Still another reason 
probably was to give occasion for this miracle. 

Perhaps all of these reasons combined to make the 
change a desirable one and several of the apostles being 
fishermen, whose boats were at their own disposal, and 
the Sea of Galilee small, the undertaking was not extraordinary. 
The sail across the sea brought Jesus and the 
apostles to a quiet secluded place, where they probably 
spent a day or two in rest and comparative privacy, 
communing respecting the interests of the work. To 
camp out of doors thus, without tents, etc., seems to 
have been not an unusual thing in that climate at that 
time; indeed even to-day one may find the Arabs in 
that country sleeping along the roadside at night, 
wrapped in their outer cloaks or garments and, like 
Jacob, with a stone for their pillow. 

SEEKING THE MESSIAH. 

Another account tells us that when the multitudes 
who had been listening to the teachings of Jesus, seeing 
his miracles, etc., learned that he had gone to the other 
side of the lake, some of them went afoot and some 
in small boats in the general direction in which he had 
gone, seeking him. At this particular season many had 
their arrangements so made that they were on a holiday 
journey, going up to Jerusalem to the feast. On such 
occasions there was an unusual concourse on all roads 
leading to Jerusalem, and the people— excited by the 
conduct of Herod and bewildered and wondering respecting 
the Messiah— turned aside from their journey 
to hear more from the lips of this great Prophet, Jesus, 
and to see for themselves whether or not they thought he 
possessed the qualifications that would fit him for the 
Messiahship, for the deliverance of their nation, for the 
establishment of the long-promised Kingdom of God. 



Jesus was sitting on the mountain side with his disciples 
when this large concourse of people seeking him came 
along; quite probably he and the apostles taught the 
multitude for some time before the miracle of feeding 
them was performed. We must remember that the 
Gospel narratives are very brief and pass over small 
and irrelevant details. 

Our Lord, who had already planned the miracle, 
had led the minds of his disciples up to the point by 
inquiring, "Whence shall we buy bread that these may 
eat?" This question was addressed to Philip, one of 
the apostles who lived not far distant. He was the proper 
person on that account, but probably the Lord had 
another reason for questioning him. Philip seems to 
have been of rather a calculating and business turn of 
mind, and although this disposition is an excellent one 
to have amongst the disciples of the Lord, it, nevertheless, 
is inclined to think of earthly means rather than to 
exercise faith in the Lord. Probably the Lord wished to 
awaken Philip's thought and specially to bring him profitable 
instruction and faith through this miracle. Philip's 
answer that it would require two hundred pennyworth 
of bread (about $32.00) to supply the multitude even 
a light luncheon, shows his business trait. While all 
the various casts of mind are to be found amongst the 
Lord's people, the business head is amongst the most 
useful if it be kept under proper restraints of love and 
faith;— love, that it may not allow business instincts 
to take sole charge of spiritual affairs; and faith, that 
it may be able to realize that although business methods 
are excellent in all the affairs of life, they must not be 
permitted to ignore faith in the Lord and the power of 
his might, and the loving interest which he takes in all 
the affairs of his Church, the New Creation. 

THE USE OF MEANS. 

Andrew, whose mind seems to have been less 
practical than that of Philip, suggested that one of the 
company had five little barley cakes and two small 
fishes, yet he had hardly offered the remark when he 
felt ashamed of it, and added, "But what are they among 
so many?" Philip was too practical, too much of a 
business man to have even thought of or mentioned such 
a morsel of food in connection with the supply of so 
large a multitude; but our Lord had use not only for 
the broader mind of Philip but also for the more simple 
and less logical mind of Andrew, and used the latter's 
suggestion by calling for the little supply. There is a 
lesson for us here: it illustrates what many of us have 
seen in connection with the affairs of the Lord's people, 
namely, that all the good suggestions, all the helpful 
suggestions, all those suggestions which make for the 
interest of the Church, do not always come from one 
quarter— that often the Lord uses the stumbling lips 
and illogical reasonings of some of his followers as the 



basis of blessings to themselves and others, just as now 
he used Andrew's seemingly foolish remark. 

Another thought in this connection is that our Lord 
seems always to have made use of whatever was at hand. 
He could have turned the stones into bread and thereby 
to have fed the multitude; he could have ignored the 
little supply on hand as insignificant; but this was not 
his method. All of his followers should learn from this 
not to despise the little things, but to use them so far 
as possible. There is a principle involved, too— as our 
Lord expresses it, He that is faithful in that which is 

R3503 : page 45 

least, will be faithful also in that which is greater. 
Another lesson is that miracles are only to be expected 
after we have done all in our power with the means at 
hand. The colored man had the right idea when, after 
expressing his faith in the Lord, some one said to him, 
"Now, George, if the Lord should command you to jump 
through that stone wall, would you do it?" His answer 
was that if he were certain that the Lord had commanded 
it, he would jump at the stone wall and leave to the Lord 
all that was beyond his power. If the Lord wished to 
make a miracle out of it he was able to do so, but the 
jumping part belonged to George. So it is with us in 
all life's affairs: we are to be sure that we are in the Lord's 
way, that we are following his directions, and then we are 
to leave all the results to him, assured of his ability to 
work the greatest miracles. Nevertheless, the greatest 
miracles which any of us have to do with are of a quiet 
and unostentatious kind. In nature we see these miracles 
in the growing grain, which, under the Lord's providences, 
supplies our needs in response to our labor. 
The increase of the five barley loaves and two little 
fishes, we may be sure, was not more of a miracle than 
that which is continually going on in nature, only that 
it is a different kind, to which we are not accustomed. 
Nevertheless, as the Lord used the barley cakes and 
fishes as the nucleus for this miracle, so in nature he 
uses the seed wheat as the basis for the miracle of the 
crop gathered in harvest. In other words he always 
uses means to an end, and the fact that we may see and 
understand the means does not make the miracle either 
greater or less. A proper view of life connects the Lord 
with all the affairs of this life as well as with all that pertains 
to the life to come. 

"WHEN THEY WERE FILLED." 

The multitude sat down in groups or companies of 
fifties and hundreds, we are told, and the disciples distributed 
to them the five little cakes and two fishes in 
pieces, which apparently grew as they were broken, 
much after the manner of the widow's cruse of oil, 
which flowed incessantly until all the pots had been 



filled. So this little supply under the Lord's blessing 
increased, not merely to give a light luncheon to the 
multitude, but until all were "filled," satisfied, wanted 
no more. Here was a miracle which not only astounded 
the disciples but also the thousands; it was what John 
calls a sign, an evidence and proof of our Lord's supernatural 
power and authority— a proof that he was indeed 
the Sent of God, the Messiah. This was the object 
of the miracle— not the feeding of the multitude. At 
the very same time there were doubtless hungry ones 
in various parts of the world whom the Lord could have 
fed without any trouble to himself; but he came not to 
feed the world, he came not to stop the pain and sorrow 
and dying, but to redeem the world and to give evidence 
which would allow the apostles and all the Israelites 
indeed in whom there was no guile to accept him by 
faith as the Messiah— evidences also which, coming 
down to us and others of this Gospel age, have been the 
foundation for our faith. 

Some have said, O that we could have been there 
and witnessed the miracle of the loaves and fishes! 
Our faith would have been made so strong that we could 
have been the disciples of Jesus under any and all circumstances 
and conditions. What a wonder it is that 
any of those five thousand should ever have doubted 
our Lord's Messiahship! We answer that those who are 
truly the Lord's people have similar miracles to-day, 
because he communicates to us through the Word, and 
because in eating of the Word we partake of the spirit 
of our Lord, the spirit of the Truth. 

In view of this, which of the Lord's people can 
gainsay the fact that he is continually, in his own experiences 
and in the experiences of other Christians, 
performing a miracle greater than that recorded in our 
lesson? Which of the Lord's people who have tasted 
that he is gracious, who have hungered and thirsted after 
righteousness— Truth— and have had its assisting comfort 
time and again, could any longer feel that their 
preference would have been to have lived in the days of 
our Lord's first advent and to have seen and tasted of 
the miracles then performed? For our part we much 
prefer the higher miracles, and consider that we have 
a stronger basis for faith in these than the poor Jews 
could possibly have had in all the favors bestowed upon 
them, great as those favors were. 

WEALTH AND ECONOMY BLENDED. 

Although our Lord was rich before he came into the 
world, and although he realized that through the power 
of God in him he could still have all that was necessary 

R3504 : page 45 

for his well being and could provide for his followers, 

too, as shown not only in the miracle before us, the increase 



of the loaves and fishes, but also shown when, 
on another occasion, he granted his disciples the great 
draught of fishes out of the very lake before them— with 
all this wealth at his command our Lord was a great 
economist; from his standpoint nothing should be 
wasted. It was in harmony with this that, after the 
multitude had been thoroughly fed, the Lord instructed 
the Apostles to gather up the fragments that nothing 
be wasted, and they took up twelve haversacks full- 
each of them gathered the full of his bag or satchel or 
haversack, in our text called a basket. 

There are two lessons in this for us, one a practical 
lesson on economy, that none of the Lord's blessings 
and mercies are to be wasted. To some this lesson may 
come easier than to others, but it is a usual experience 
in life that willful waste brings woeful want. Quite 
probably some of the Lord's dear disciples at the present 
time need to learn the lesson of economy as much as 
did the disciples and multitude on this occasion. This 
does not teach the lesson of miserliness either, for the 
Scriptures declare, "There is that scattereth and yet 
increaseth; and there is that withholdeth more than is 
meet, but it tendeth to poverty." (Prov. 1 1:24.) The 
first lesson was generosity, the secondary lesson was economy. 
So it should be with us: our generosity should be 
equal to our disposition to economize. The Lord is 
not stingy, but generous; and none of his followers should 
be stingy. The Lord was economical, and that also his 
disciples should be. 

It was those who scattered to others who had their 
haversacks filled in the end and gained the supply for 
themselves. 

We can apply the same lesson to spiritual things: 
the Lord's people are to be distributors. We have received 
of the Lord's bounty, grace and truth freely; 
we are to distribute freely. Those who distribute will 
have the privilege of gathering up for themselves, that each 
may have more than he gave away. How true it is 
that those who are most intent upon feeding others with 

R3504 : page 46 

the bread of life are themselves most bountifully supplied. 
Let us see to it, then, that we have generosity in respect 
to the spiritual as well as the natural food. Let us give 
forth the word of life and the water of life. While we 
do so from good, honest, sincere hearts, with a desire to 
honor the Lord and to bless the people, and without 
selfishness or pride on our own part, we may be sure that 
he will give us more and more of a rich supply for our 
own spiritual growth and sustenance. 

The multitude took knowledge of the miracle and 
acclaimed our Lord the great Prophet. By many of 
them, however, the miracle was only partially appreciated. 
Doubtless they viewed it as an indication that 
if Jesus were proclaimed a king, he could supply his 



soldiers with food without a commissary department; 
and if he could thus supply the food to his supporters and 
followers he would be able also to give them the victory 
under all circumstances and conditions. These things 
are true, but not true in the way that the natural Israelites 
supposed. Our Lord giveth us the victory now over 
sin and selfishness, and leads us on from one achievement 
to another as we seek to walk in his steps, and all the 
way he feeds us with the living bread from heaven. In 
due time he will become the great King over the world, 
and his power to control and to feed and to put down 
Satan and all the powers of evil will be fully manifested. 
Then many of the blind eyes shall be opened— eyes 
which cannot see the things of faith, ears which cannot 
hear the message of faith. Let us give thanks to the 
Lord more and more that our eyes see and our ears hear 
the message which as yet the world sees not, appreciates 
not. While this Gospel age can bring special blessings 
only to those who have the hearing ear and understanding 
heart and eye of faith, thank God there is another 
age to come in which all the families of the earth will 
be abundantly blessed and guided and helped by those 
who now are able to walk by faith. Only a special class 
can now appreciate the bread which came down from 
heaven. By and by, under the blessed influences and 
arrangements of the Kingdom, all may have the privilege 
of eating of the bread of life and thus attaining 
the life everlasting. How our hearts go out to those 
who are now starving for this very bread, not only the 
heathen who have never heard of Christ but many in 
the lands of civilization who, although they have heard, 
know not, see not, neither do they understand, neither 
can they understand until in the Lord's due time their 
eyes of understanding and ears of appreciation shall be 
opened, as has been promised through the prophets.— 
Isa. 35:5; 42:7; 49:9. 

"Only five barley loaves! 

Only two fishes small! 

And can I offer these poor gifts 

To Christ, the Lord of all? 

To him whose mighty word 

Can still the angry sea, 

Can cleanse the lepers, raise the dead?— 

He hath no need of me." 

"Yes, he hath need of thee! 
Then bring thy loaves of bread; 
Behold, with them, when Jesus speaks, 
The multitude are fed." 



R3504 : page 46 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



PASTOR C. T. RUSSELL:- 

I must kindly thank you for sending me from 
time to time new pamphlet issues, and also the copies 
of that most interesting debate you had with Dr. 
Eaton, which I enjoyed most thoroughly and which I 
have made some use of in reading and lending to 
others. 

I cannot thank you enough for the new delight 
and pleasure I now receive in reading God's Word. 
Everything seems to have taken on a different view 
from the conceptions I had formed from teachings received 
as a member of the Episcopal Church of Ireland, 
—and if this be so in Ireland, where high ritualistic 
and Popish practices are not allowed, what must 
be the state of the poor dupes of the sister church of 
England, where idolatrous practices are fast displacing 
the simple faith in Christ? Certainly things are 
fast shaping for the great chaos that is to usher in the 
day of our Lord. Praying that God may bless you 
in your labor of love, I remain, 

Yours in hope, JOHN M. KEAGUE,-Scotland. 



DEAR MR. RUSSELL:- 

Having for some time become dissatisfied with 
the doctrines of the Protestant Church of England of 
which we were members, we thought to set out to 
seek anew from God's Word his own Truth. For a 
year or more we read and studied justification by faith 
and came to the conclusion that all who believe must 
be justified from all things. Still we could not get free 
from belief in the doctrine of everlasting torment, but 
hoped that our Lord would give us light and guide 
us into all truth. And so he is doing. Last year a 
friend sent us your little book "About Hell," which 
greatly opened our eyes to the Truth, and afterwards 
the DAWN volumes, from which, thank our loving 
Father, we have been made wise with regard to his 
plan, gracious, loving, divine. Blessed be his holy 
name! We desire to thank you for the blessing you 
have brought to us in so opening up the Bible to us, 
and we know that you are the instrument in his hand 
in this "latter day" to make known his will and plan 
to all his languishing people. May he continue to 
bless you as steward of his household is our earnest 
prayer. In Christian love, yours very truly, 

DAVID AND ISABEL MYERS, -Jamaica. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

In the end of 1901 two Glasgow colporteurs came 
to this place selling the "Plan of the Ages." We got 
one, along with a great many others. We heard the 



brothers' lectures and got the rest of DAWNS. We 
can look back now and see how the Lord prepared us 
for the Truth, being weary of all church formalities 
and longing for light. We have been enabled to witness 
to several of the clergy and church elders to the 
Truth. We are told at times that we are giving out 
poison, but we tell them if they read they will find it 
real life giving food. 

We thank God for raising you up to give us these 
"feasts of fat things," and we pray that you will be 
guided and filled by his Spirit as you go on feeding 
the household of faith with meat in due season. 

Yours in the Lord, DON F. MURRAY,-Scotland. 

page 47 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:- 

About two years ago I was put in possession of 
Vol. I., MILLENNIAL DAWN. Very soon after commencing 
the reading I realized the supply of a long-felt 
something wanting. I soon became so interested 
that the volumes in their order were secured, and not 
only read but studied, and some of them read many 
times. Now the "Plan of the Ages" is thoroughly 
my own. Three years ago I asked the session of the 
Presbyterian Church to drop my name from the roll 
of membership. I was reared in the Church and have 
always been her strong adherent, defending her position, 
but feeling sadly a lack which grew as years 
passed. Before I had finished the volumes I decided 
that I had no home in the Presbyterian fold and so 
withdrew. 

If you think that I can be useful in presenting 
the Truth in the way of distributing tracts you publish, 
I am perfectly willing to be made serviceable in 
this line, although I shall be opposed by my wife and 
many of my warmest friends. I am an old soldier, 
sixty-four years old. 

Yours in Christ, C. B. MUSTARD, -Kansas. 



R3505 : page 47 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have been so blessed through coming into the 
light of Present Truth that I feel I must write to tell 
you about it. I can never express the joy that has 
come into my life through the study of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. The glorious plan of God as set forth (through 
rightly dividing the Word of God) is grand. I have 
received the Truth in the love of it, and I can indeed 
say, God bless the Colporteur work, as it was at the 
door I bought Vol. I. DAWN of a dear brother of the 
Church here. The Chief Reaper will reward him in 
the harvest home. I was so delighted with Vol. I. 



that I found the little company of Christians here and 
secured the four succeeding volumes of DAWN, and 
ever since that time I have proved that "the path of 
the just is as a shining light, which shineth more and 
more unto the perfect day." 

This Truth was brought to me at the very darkest 
hour of my spiritual experience. Surely man's 
extremity is God's opportunity! I was for some 
weeks passing through a time of trial. I have for 
some years had a thorn in the flesh, and as I greatly 
desired to be released from it I was led to attend some 
meetings held by those who teach divine healing, was 
anointed and prayed for, but failed to receive healing. 
I was then plunged in despair and doubt, and of course 
was told by those people that there must of necessity be 
something wrong in my relations to God, and it was entirely 
my own lack of faith; so you see that the opening 
up of the Scripture which I received from DAWN at that 
time meant much to me, as it was the means used by 
my heavenly Father in causing me to see that, although 
earthly promise of restitution for the world 
was purchased by our dear Redeemer, for the Church 
called out from the world there are exceeding great 
and precious promises that by these we might be partakers 
of the divine nature. The Lord has anointed 
my eyes with eyesalve, and I can see that these Elijahs 
and others are, as you say in the WATCH TOWER, 
Antichrists also and having the same spirit as the Antichrist, 
the Papacy, taking to themselves the office and 
work of the Christ, who shall very soon take to himself 
his great power and reign, and then restitution blessings 
shall flow as rivers of water from the throne of 
God and the Lamb. 

I have always from a child had a love for the 
dear Savior and a desire to bring others to know him, 
and that desire led me to go as an officer in the Salvation 
Army, as I found there was more opportunity for 
service in its ranks than in the Congregational Church 
in which I was brought up, and I did my utmost with 
great zeal, but not according to knowledge. Now 
that I have been led to see the dispensational plans 
and purposes of God and that in due time all shall be 
brought to a knowledge of the Truth, I do enter into 
rest and sit with Christ in heavenly places, as the 
spirit of the new mind rises above the circumstances 
of my life in the flesh, although still sharing the ills 
to which the flesh is heir through the fall and curse 
of Adam. 

I remain, your sister in the Truth, 

EMMA WILLIAMS,-England. 



DEAR SIR AND BROTHER:- 

By this time I hope you will have received the 
500 volumes of the MILLENNIAL DAWN in Italian. 



I hope you are satisfied with the print and binding 
of the volumes. We have tried to do our best, and 
have had experiences that will be useful in future. 

Although ill, but now, thank God, a little better, 
I have never ceased to be occupied with the work, and 
the Lord has blessed it. To the many letters and 
cards that I could send you, there is one most rejoicing 
and very important of the Pastor Giuseppe Bauchetti, 
doctor of letters and philosophy, a very learned 
man, who with child-like simplicity has received Present 
Truth and is ready to give testimony. After reading 
the two volumes in French, he has bought all the 
other books in English, and he has so learned that 
tongue as to be able to understand the third, fourth, 
fifth and sixth volumes. Others have started to study 
the French, it being much easier for them than the 
English volumes. 

Brother Bauchetti is wishing to write to you personally 
to express his admiration and gratitude for 
having freed him of many terrible doubts and made to 
shine in his heart such bright light and assurance and 
inexpressible joy. 

I am busy selecting in each of the principal towns 
a brother who will sell the books and endeavor to 
spread the Truth. 

I need not tell you how orthodoxy and traditionalism 
are making war on us, but in all humility and 
not trusting in ourselves, we are ready to go on, confidently 
trusting in him who said, "Be of good cheer: 
I have overcome the world." 

Last week I had occasion to visit two districts of 
the Waldensian valleys, and I never expected to find 
among people that pretend to be Christians such 
deadly sleep as I found there. Some watchful ones, 
however, are to be found here and there, and they 
quite readily accept the food so long desired. 

Expressing to you my gratitude and that of all 
the brothers and sisters for all that you are doing for 
us, I remain yours most humbly in the Lord, 
DANIELE RI VOIRE, -Italy. 



page 49 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVI. FEBRUARY 15, 1905. No. 4 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 51 

The Story of Adam and Eve 51 

Forecasting the Financial Future 51 

A Brief Statement of Rome's Teachings 52 



A Strange Prediction 52 

The Satisfaction of Justice 53 

Our Lord's Sacrifice was Sufficient 54 

Justice Deals Only with the Mediator 54 

The Feast of Tabernacles 55 

"Ye Shall be Free Indeed" 58 

Interesting Questions Answered 61 

Our Lord as Abraham's Seed 61 

The Church's Relationship to Abraham 62 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers 62 

page 50 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R3505 : page 50 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER. 



Those who would celebrate the Lord's supper on its anniversary 
date, this year, should do so after 6 p.m. on Sunday, April 
16th. The day following at 3 p.m. will be the anniversary 
of the Lord's death, on the 14th of Nisan, Jewish reckoning. 
The day following will begin the Jewish feast of Passover, 



which lasts a week, but in which we have no special interest 
except as a type. 

page 50 

WATCH TOWER TAGS NOT YET CORRECTED. 



We regret that press of work at the TOWER office has 
put us so far behind that the date beside your addresses on 
the wrapper does not show subscriptions recently received. 
Have patience a little longer, please. We hope to get caught 
up soon. This is our busy season every way. 

EATON-RUSSELL DEBATE REPORTS. 



The six debates in one extra issue of the Pittsburg 
Gazette can still be obtained from the Allegheny address, or 
from the British or Australian branch offices. These will be 
supplied while they last at 5 for 5 cents (2-l/2d.) Many who 
refuse tracts will read these. 



R3506 : page 51 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
THE STORY OF ADAM AND EVE. 



PROF. L. T. TOWNSEND of Boston University, 
discussing the credibility of the account 
of man's creation given in Genesis, says:— 

"It is possible and perhaps probable that the 
world is to witness shortly among nominally Christian 
people one of the most resolutely contested intellectual 
conflicts between belief and unbelief that has been 
known since the dawn of the Christian era." 

He expresses the conviction that a return to faith 
in the Bible's records will be advantageous to the 
world at large as well as to Christianity, and declares 
that scientists have been obliged to make so many 
changes of late that it should make them more modest. 
His words are:— 

"The readjustments of astronomical and geological 
theories during the last quarter of a century, 
which in every instance have been making for, rather 
than against, the beliefs of the primitive Christian 
Church, and the remarkable discoveries in archaeology 
which are affording the strongest possible defense for 
the credibility of the Bible, together with the fact 



that many of the ablest scholars are taking issue with 
much that is called higher criticism, ought to suggest 
that modesty rather than egotism and dogmatism is 
peculiarly becoming in those who are posing as leaders 
of modern thought and reformers in the theological 
world. 

"It can no longer be rationally questioned that 
the sciences of anatomy, of geology, of archaeology, 
of philology, of ethics and of theology unite in demolishing 
all theories of naturalism as to the character 
and condition of the earliest inhabitant of the earth 
of whom there is any record. 

"And the evolutionary hypothesis that the human 
race began in a savage state and slowly worked up to 
its present condition, consuming in this development 
a hundred thousand years, more or fewer, is, in the 
presence of established facts, an assumption as groundless 
as anything one can imagine. On the other hand, 
a sudden emergence from the savage state to one represented 
by the ancient civilizations of Assyria, Babylon, 
Egypt, and that of many other countries is not 
an emergence of which history shows any evidence. 
Hence the theory that the human family began high 
up in civilized and social life, but afterward suffered 
a decadence, has probabilities in its favor that amount 
well-nigh to an absolute certainty. 

"What may be insisted upon, therefore, is this: 
There is no evidence of any kind that Adam, who 
throughout the Bible is spoken of as an authentic 
person, was not the first man. There is no evidence 
that he did not have a perfect body and fully endowed 
intellect; there is no evidence that he could not give 
appropriate names to the animals brought before him; 
there is no evidence that his son Cain did not build a 
city; there is no evidence that his grandson Jubal 
did not handle the harp and organ, and there is no 
evidence that Jubal's brother, Tubal-Cain, and grandson 
of Adam, was not a worker in brass and iron. 

"But there is no need of stating these matters in 
negative terms, for all discoveries in the last twenty-five 
years or more are in harmony with the Bible record 
that the first beings on earth that wore the human 
form had a body just as perfect, and a brain or an intellect 
just as capable of working, and a language just 
as complete in expressing thought, as those of any 
man now living. These are not philosophical nor 
theological speculations, but conclusions based upon 
established facts and reached by approved scientific 
methods." 

FORECASTING THE FINANCIAL FUTURE. 



At the last session of the Pennsylvania Bankers' 
Association, one of their number addressing the body 



expressed himself as convinced that prosperity may be 
expected, and said in conclusion:— 

"A friend of mine has it [the financial fluctuations] all 
figured out on the cycle plan— he starts with the panic of 
1819. I will not burden you with it all, but merely state that, 
according to his figuring, we will have good times from now 
until 1908, when prices will have reached their height and 
start downward until 191 1, when we will have the greatest 
panic in our history. I quote him as follows: 

"In the past, stocks have gone up and down with 
regularity of the ebb flow of the tide. Some stocks, even with 

R3506 : page 52 

the tide going out, dart higher than others, and tend to confuse 
the would-be buyer as to the general tendency. So with 
the incoming tide, some stocks tend to keep back, though the 
general tendency is higher, always higher." 



We have seen the financial cycles outlined, and consider 
it remarkable. We mention it as an outside corroboration 
of about what we are expecting inferentially 
from the prophetic testimony, viz., that October, 1914, 
will date the cataclysm of Anarchy in a world-wide 
sweep, which implies that a panic, the greatest ever 
known, would occur somewhere about 191 1 and lead up 
to the "time of trouble, such as was not since there was 
a nation." 

A BRIEF STATEMENT OF ROME'S TEACHINGS. 



The latest statement we have seen of the teachings 
of Roman Catholicism respecting Purgatory, Indulgences, 
etc., is the following:— 

"A plenary indulgence is granted to the penitent sinner 
upon confession and going to holy communion. It is granted 
to lay Catholics who take part in the Congress, go to confession, 
receive communion, and on any day during the Congress 
visit a church, praying before the blessed sacrament for the 
intentions of the Pope. 

"A partial indulgence of seven years and seven quarantines 
—that is, the reduction of seven years and seven times 
for sin committed here— is granted to those of the Church in 
the city and ecclesiastical province of New York who will 
unite themselves with the Congress in spirit and be interested 
in its proceedings, and visit a church on any day during the 
Congress, praying before the blessed sacrament according to 
the intentions mentioned above. 

"A partial indulgence of 300 days' remission from punishment 
for sins in eternity is granted to those who assist at 
the Congress, as well as to all the faithful in the province who 
at least are contrite of heart and visit a church on any day of 



the Congress and pray. All these remissions of punishment 
for sin may be gained for the benefit of any friend or relative 
suffering punishment in purgatory. The duration of the 
suffering of the latter is thereby lessened and their advent 
into heaven expedited. 

"None of these remissions from punishment in eternity 
can be obtained for unconfessed sin. 

"The Church makes a distinction between the forgiveness 
of sin and its punishment. 

"Confession and communion bring forgiveness, but sins 
must sometimes be atoned for in eternity, even after sacramental 
absolution, the remission of this punishment being 
valid in the court of conscience and before God, and being 
made by an application of the treasure of the Church on the 
part of a lawful superior." 

ALL GO TO PURGATORY. 

"Purgatory is a middle state between heaven and hell. 
Few, if any, are so perfect at death as to deserve immediate 
admission to a state of bliss in Heaven, and the Church has 
taught from the beginning that souls which are not pure 
enough for heaven nor evil enough for hell are made to suffer 
for a time in purgatory. 

"The pains of purgatorial punishment may be as awful 
as those of hell, but with this difference, that the torments of 
the one are everlasting while the purgatorial sufferings endure 
only for a limited time. 

"Now, as Christ in making St. Peter the head of his 
Church gave him the keys of heaven and of hell, the Popes, 
Peter's successors, have the power to absolve from sin, and 
consequently from much of the purgatorial punishment. 
And it is this that is meant by indulgences. But it does not, 
by any means, imply that the Pope has the power or authority 
to remit the punishments of hell." 



Poor creatures! What a miserable prospect they 
look forward to when they think of death coming upon 
their friends or themselves. No wonder the majority 
of the laity have such unhappy faces. How relieved they 
will be when, in the resurrection morning, they awake and 
find that their fears were a nightmare of Satan's origination 
to keep them from knowing and loving the true 
God, whose name is Love, and whose merciful provision 
is that all redeemed by the precious blood of Christ shall 
yet come to a clear knowledge of his grace and to an 
opportunity for restitution to all that was lost— including 
lasting life in divine favor. 

It may sound strange at first, but it is true, that 
Protestants have been blessed in some respects by adding 
to this error— by making the future yet more awful 
—by determining and teaching that there is no purgatory, 
no prospect of peace or joy, but only agony for all eternity, 

for all not fit for heaven when they die. 



How is this more horrible doctrine less injurious, 
do you ask? Because it is so unreasonable that few 
believe it. Protestants well know that only saints are 

R3507 : page 52 

"fit for the Kingdom" (Luke 9:62) and it is to their credit 
as rational beings that they cannot imagine their unfit 
loved ones as having been consigned by a just God to 
everlasting tortures. 

A STRANGE PREDICTION. 



The following item is going the rounds of the 
secular press:— 

"In 1849, according to the German newspapers, 
Frederick William, who was then King of Prussia, 
consulted a fortune teller, and here is the extraordinary 
prediction which she made to him:— 

'"We are now in the year 1849,' she said, 
'and if, beginning at the right, you place under 
each other in a vertical column the numerals which 
make up this number, 1849, under the number 
itself, you will find the year in which your kingdom 
will become a great empire. That year will 
be 1871. Now perform the same operation with 1871 
and you will arrive at 1888, which is the date of the 
first Emperor's death. Finally treat 1888 in the same 
manner and you will obtain 1913, this being the year 
in which the empire will be overthrown and a republic 
proclaimed.' 

"Here is the way in which she obtained the three 
notable years:— 

1849 1871 1888 
1 1 1 

8 8 8 
4 7 8 

9 1 8 



1871 1888 1913 

"Her predictions as regards two of the years have 
come true and superstitious persons are now wondering 
if 1913 will really prove quite as fatal a year for 
the German Empire as she has prophesied." 



R3507 : page 53 

THE SATISFACTION OF JUSTICE. 
LAST year we answered questions on the above 



subject sent in by one of the number. We 

have been requested to present our reply in 

the columns of the WATCH TOWER, that others might 

be profited as well. We do so as follows:— 

With the first and second paragraphs of your letter 
I agree quite well. The first point of objection is found 
in the third paragraph. 

(1) Your statement reads, "Now to purchase for 
Adam a right of release, it would be necessary for some 
one to pay to Justice the exact equivalent of what he 
forfeited, give a ransom for him." I agree to that part, 
but disagree to the next statement, namely, "This Jesus 
did." Jesus died for all, he laid down his life as a ransom 
for all, but he did not give it or pay it over to Justice 
for all. He deposited the merit or value of it all in 
the hands of Justice as security or guarantee for the redemption 
of the whole world, but he applied only a 
portion, not for the world, but solely for those who would 
now exercise faith in him. It is as though a man conducting 
a large enterprise went to a banking company 
and, after securing the said bank against loss, got it to 
underwrite his scheme, and in connection therewith 
appropriate a certain amount of his deposit, leaving 
the remainder to be paid in later on, according to terms 
and conditions mutually agreed upon. 

That this is the divine plan is shown in various ways 
in the Scriptures: 

(a) We are distinctly told that our Lord Jesus ascended 
up on high, there to "appear in the presence of 

God for us"— not for the world in general, but for believers. 
The Scriptures in various ways indicate a 
marked distinction between the divine arrangement for 
us and the divine arrangement for the world. For instance, 
"Christ was a propitiation for our sins, and not 
for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world." 
This statement shows a distinct differentiation between 
our sins and the sins of the whole world. The one sacrifice 
is the basis of both these propitiations, yet they are 
separate and distinct in order— in time. The application 
of the Lord's grace is first to the Church, to believers, 
to the household of faith. He appears before the bar 
of Justice during this Gospel age to make satisfaction 
"for us." 

(b) Not only have we those statements to the effect 
that the atonement is effected thus far only for "the 
household of faith," but additionally we have the demonstration 
of this in the fact that the holy Spirit was shed 

forth only upon the Church, "the servants and handmaidens." 

The same is attested by the statement of 

the Apostle that we believers "have escaped the condemnation 

that is on the world." The condemnation 

is still on the world, but it is not on us, because our High 

Priest has applied the merit of his sacrifice "on our 

behalf." Thus also the Apostle again states, "Ye are 

washed, ye are sanctified." Likewise he declares that 

the children of believers are similarly washed and 



cleansed, justified, and that the children of unbelievers 
are still "unclean."— 1 Cor. 7:14. 

If the atonement had been made, applied on behalf 
of the world, the world would no longer be unclean, 
children of wrath under condemnation, etc. Because the 
atonement was made for the household of the priest, 
therefore all the members of the household of faith are 
justified, cleansed, washed in the precious blood. 

(c) It is in full accord with the foregoing that we 

find the Apostle distinctly declaring that it is the privilege 
of the Church to "fill up that which is behind of 
the afflictions of Christ"— to "suffer with him," to "be 
dead with him," etc. Thus the teachings of the New 
Testament agree with those of the prophets of the Old 
Testament, who "spoke of the sufferings of Christ and 
the glory that should follow." The glory has not yet 
been revealed. When "revealed all flesh shall see it 
together." We are glad to trust that we are in the dawning 
of the Millennial day, that the glories of the great 
Messiah will soon be manifested to the groaning creation. 
This will be a manifestation of the Son of God, and also 
of all the sons of God graciously counted in with him as 
suffering with him, sacrificing with him, dead with him 
as members of his body, participators in his sufferings 
and sacrifice, sharers with him in his glory to be revealed. 

(d) In accordance with the foregoing is the testimony 
of the Tabernacle Shadows which fits and binds 
together every feature of the glorious plan and shows us 
that the first sacrifice of the Day of Atonement, the sacrifice 
of the bullock, was for and on behalf of the body of 

the priest and his household, the house of Levi, the household 
of faith. It shows us that the sacrifice of the goat, 
representing the sacrifice of the body of Christ, is a part 
of the atonement work, though the merit rests entirely 
upon the first sacrifice— of the bullock. From this we 
see how the Lord is accepting "us" as sacrificers, because 
we are Christ's and not on our own account. 

(e) We see further that this second part of the 
Atonement Day sacrifices will not be complete until the 
last member of the body of Christ has suffered with the 
Head. The type shows further that when this shall have 
been accomplished, the full ransom-price for the world will 
be presented to Justice and be accepted forthwith; and 
that as a result the great High Priest shall come forth 
clothed in glory and in blessing power and that the result 
will be the lifting of the curse, the removal of all divine 
wrath and the pouring of the holy Spirit upon "all 

flesh." 

(f) This in no sense signifies that merit of the Church 
has accomplished anything that could not have been 
accomplished without her co-operation. It shows on 
the contrary that all the merit was in the Lord Jesus and 
in the sacrifice which he gave. Any sacrifice which we 
make is based upon his merit imputed to us and continued 
in our sacrifice. It is the sacrifice of "his body," 

in the larger sense of the word his Church, that will thus 



be completed. It will be the Christ, the great Prophet, 
Priest and King, of many members, with one Head, 
raised up from amongst the brethren. It will effect all 
this great blessing, and all the members of the body must 
recognize the honor of the Head and maintain the same; 
and all of them will be glad to acknowledge that without 
him we could do nothing, and that without him our 
sacrifices would not avail anything, and that hence to 
him belongs all the glory of the great salvation. 

(1)1 still affirm, as in the past, that as we all shared 
in Adam's condemnation, any price which will avail for 
him must be sufficient to purchase deliverance for all 
that were in him— the whole human race: that the death 
penalty was such that if one were paid for, all would be 
paid for: that in harmony with this Jesus gave himself 
a ransom for all. But the giving of himself into death 
as "a ransom for all" or "a corresponding price," must 

R3507 : page 54 

not be confounded with the paying over of that price 
to Justice after our Lord arose from the dead. He has 
the entire merit of his sacrifice at his command, and all 
of it pledged on behalf of Adam and his race, but only a 
portion of it is applied, namely, to the household of 
faith. 

JESUS APPROPRIATED ON BEHALF OF BELIEVERS. 

(2) To say that the Lord paid over to the Father or 

to Justice the full amount, and that the Father accepted 
the same for all, would be to contradict the plain statements 
of Scripture which we have just examined. Justice 
is properly represented as being blind, and hence if 
the Lord's merit had been applied for all Justice would 

R3508 : page 54 

not be at liberty to discriminate and to select first of 
all a little flock and withhold for a time the blessing of 
the remainder. Justice must be impartial, and if she 
accepts the price must at once release all claim upon the 
captives. We have shown that this is not the case, that 
Justice still regards the world as "children of wrath," 
"under condemnation," "unclean." This proposition 
is, therefore, fallacious— manifestly so. 

(3) When our Lord "ascended up on high" he led 

a multitude of captives. In the prophetic sense we might 
speak of the whole world as already released, but not in 
the actual sense. From the standpoint that our Lord's 
life is a sufficiency to meet all the requirements of Justice 
whenever applied, we may think and speak of the 
world as being no longer dead but merely asleep. Indeed 
our heavenly Father spoke of mankind from that standpoint 
of his purpose centuries before the ransom price 
was paid at all. 



The entire work of redemption is properly viewed 
as one with a beginning and ending, just like the Day of 
Atonement. It was all one Day of Atonement, but 
there were two parts of the work of that day. And so 
there are various features or stages of the work of "leading 
captivity captive." It began with our Lord's own 
personal release from the captivity of death; it continued 
subsequently with the reckoned release of believers, and 
further development is found in their actual release in 
the First Resurrection. A still further development 
will be found in the awakening of the world and the 
restitution processes of the Millennial age. The absolute 
fulfilling of this leading of captivity captive will not be 
realized until the close of the Millennial age, when death 
will be literally, actually, fully "swallowed up in 
victory." 

OUR LORD'S SACRIFICE WAS SUFFICIENT. 

(4) There was no need of anything being added to 
the Lord's sacrifice so far as Justice was concerned; but 
the Apostle tells us that God foreknew us also by Jesus,— 
that, in the divine plan formulated before the world 
began, the Lord foreordained the Church, Jesus' Bride or 
associates; and in order for us to share with him in his 
glory it was necessary that we should also share with him 
in his sufferings. And because his sufferings were by 
divine arrangement applied as the atonement for the 

sins of the Church, therefore, by this divine arrangement, 
any sufferings that the Church may experience are counted 
in with those of the Lord as "sufferings of Christ;" 
and all the sufferings of Christ were atonement sufferings, 
not for personal sins, but for the sins of the world. 

If any of the Lord's people suffer stripes as punishments 
for partially wilful sins, such sufferings are not 
part of the sufferings of Christ, but are stripes for discipline. 
The sufferings which we have with Christ are 
of the same nature as his, namely, because of our loyalty 
to him and the principles of righteousness for which he 
stands. 

JUSTICE DEALS ONLY WITH THE MEDIATOR. 

(5) It would not be the correct thought to say that 
the life of Adam forfeited through sin is to be given 
back to him by Justice, because Jesus redeemed us. The 
thought rather is that Adam and his race had forfeited 
their rights to life and had no such rights at the bar of 
Justice, and that Jesus sacrificed his human life on man's 
behalf, so that the dead world might receive life through 
him— life from the dead. 

It is in harmony with this thought and in opposition 
to the other that the Lord speaks of himself as the Bread 
which came down from heaven, of which a man might 
eat and not die. Thus in the celebration of the Lord's 
Memorial Supper, in partaking of the bread we represent 



our faith in his redemptive work and our justification to 
life through the life which he laid down for us. 

The same thought is also presented in the Scriptures 
when referring to Christ as the "Everlasting 
Father" of the world in the future. He sacrificed his 
life, and is by divine authority granted the privilege of 
applying its equivalent to Adam and all of his race as 
he may please. He does apply a portion of that merit 
now to us who believe, and eventually he will apply 
sufficient of his merit to bring a blessing to all the world 
of mankind. Hence we have the promise of the Scriptures 
of a future time of restitution: the restitution to 
life of Adam and his children by virtue of their acceptance 
of that life as a gift— which Christ secured for them 
by the laying down of his life on their behalf. This our 
Lord designates regeneration. The world was generated 
once through Adam and all lost life through his disobedience. 
Christ has died that he might assume the place 
and rights and privileges of headship to our race, the 
privilege of fatherhood. He proposes a regeneration of 
all the children of Adam— so many of them as will 
accept the terms and conditions for returning to the full 
life and perfection of perfect human nature. 

MIGHT NOT THE CHURCH BE MERELY "RECKONED 
SACRIFICERS"? 

(6) The "reckoning" of Scripture is merely that of 
justification, making up for our inherited deficiencies 
and weaknesses. There is no reckoning of sacrifice. 
Being blemished by nature we have nothing whatever 
to sacrifice unless first we are counted or reckoned as 
justified,— made whole, cleansed. Such the Apostle 
urges, "I beseech you, brethren, by the mercies of God 
[in your justification] that ye present your bodies living 
sacrifices, holy, acceptable to God, your reasonable 
service." The sacrifice must be an actual one of a body 
reckoned perfect, but actually very imperfect. We cannot 
be reckoned to suffer with Christ if we do not suffer 
with him, and hence there is nothing in the Scriptures to 
this effect. On the contrary, "If we [actually] suffer with 
him, we shall also be glorified together." It will not do, 
therefore, to figure away these plain limitations of the 
Scriptures. Whoever does so is in a dangerous position, 
wresting with the Scriptures. 

On the Atonement Day the blood of the bullock was 
sprinkled seven times, as representing fulness, completeness, 
efficacy— efficacy for the thing for which it 
was sprinkled or applied, namely, on behalf of the High 

R3508 : page 55 

Priest's body and household. Similarly, subsequently, 
the blood of the Lord's goat, the second offering of the 
Atonement Day, was sprinkled seven times, representing 
similarly perfection, fulness, completeness, efficacy, for 



the purpose it was applied, namely, on behalf of "all the 
people." 

PERHAPS JESUS DIVIDES THE CREDIT WITH HIS CHURCH. 

(8) It is wholly contrary to the facts and Scripture 
to say that Jesus divided the credit of the atonement 
sacrifice with his Church, but not the deed. It is the 
deed that he requires, and without the deed there will 

be no participation. It is not the less his deed, as already 
shown. We could have neither part nor lot in the matter 
except as members of his body and under the influence of 
him as our Head, who works in us to will and to do of 
his good pleasure— to fill up that which is behind of the 
sufferings of Christ. 

(9) Yes, we use balances to represent divine Justice. 
Adam's disobedience forfeited his life to satisfy Justice; 
the unmerited death of Christ would balance or offset 
Adam's penalty, and when applied will give him the right 
to regenerate Adam's race on appropriate terms and 
conditions. 

(10) To say that "The Church sacrifices her life-rights 
to become sharer in the great reward of Christ," 

yet to reject the clear testimony that God accepts this 
as a part of the sufferings of Christ, guided by him as the 
Head, and finally to be applied by him as a part of his 
own, is inconsistent and unreasonable. 



R3508 : page 55 

THE FEAST OF TABERNACLES. 

John 7:37-46. -March 5. 

Golden Text:— "Never man spake like this man." 

THE TWO great feasts of the Jews were the Feast of 

Passover, from the fifteenth to the twenty-second 

of the first month, and the Feast of Tabernacles 

(dwelling in booths), from the fifteenth to the twenty-second 

of Tishri, the seventh month, corresponding 

closely to October 1, but varying according to the Jewish 

calendar, which was calculated on lunar time. These 

two great feasts divided the Jewish year, and were the 

great occasions on which the people from all over the 

Kingdom were expected to visit Jerusalem, the capital 

city, to spend a week in fellowship together, in thanksgiving 

to the Lord and the making of vows to him. These 

two festivals represent the beginning of a year— the 

one the civil year, the other the Church year, yet both 

might be termed religious in the sense that the entire 

national government was built upon a religious foundation. 

Israel was God's nation, and its laws were from 

him. 



Each of these feasts had its peculiar religious sacrifice, 
pointing to our Lord and his sacrifice and the 
Gospel Church, his body. The Passover festival in the 
beginning of the year was the anniversary of the deliverance 
from Egypt, the Passover lamb representing Christ, 
our Passover sacrifice, and the feast following representing 
the liberty and joy and blessing which come to all 
of the Lord's people passed over through faith in his 
blood. The fall festival was held in connection with the 
Day of Atonement and its sacrifices for sins, which 
typified the better sacrifices of this Gospel age and the ultimate 
atonement for the sins of the whole world, and the 
consequent ultimate removal of the curse which still rests 

R3509 : page 55 

upon the world of mankind. This festival was instituted 
at the time Israel passed from the wilderness into the Land 
of Promise. It commemorated the wilderness life and 
the entrance into Canaan, where they were privileged to 
enjoy their inheritance and have more substantial dwelling 
places. It was really the festival of the New Year, 
and a kind of thanksgiving occasion for the ingathering 
or harvest of the year.— Exod. 23:16; Lev. 23:33-44. 

THE FEAST OF TABERNACLES CELEBRATION. 

The usage of the people on this occasion is thus 
described by Edersheim and others:— 

"In Jerusalem booths were erected everywhere, in 
court and on housetop, in street and in square. These 
arbors or booths were made of branches of trees— palms, 
sycamores, olives, pines, willows, etc. Nobody was 
living at home, everybody in these booths— all the people 
from the city and crowds from the country. All distinctions 
of rank, all separation between rich and poor, 
were for a while forgotten, as each one dwelt in as good 
a dwelling as his neighbor. 

"Each morning a joyous procession, with music, 
went down to the Pool of Siloam and drew water in a 
golden pitcher, from which it was poured out upon the 
altar amid hallelujahs. 

"At night, four golden candelabra, each with four 
golden bowls for light, were in the center of the court, 
and the light emanating from them was visible to the 
whole city. Around these lights pious men danced before 
the people with lighted flambeaux in their hands, singing 
hymns and songs of praise, whilst the Levites, who 
were stationed on the fifteen steps which led into the 
woman's court of the Temple and which corresponded to 
the fifteen psalms of degrees, i.e. steps (Psalms 122-134), 
accompanied the songs with instrumental music. 

"The Temple illumination was symbolical of the 
light which was to shine from out the Temple into the 
dark night of heathendom; then, at the first dawn of 
morn the blasts of the priests' silver trumpets, of the 



army of God, as it advanced with festive trumpet-sound 
and call, to awaken the sleepers and to utter 
solemn protest against heathendom." 

"It is supposed that on the last evening of the festival, 
when the splendid light of this grand illumination 
was to cease, Christ called attention to himself, 'I am 
the Light of the world' (John 8:12), which is to shine 
forever and illuminate not only the Temple and the 
Holy City, but all the world,"— the Sun of Righteousness. 

"THAT GREAT DAY OF THE FEAST." 

The last of these seven days of the feast was called 
the Great Day. It was in it that the entire festival 
ceremony and rejoicing reached its climax. Again we 
glean from Edersheim and others, as follows:— 

"According to Jewish tradition the pillar of cloud 
by day and the fire by night, symbolical of God's presence 
and guidance, at first appeared to Israel on the 
fifteenth of Tishri, the first day of the feast. On that 

R3509 : page 56 

day Moses was said to have come down from the Mount 
and announced to the people that the tabernacle of 
God was to be reared among them. We note that the 
dedication of Solomon's Temple and the descent of the 
Shekinah glory upon it took place at this feast— 1 Kings 8; 
2 Chron. 7. 

"The last great day of the feast was the climax of 
all this symbolization. Early in the morning the people, 
with the Paradise apple (an orange) in their left hands 
and branches in their right, marched to the sound of 
music in a procession headed by the priest, who bore a 
golden pitcher to draw water from the Pool of Siloam, 
south of the Temple. The priest having filled the golden 
pitcher at this fountain, brought it back into the court 
of the Temple, amid the shouts of the multitude and the 
sounds of cymbals and trumpets. The return was so 
timed that the procession should arrive just as other 
priests were laying the pieces of the sacrifices on the 
altar of burnt offering toward the close of the ordinary 
sacrifice-service. 

"On each of the seven days the priest made a circuit 
of the altar, saying, 'O, then, now work salvation, 
Jah! O, Jah, give prosperity!' But on the seventh day 
they made the circuit seven times remembering how the 
walls of Jericho had fallen in similar circumstances, and 
anticipating that by the direct interposition of God, 
the walls of heathendom would fall before Jehovah and 
the world lie open before his people to go in and possess 
it. 

"The golden pitcher full of water was then poured 
upon the altar. This ceremony was considered of vital 
importance and apparently symbolized the out-pouring 
of the holy Spirit. Immediately following the pouring 



of this water the Hallel was sung. This consists of 
Psalms 1 13-118. These were chanted, with responses, 
to the accompaniment of the flute. As the Levites 
intoned the first line of the Psalm, the people repeated 
it; while to each of the other lines they responded, 
Hallelu Yah (Praise ye the Lord). Then the priests 
blew a three-fold blast on their silver trumpets." 

JESUS AT THE FEAST. 

Our lesson relates to the last feast of Tabernacles 
attended by our Lord— the one which occurred just six 
months before the crucifixion. In a previous lesson we 
saw that the feeding of the five thousand was at a time 
when many of them were on their way to Jerusalem to 
the feast of the Passover, so that the present lesson is 
at least six months later— quite possibly a year and six 
months later, as evidently there was a considerable time 
during which our Lord "could not walk in Jewry, because 
the Jews sought to kill him." 

On the occasion of this feast, many wondered 
whether or not Jesus would attend it, for it seems to have 
been well understood by a considerable number that the 
chief priests were so envious against the Lord, so enmitous, 
so bitter, that threats had been made against 
his life. While our Lord realized that his life was under 
divine protection until his "hour" should come, nevertheless 
it would appear that he did not tempt providence 
by going unnecessarily in the way of danger, but rather 
shaped his course according to the conditions he found. 
Thus, too, he admonished his disciples, "When they 
persecute you in one city, flee ye to another." 

The context shows that at this time some of our 
Lord's brethren (probably his cousins, for cousins at 
that time were called "brethren") seemed to doubt his 
Messiahship, and urged him to go up to Jerusalem and 
perform his mighty works there, where the most learned 
men of the nation would have an opportunity for seeing 
and criticising and fault-finding, and if possible refuting 
his claims and miracles. Our Lord's answer was, "Go 
ye up to the feast; I go not up to the feast; mine hour is 
not yet fully come." For our Lord to have gone up 
early to the feast might have provoked the animosity of 
the religious teachers the more. His delay in going was 
no injury to the publicity of his teachings either, because 
the people naturally inquired for him, expressed wonder, 
discussed his claims, told one another what they had seen 
and heard in their own cities, villages, etc. It was 
toward the latter part of the feast week that our Lord 
arrived on the scene and went straightway to the Temple, 
and when the religious sentiments of the people were at 
their highest pitch he called their attention to the deep 
spiritual things symbolized by them year by year 
continually. 

It is presumed that it was just at the close of the 
pouring of the golden pitcher full of water on the altar, 



a libation to the Lord, and while the multitudes in the 
warm climate were probably thirsty and had their thirst 
rather aggravated by the sight of the water, that Jesus 
made the announcements which constitute the essence 
of our lesson, "If any man thirst, let him come unto 
me and drink. He that believeth on me, as the Scripture 
saith, Out of his belly shall flow a stream of living 
water." 

No wonder the people said, as the Prophet had 
foretold, that our Lord spake in parables and dark sayings. 
How many, how few of the multitude who heard 
could gain any reasonable understanding of this message! 
Even under the blessed influences that are ours 
under the Spirit dispensation, how few have any adequate 
conception of what these words signify. 

DRINKING AT THE FOUNTAIN. 

All have some conception of what natural thirst is, 
and of the refreshment that comes through partaking 
of literal water, and to understand our Lord's words respecting 
the water of life which he has to give, we must 
carry the figure forward and realize that there are other 
thirsts and cravings of the human nature which need 
satisfaction, which without satisfaction cause unrest, 
distress. These cravings of the heart we briefly refer to 
again as thirst for rest, peace, joy and fellowship. 
Only those who have such thirsts are called upon— 
"Blessed are they that hunger and thirst." Many of 
our race at the present time are so depraved mentally 
and physically that they have no hunger and thirst for 
better things than they now enjoy— they already are 
full and satisfied with the imperfect things possessed. 
The Lord's appeal at the present time is not to these, 
but to those who hunger and thirst, "If any man thirst 
let him come unto me and drink." 

This is the appeal of this Gospel age: the Lord is 
seeking for the thirsting ones and finding them, and if 
they will drink at his fountain of grace and truth, they 
will find the satisfaction, the comfort, the joy, the peace, 
the rest, the blessing, which the world can neither give 
nor take away. Blessed, therefore, are the thirsty, and 
favored are they who are now drinking of the waters 
given forth by the smitten Rock— our Lord.— 1 Cor. 10:4. 

R3510 : page 57 

The Apostle commented upon our Lord's words, 
explaining the first part, but not the second. He says, 
"This spake he of the Spirit which they who believed 
on him should receive." The receiving of the Spirit is 
the satisfying of our thirst. All through life we are 
drinking at this fountain. We will not be satisfied until 
we awake in the Lord's likeness; then, as the Apostle 
declares, "I shall be satisfied when I awake in thy likeness" 
—when this mortal shall be swallowed up in immortality, 



we shall be like our dear Redeemer, see him 

as he is, and share his glory as members of his body. 

THE HOLY SPIRIT WAS NOT YET GIVEN. 

The holy Spirit was exercised upon the prophets, 
and under its influence they spake and wrote. But the 
holy Spirit granted to the Gospel Church at and since 
Pentecost is different; it is the Spirit of adoption, the 
Spirit of understanding, not the Spirit of prophecy. It 
was not possible for any to be begotten of the Spirit 
as sons of God until the ransom-sacrifice of Jesus as 
on our behalf had been accomplished, not until he had 
ascended up on high and presented the merit of that 
sacrifice on our behalf to the Father, not until it had 
been accepted by the Father. Then this blessing of the 
Spirit of adoption was shed forth upon the apostles. 
All accepted to membership in the body of Christ since, 
by association with the fellow-members, are made partakers 
of this one Spirit, by which all are sealed until 
the day of deliverance. Eph. 4:30. 

THE OUTFLOWING STREAM. 

"Out of his body shall flow a stream of living waters." 
This verse was not fulfilled at Pentecost, where 
the Lord's followers merely began to drink of the spiritual 
truths, and by them to be united into one body of many 
members, of which Jesus is the head. It is from this 
one body that ultimately the stream of the water of 
life shall flow during the Millennial age for the blessing 
of the whole world. Our Lord referred to this saying, 
"My word shall judge you in the last day"— in the great 
day, the Millennial day; the world shall be judged by 
every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God. 
The water of life represents the Truth, and the amount 
of this water of life or Truth that shall proceed from 
the mouth of the Lord, from the mouth of the glorified 
Church, shall be such a stream, such a flow, as will 
reach to every part of the earth. "The knowledge of 
the glory of God shall fill the whole earth." 

In the present time, those who drink at the fountain 
of the water of life, are merely the sanctified in 
Christ Jesus, and our Lord declares of these that his 
grace and truth in them shall be as a well of water 
springing up into life everlasting. In Revelation, Chapter 21, 
we are given the picture of the aggregation of 
the various members of the body of Christ in glory. 
The whole is pictured as the New Jerusalem, and from it 
issues the stream of the water of life which our Lord 
referred to in his discourses. It will be a great river of 
the water of life, and on either bank of it will be the 
trees of life, nourished and supplied by it, bearing good 
fruit, and the leaves of those trees will be for the healing 
of the nations. 

Thus seen the Lord's discourse briefly pictured the 



blessings coming to his followers during this Gospel age, 
and the blessings that shall in the next age proceed from 
them for the comfort, blessing and uplifting, restitution, 
of all the families of the earth— of whosoever wills 
to take of that river of the water of life, which then will 
flow freely, and to which all will be clearly and distinctly 
invited by the Spirit and the Bride. 

A DIVISION AMONGST THE PEOPLE. 

Peace and unity are greatly to be desired; yet these 
are not always possible, not always advantageous. If 
all were perfect, peace and unity would certainly be 
the only proper condition, but so long as there are imperfections, 
errors, etc., there must be differences. In 
harmony with this our Lord declared that his message 
would not bring peace but a sword under present conditions. 
He will be the Prince of Peace by and by, but 
not until peace shall be established upon a righteous 
basis. Before that time he will be the King who will 
reign in righteousness, and dash evil systems and things 
to pieces as potters' vessels, with a rod of iron. 

There are those who say peace, peace, when 
there is no peace and when peace is not possible, 
and the Lord's people are not to be of these. 
This does not mean that the Lord's people are to 
be breeders of strife. On the contrary they are exhorted 
everywhere in the Scriptures to be peaceable 
and peacemakers; but with all efforts for peace, and 
their love of peace and their peacemaking qualities continually 
increasing, the message that our Lord gave 
them will breed disturbances. Why? We answer in 
the words of our Lord, because there is no fellowship 
between light and darkness, there can be no peace nor 
truce between the two; in proportion as the one obtains 
control, the other is excluded. 

In harmony with this we find in this lesson that 
there was a division among the people because of him— 
some approving and some opposing. Thus it must be 
with us as we lift up the standard of righteousness: if 
we will let the light of truth shine out, those who love 
the truth will be more or less attracted by it in proportion 
as their hearts are sincere, truth loving. Those 
who love the error will become antagonistic in proportion 
to their lack of sincerity. If this was the case with 
our Lord, can we think that it would be possible for his 
disciples to find it otherwise? Surely not. We must 
have our feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel 
of peace. Ours is the Gospel of peace, yet we will find 
that as we bear it to others our path of progress will be 
a difficult one and we will need all the protection the 
Lord has provided in his fore-statement of what we must 
expect, and his promises of blessing and glory to the 
overcomers. 

ENVY, MALICE, HATRED, MURDER. 



While our Lord was in the Temple teaching, the 
Jewish rulers, aware of his presence, were conspiring for 
his life. A meeting of the Sanhedrin was called, and 
officers representing the body were present in the Temple 
amongst the people, charged with the responsibility of 
finding some fault with the teaching and making it the 
pretext for a measure of insurrection, and further, the 
arrest of our Lord— under a charge either of teaching 
contrary to the Law of Moses or contrary to the Roman 
laws. On every occasion they sought to entrap him in 
his words, but being unable to do so, they returned to 
the Sanhedrin to report. 

What a sad commentary it is upon the deceitfulness 
of the human heart, that these men, who were thus 

R3510 : page 58 

seeking for the apprehension and death of Jesus, were 
the most influential men in this, the holiest nation of 
earth. Not only so, they were Doctors of the Law- 
men supposedly the best versed in the Mosaic Law, its 
letter and spirit— men whose position in Judaism corresponded 
to that of Doctors of Divinity in Christendom 
to-day. We may well ask, as Pilate subsequently 
did, "Why, what evil hath he done?" The answer 
must be that there was no evil except in the hearts of 
these most talented, educated and nominally most 
religious men in the world. 

We can imagine that if one were to have inquired 
as to their motive, the answer would have been, We are 
so loyal to God, to his Law through Moses and to the 
interests of this mighty people, over which God has 
made us rulers and teachers, that we are zealous to put 
down this man who, though he seems to be God-fearing, 
sympathetic with the poor, etc., is, we believe, a most pernicious 
man. He is pernicious in that he is representing 
himself to be the Messiah, and because he is really a 
man of ability, he has hoodwinked the people. If we 
let him alone, the power of controlling this nation, 
which now rests with us as the moral and intellectual 
leaders of the nation, will pass out of our grasp; this 
man will establish himself, and the whole people of 
Israel will look upon us as being foolish, and conclude that 
they were able to know the Messiah and that we, their 
intellectual superiors, were stupid or out of divine favor 
so we could not recognize the time of our visitation. 

This would be their way of reasoning on the subject, 
but the Lord's view of the situation would be the 
very reverse, that they were hypocritical, that they were 
pretending to be what they were not in reality, that much 
of their praise and service toward the Lord were formalistic 
lip services, and that pride lay at the bottom 
of their endeavors and professions, and that this 
pride was touched by the success of our Lord and his 
wisdom, and the fact that the multitudes heeded his 



message: they were envious, malice burned in their 
hearts, they hated him without a cause— simply because 
he was better, holier, wiser than they, and because the 
people were recognizing this fact. 

How dangerous a thing is envy— selfishness! How 
many of the Lord's people to-day are afflicted by it 
so that they refuse to recognize the Spirit of the Lord, 
so that instead of seeking to encourage one another and 
to add to the influence of one another and to realize 
that the whole work of the Lord is one, alas, how often 
is the spirit of strife and vain glory found! How displeasing 
everything of this kind must be in the sight of 
the Lord! 

GRACE WAS POURED UPON HIS LIPS. 

When the officers returned to the Sanhedrin, the 
question was asked, Where is your prisoner? Why did 
you not bring him? Were you not able to entrap him 
in his words? Is it possible that any man could speak in 
public and that keen-minded men such as you are would 
be unable to entrap him in anything he might say that 
would enable you to form a charge against him as a 
teacher of that which would be injurious to the people, 
that he said nothing that you could construe to be a 
violation of the Law of Moses or the law of the Romans? 
The answer was a volume in itself,— "Never 
man spake like this man." 

R3511 : page 58 

The Lord's people, seeking to walk in his footsteps, 
continually find that the world is still full of envy and 
malice and hatred. They still find it true that "The 
world knoweth us not, even as it knew him not;" they 
still find that amongst their opponents, amongst those 
who seek to do them injury, amongst those who seek to 
entrap them in their words and who would apprehend 
them and injure them in reputation, if not in person, 
they find some of the worldly noble, the worldly wise, 
the worldly religious. The Lord's message to these is, 
"In your patience possess ye your souls." Their proper 
course is to set a guard upon their lips that they sin not 
with their mouths, that they should not only pray but 
strive that the meditations of their hearts and words of 
their mouths be acceptable to the Lord, and in proportion 
as this is true of them it will also be true of them 
that they will be wiser and more discreet in their language 
than others— approximately like unto him who 
spake as never man spake. 

But what a matter this is to guard the tongue! 
Truly the Apostle said that he who is able to conquer 
his tongue is able to conquer his whole body. It is so 
easy to say something that ought not to be said, it is 
so easy for the majority to repeat an evil rumor, to cast 
a reflection upon the character of another, to assassinate 



in this manner, or at least to wound or injure, the 
interests or feelings or good name of another. Let us 
more and more in this particular also seek to be like 
our Lord, seek to speak as other men do not speak, and 
thus show forth the praises of him who hath called us 
out of darkness into his marvellous light. 



R3511 : page 58 

"YE SHALL BE FREE INDEED." 

John 8:3 1-40. -March 12. 

Golden Text: "Whosoever committeth 
sin is the servant of sin." 

THIS LESSON is a brief report of one of our Lord's 

discourses while at the Feast of Tabernacles, 

referred to in our last lesson— probably delivered 

on the last, the great day of the Feast. Many who had 

heard his discourse on the Water of Life that he could 

give and on himself as the Light of the World, were 

well convinced that "never man spake like this man"— 

convinced that he was a great prophet, or teacher at 

least, that he was sent of God, and, this being true, 

that he could be none other than the long-expected 

Messiah. Addressing these believers, our Lord intimated 

to them that they were not yet fully his disciples— that 

discipleship would imply a desire to hear his message further 

and a willingness to obey it at any cost. His 

words were: "If ye continue in my words, then ye are 

my disciples indeed; and ye shall know the truth and 

the truth shall make you free." 

SHARPER THAN A TWO-EDGED SWORD. 

The Apostle points out the fact that the Word of 
God is quick (living) and powerful and sharper than 
a two-edged sword, able to separate and divide and distinguish 

R3511 : page 59 

as nothing else will do, both the thoughts and 
intents of the heart. We see this illustrated in our 
Lord's words. He uttered the truth, important truth, 
blessed truth, helpful truth to those in a right condition 
of mind. Nevertheless, in those in a wrong condition 
of mind his noble words stirred up envy, resentment 
and an evil spirit. This must necessarily be the case 
always. Truth, as our Lord points out, is represented 
by the light, error by the darkness, and there is continually 
an antagonism between these. Where one is, 
the other is correspondingly lacking; where one 
comes in, the other departs proportionately. 



Apparently many of our Lord's hearers were favorably 
impressed with these utterances; apparently 
the multitude of those who heard him were so much on 
his side that the officers of the Sanhedrin failed to take 
him; apparently the division of the people concerning 
him was quite largely in his favor. The expression, 
"Never man spake like this man," and the declarations 
that they "marvelled at the gracious words 
that proceeded out of his mouth," and that they said, 
"If this be not the Christ, when the Christ cometh can 
he do greater things than this man doeth?" all imply 
that there was a strong undercurrent of sentiment in 
his favor; and the fact that the chief priests and Doctors 
of the Law were jealous of him to the extent that 
they sought his death, also implies this attitude of the 
multitude. But he followed the course of duty instead 
of the course of worldly wisdom and self exaltation. 

It was necessary that he should present the truth 
to those who were believing, that it might sift and separate 
amongst them, that those of proper attitude of 
heart might be brought nearer to him and to the Father, 
and be prepared for the great change which would date 
from the time of his death and resurrection and the 
pouring out of the holy Spirit. It was necessary, also, 
that others not of the right condition of heart should 
be repelled, "That seeing they might see and not perceive," 
not become disciples indeed, not be made free, 
because not really the children of the Truth; that they 
should not fully recognize the Messiah, not be prepared 
for the blessing of Pentecost, but, on the contrary, be 
left in their blindness, in which six months later they 
would cry before Pilate, "Crucify him," "Away with such 
a fellow from the earth," "His blood be upon us and 
upon our children." 

PRIDE AN OPPONENT TO THE TRUTH. 

Touch a man's pride and you arouse his whole 
being. Blessed, therefore, and favorably conditioned 
are the humble, the meek and the lowly of 
heart. They are not only better prepared to receive the 
good tidings respecting the Kingdom, but will be better 
prepared to follow the footsteps of the Master in the attainment 
of the Kingdom. Pride is generally in error 
and hence frequently comes into contact with the Truth, 
as in this case. There was nothing really or properly 
offensive in our Lord's words, "The Truth shall make 
you free:" it was the power of the Truth in the words 
and not any rudeness or unkindness of the sentiment 
that aroused the wrath of the hearers— the expression 
wounded their pride. 

This pride seems to be a part of the difficulty of 
the Jew from that day to this. The Apostle intimates 
this in his quotation from the Prophet respecting their 
fall, "Let their table become a snare, a recompense 
unto them." The peculiar blessings of God upon that 



people ensnared them, for instead of appreciating the 
fact that they were not more worthy than others, they 
trusted in themselves that they were righteous and 
despised others— they thought of themselves as being 
more worthy than others of divine favors, revelations, 
etc. So in this case our Lord's hearers resented the 
thought that the Truth could make them free. If our 
Lord had said, You who are free, being my disciples, shall 
bless the heathen and deliver them from the yoke of 
bondage, the sentiment would have called forth approval 
and he would have been well thought of. 

And this, indeed, would be the strict truth— the 
Lord's faithful disciples, the Israelites indeed, are the 
channels through whom the Lord will ultimately break 
the shackles of sin and death from off the Gentiles, the 
world and also from Israel. But in order for anyone 
to be the Lord's disciple, he himself must be made free, 
and it was to this the Lord referred, and it was this 
thought that angered those who had a few moments 
before believed on him. How could they 
regard him as the Messiah when he spoke thus slightingly 
of the Jewish nation and implied that in some 
sense of the word they were bondsmen? No; they had 
been bondsmen for awhile in Egypt but they now were 
free, was their argument. 

SIN AND DEATH, SLAVE-MASTERS. 

Supporting his previous statement, our Lord thrust 
a probe into their wounds, which had a good effect doubtless 
upon those in the right condition, but only an angering 
effect upon the majority. His words were, "He 
that committeth sin is the slave of Sin." In agreement 
with our Lord's words we recall the Apostle's expression, 
"Ye were sold under sin"— into slavery to Sin; and 
again he represents that the whole world are slaves to 
Sin and Death. Sin and Death are personified as cruel 
monarchs reigning over the world of mankind, and that 
the only ones freed from their galling yoke are those 
whom Christ has made free through the Truth, those 
who through the Truth have become his servants, his 
followers. What a precious lesson there is here for those 
who are in a humble attitude of heart and comprehend 
the slavery, longing for the liberty proper to the sons 
of God. All those learning this lesson, all those realizing 
the power of sin and death reigning, must desire freedom 
before they are properly prepared to follow Jesus, to 
walk in his steps and thus seek deliverance. 

For over six thousand years Israel had been under 
the Law, and all of them who were of the right condition 
of heart found just what the Apostle Paul expresses 
in Romans 7, that to will to do right was present 
with them but not the ability to perform; that sin had 
such a hold in their members, in their flesh, that their 
best intentions were unable fully to control their words 
and thoughts and deeds. In other words, all Israelites 



indeed must have realized that through the fall, through 
the weakness of their flesh, they were unavoidably the 
servants, the slaves of sin, and all true Israelites 
looking up to the perfect law of God, the law of liberty, 
must have desired freedom from sin and ability to obey 
the divine command and thus to attain the great reward 
promised. Those of our Lord's hearers who were Israelites 
indeed must have seen the matter from this standpoint, 
and have felt the force of our Lord's words and 

R3512:page60 

have desired that the truth should make them free from 
the bondage of Sin and Death. 

The majority, proud, boastful, conscience-seared, 
heady, high-minded, were incensed at the truth. They 
tauntingly repudiated the truth, declaring that as 
Abraham's seed they never were in bondage, thus rejecting 
the only avenue of escape from their slavery, their 
only channel for freedom, because there is "none other 
name given under heaven and amongst men whereby 
we must be saved," delivered, set free from sin and 
death, than the name of Jesus. Our Lord promptly exposed 
to them the hollo wness of their pretensions. 
Pointing to the malice, envy, hatred, murder, which 
filled their hearts toward him as the result of his statement 
of the truth, he called upon them to witness that 
they had little of the disposition or works of Abraham, 
for they were even now desiring to kill him simply because 
he had told them the truth, because he had told them 
truths which Abraham could not tell, because he was 
proffering them assistances which their relationship to 
Abraham could not secure aside from him. No wonder 
the Scriptures declare, "They hated him without a cause," 
hated him because he told them the truth— the darkness 
hated the light. The same is true to-day as respects 
nominal spiritual Israel. There is a boastfulness 
and pride which objects to the truth because it more 
or less condemns all and makes manifest that very few 
indeed are free from the control of Sin. 

"CHILDREN OF THE LIGHT." 

Although they were not mentioned and probably 
were few in comparison to the multitude and probably 
made no demonstration at the time, we doubt not that 
there were some in the audience who were Israelites 
indeed, and in whose hearts our Master's words found 
lodgment, bringing forth much fruitage subsequently. 
These were Israelites indeed in whom there was no 
guile, no dishonesty, neither deception of others nor 
deception of their own hearts. They knew themselves 
to be sinners, unable to come up to the standards of 
the Law; they realized that they were indeed as the Lord 
had said, slaves of sin and imperfection; they desired 
to follow the perfect law of God as they discerned it 



with the eye of their understanding; they wondered and 
hoped if it were possible that this great Teacher had 
some words of truth, some message from the Lord which 
would relieve them from their great burden. These 
were in the attitude so graphically described and pictured 
by the Apostle Paul in his words, O, wretched 
man that I am, who shall deliver me from this dead 
body? My mind desires to serve the law of God, but 
I have in my flesh all the imperfections and weaknesses 
of heredity and I am unable to do as I would. 

Our Lord did not go into the details to show how 
the truth would make free; he merely stated the proposition, 
realizing that it would attract those who were 
of right condition of heart as the magnet attracts steel. 
It was not time to explain the truth that would make 
free. First he must redeem the world— he must die for 
our sins, be resurrected, changed, received up into glory 
and present a portion of the merit of his sacrifice on 
our behalf. When this had been accepted of the Father, 
the due time would come for the truth on this subject 
to be understood by the proper class, the Israelites indeed, 
and then he would shed forth the holy Spirit to 
guide his disciples into all truth on the subject and to 
give their hearts a full assurance of faith and to give 
their intellects full understanding of how God could be 
just and yet be the justifier of them that believe. 

Under the enlightening and guiding influences of 
that Spirit, we now see what our Lord's hearers before 
Pentecost could not distinctly discern. We see that 
Israel was the house of servants and could not abide 
in the house of the Lord, in the place of his favor forever, 
but only temporarily would they occupy the place 
to prepare the way for and make types for the Gospel 
house of sons. "For Moses verily was faithful as a servant 
over all his house [of servants], but Christ as a 
son over his house [of sons]." Ah! now we can appreciate 
that the Son makes free— free indeed those who 
come unto the Father through him. 

TRUTH MAKES FREE INDEED. 

The truth which our Lord gives us to make us free 
indeed has various parts, various aspects. First, we 
need to realize our enslavement to sin and the hopelessness 
of our own efforts to extricate ourselves and obtain 
liberty. Some learn this lesson of truth much 
more quickly than do others, but it must be learned 
before we are ready properly to appreciate the next 
lesson, which is that our Lord Jesus died that he might 
thus cancel the power of sin upon humanity— that he 
might thus relieve us judicially from the divine displeasure 
and sentence of death, and that he might thus 
have the right ultimately to set free the captives of 
Sin and Death. 

The third lesson to be learned is that the time for 
actually setting free the world, appointed in the Father's 



plan, is the great seventh day, the Millennium, the seventh-thousand-year 

day. Then he who bought the 

world with his precious blood will, according to the 

divine plan, dissolve the curse and set in operation the 

various agencies and methods of the Millennial Kingdom 

for the mental, moral and physical uplift of the 

world from its dead and enslaved condition— some actually 

in the tomb and others hastening hither— all are to 

be set free from the bondage of death, all are to be granted 

the opportunity for coming into the glorious liberty 

of the sons of God, liberty of freedom from sin and its 

dominion and liberty of freedom from death, the wages 

of sin. 

The Apostle points out to us that the whole creation 
is groaning and travailing, waiting for that day and 
for the sons of God, under Jesus, the great Chief-captain 
and High-priest, to be the deliverers. The Apostle 
Peter points out that whosoever at that time will not 
avail himself of the great privileges and blessings of liberty 
and return to the Father's family will be destroyed 
in the Second Death.— Acts 3:23. 

NOW ARE WE SONS OF GOD. 

Another lesson which the holy Spirit teaches us 
through the apostles and prophets respecting this liberty 
where with Christ makes free, is that those who can 
now exercise faith in him and who earnestly crave this 
liberty, may in a certain sense be made free from sin 
and death now— in this present life— while outwardly 
to all appearances subject to similar conditions with the 
world. This faith salvation is the one which is in operation 
during this Gospel age. Blessed are those who 
have the eyes of faith and ears of faith, for they 
may receive this liberty in advance of the world, in 

R3512:page61 

advance of the Millennial age, and, receiving it into 
good and honest hearts, may receive still further blessing. 

This liberty is justification, and of its comforting 
and blessed effects upon the hearts of God's people, 
the Apostle speaks (Rom. 5:1) saying, "Being justified 
by faith, we have peace with God." The truth gives 
us this peace— believing the scriptural statement that 
Christ died for our sins and rose for our justification, 
accepting him as our Redeemer from the shackles 
of sin and the serving of sin and reckonedly being 
brought from death unto life. From this standpoint we 
realize that we are acceptable with God, although we 
are still actually imperfect, we see that God accepts 
our best endeavors to obey his law as instead of actual 
obedience, and that his justice is compensated or fulfilled 
by the imputation to us of the righteousness of 
our Lord Jesus, who died for our sins. The Apostle 
tells such that they are freed from the slavery of sin 



that they may come into the service of another— even 
Christ. 

"ACCESS INTO THIS GRACE." 

Being thus by faith released from sin, the next 
step proper for the believer is to realize that he cannot 
keep himself, that he cannot maintain his liberty for 
himself, and to flee to the great Redeemer, who offers 
protection and assistance to all those who consecrate 
themselves fully to him— to all those who become his 
disciples. By justification they are free, but still in 
danger of being overtaken by the snares of sin and 
the wiles of the Adversary. To be free indeed, positively 
free, securely free, they need to make an alliance 
at once with the Lord Jesus, to give their hearts fully 
and completely to him, to accept his will, his word, 
his guidance, in every matter. But in turn the Lord is 
particular and will not receive these upon any terms, 
but only upon the condition of a full surrender to his 
will. Ah, they say, that means then another slavery, 
a slavery to Christ Jesus, instead of a slavery to sin. 
True, the giving up of the will is the strongest kind of 
a bondage, and this is exactly what the scriptures represent 
as being the course and the proper course of those 
who would be similarly free from the dominion of sin 
and death. The Apostle declares that being made free 
from sin we became the servants [Greek, the bond-slaves] 
of righteousness and of Christ.— Romans 6:20. 

We might well hesitate about getting free from one 
bondage and getting under subjection to another; but 
when we realize that to be the bondservants of Christ 
means to be the bondservants of that which is right 
and good and true, and in harmony with the Father, 
and that it is to the best interests of ourselves and all 
concerned, we rejoice thus to place ourselves unreservedly 
under the control of him who hath so loved us as 
to purchase us with his own precious blood. Surely 
we are safe in his hands! Those who seek to use liberty 
for themselves, those who boast they have a mind of 
their own, and will of their own, know not how dangerous 
is their position, and that surely they will succumb 
eventually to the wiles of the Adversary and to 
the ensnarements of sin. Only those who follow the 
course of full consecration to the Lord are wise. There 
is not only rest and peace, and joy and liberty for the 
sons of God now, but, additionally, O wonderful 
thought, to these the Master has proposed that they 
shall be his Bride, his associates in the Kingdom, his 
joint-heirs throughout eternity!— Romans 5:1. 



R3513 : page 61 

SOME INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 



OUR LORD AS ABRAHAM'S SEED. 



Question (1). In view of the fact that our Lord 
Jesus is no longer a man, but highly exalted far above 
angels, principalities and powers, and every name that 
is named, and partaker of the divine nature, is it proper 
for us to consider him now to be the Seed of Abraham? 
Or should we think of him as having been the Seed of 
Abraham merely according to the flesh? 

(2). If the above question be answered affirmatively, 
what are we to do with the Scriptures teaching 
that our Lord's sacrifice of himself became the basis of 
his high exaltation to power and authority to bless all 
the families of the earth as the seed of Abraham? Is it 
not the seed of Abraham that is to do the blessing, and 
would not this seem to indicate that the glorified Christ, 
and not the man Christ Jesus, is the Seed meant in the 
Scriptures? 

(3). You point out in the DAWN that Melchisedec, 
who had neither father nor mother in the priesthood, 
and the beginning and ending of whose priesthood is 
not recorded, was a type of the risen, glorified Christ— 
"a priest forever after the order of Melchisedec." 
Would not this seem to indicate that our Lord as a man, 
in the flesh, as the son of Mary, was not the heir of 
the Abrahamic promise, and that he did not reach this 
position until begotten of the holy Spirit and ultimately 
born of the holy Spirit? 

Answer. The Apostle Paul settles the matter respecting 
our Lord's relationship to Abraham according 
to the flesh. He declares that when Jesus left the 
glory with the Father, and humbled himself, he took 
not upon him the nature of angels, but the seed of 
Abraham. (Heb. 2:16.) This evidently refers to his 
birth of the flesh, as the son of Mary. Another message 
of similar import (Rom. 1:3) declares him to have 
been "of the seed of David according to the flesh," 
and hence of the seed of Abraham according to the 
flesh. This, however, does not conflict with the thought 
that he is still the Seed of Abraham, though highly exalted 
and now of a totally different nature— of the 
divine nature. 

In this connection we must remember our Lord's 
own statement, "I am he that was dead, and behold I 
am alive forever more." He who is alive is thus declared 
by himself to be the same who left the heavenly 
courts, who took the nature of men and who died on our 
behalf. At no time was our Lord's life forfeited. He 
declared, "No man taketh it from me. I lay it down 
of myself. I have authority to lay it down, and to 
receive it again." He is the same soul or being who, 
in response to the Father's plan laid aside his glory 
and became a man, the same soul or being who, as the 



man Christ Jesus, gave himself into death for our sins, 
his sacrifice being accepted of the Father, even unto 
death, and the same soul or being who was restored 
again, only on the higher plane of being, on the spirit 
plane, of the divine nature. 

R3513 : page 62 

As our Lord forfeited nothing, as he merely tendered 
all to the Father, and as the Father accepted the 
sacrifice, and returned to him all the rights and privileges 
on a new plane of being, he has to distribute to 
them the lost life and also the lost Kingdom, but he 
does not propose to give to men his share in the Abrahamic 
promise. It is to their advantage that he shall 
retain this title of Seed of Abraham, and exercise it to 
the full during the Millennial age, in the interest of all, 
whom he purchased with his precious blood, and whom 
he then will bless by setting them free from the bondage 
of Sin and Death, and give them all the needed 
assistances, that they may, if they will, return to full 
fellowship with the Father and to all that man lost in 
Adam, and more. 

This question is not at all affected by the Melchisedec 
type, which merely is used by the Apostle to show 
how the Lord's priestly office came to him without his 
being a member of the priestly tribe of Levi. That type 
has no bearing whatever upon the covenant promise 
made to the seed of Abraham, except that it shows us 
that our Lord can be the mediatorial priest on behalf 
of the world during the Millennial age, without in any 
sense of the word being connected with the Aaronic 
family. As the seed of Abraham he obtains his title to 
the throne of earth through the typical kings of Israel, 
as it was written respecting the last king, Zedekiah, 
"O thou profane and wicked prince, whose time is come 
that iniquity should have an end: take off the diadem, 
remove the crown. This shall no more be the same. 
I will overturn, overturn, overturn it, until he come, 
whose right it is, and I will give it unto him." Christ 
is the king, the heir of David's throne. His priestly 
line and authority came not through the house of Levi 
and Aaron, but according to another line, viz., that of 
Melchisedec. Our Lord, as the seed of Abraham, will 
exercise both the kingly and priestly office in his great 
work mentioned in the oath-bound covenant— the blessing 
of all the families of the earth, during the Millennial 
reign. 

THE CHURCH'S RELATIONSHIP TO ABRAHAM. 



Question. How can the Gospel Church be recognized 
as the Seed of Abraham, since only comparatively 
few of its members are actually members of the Jewish 



nation? 

Answer. The Apostle gives two lines of argument; 
the one is represented in his words, "Ye, brethren, as 
Isaac was, are the children of promise." (Gal. 4:28.) 
In this argument our Lord Jesus is represented as being 
the actual seed of Abraham, and as granting to all 
those who become united to him through faith, and 
through the spirit of adoption a joint-heirship with him, 
as members of his body, under him as their Head. 

The other argument the Apostle uses is, "If ye be 
Christ's then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according 
to the promise." (Gal. 3:29.) Here the Apostle's 
thought is that of a wife who experienced the same honors 
and privileges as her Head, her Husband, by becoming 
vitally associated with him as his wife. Thus 
we Gentiles are permitted to come into relationship with 
this oath-bound covenant by union with Christ, and 
similarly the Jews, who could not claim relationship 
to this promise because banned by their law, are made 
free from their union with Moses, that they also might 
be united to Christ, and through union with him who is 
the heir of all, become with the Gentiles of the same 
class "fellow heirs of the same promise." 



R3513 : page 62 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 

page 62 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

The "Heavenly Manna" fills a long-time want with me, 
and I thoroughly enjoy it every day, 7 a.m. To-day's 
thought of humility, and yesterday's of time's being an important 
element in all of God's work, are exceedingly helpful. 
I thank you sincerely for your part, your large part in the 
book, and pray I shall daily profit by the beautiful gift and 
the faithful use of it. 

The Dispatch of Monday, the 30th Jan., came yesterday 
and was greatly enjoyed. I sent the sermons after reading 
to a friend. The storm prevented work last week, and 
the cold also. But I have experienced much joy in the 
colporteur service. 

Your Sister in the Lord, 

ALICE L. DARLINGTON. 



R3513 : page 62 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

It is with greatest pleasure I write these lines and thank 
the Lord that there is a man who will preach the truth. I 
cannot tell how much good you have done me. I sent for 



the WATCH TOWER last spring and it would do you good 
to have seen me "eat it." I was starving for the Truth, 
and the TOWER literature is the "key" that unlocks the Bible, 
so I can say "Blessed Book!" 

I took right hold and went to work, and can say that 
this is the most prosperous year of my life, although the 
wet season destroyed all the crops and left me poorer than 
ever in this world's goods. 

I have a son-in-law who preached for the M.E. Church, 
and I labored with him, and got him to come to hear one of 
the Pilgrims when he was in this vicinity. The result is that 
he resigned the pastorate and has gone to work with his 
hands to support his family, and preaches seven (true gospel) 
sermons a week, anywhere and everywhere he can get a 
chance. His mother heard that he had quit preaching for 
the denomination and she came to see him. He labored 
with her with the result that she accepted the Truth, and 
so the work goes on. Praise the Lord! 

Dear Brother, I write this letter that you may feel encouraged 
to go on with the noble work. 

Your Brother in Christ, 

WM. BONE, Michigan. 



page 62 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

It is with pleasure that I write to thank you for the 
"Daily Manna," received this week. I have already been 
blessed and strengthened by it. 

How blessed and favored are we above all other people 
in that we are permitted to sit at the King's table in the 
days of His presence and feast upon the rich food so abundantly 
provided and served so wisely and carefully under his 
guidance and direction. 

I rejoice more and more that I received an invitation 
to this feast; that it is my privilege to live in this harvest 
time when such wonderful light is due to God's faithful and 
humble children. 

I am wondering often why he so highly honored me as 
to open my eyes that I might see the riches of his grace and 
become a partaker of his favor. Surely he does choose the 
weak and base things of this world, things not highly esteemed 
of men, to be his servants— "No flesh shall glory in his 
presence." 

I am glad to say that my health is so far improved that 
I am able to begin work again. I have already done a little 
and trust I shall be able to canvass these two towns during 
the coming six or seven weeks and be ready to return to my 
work with Sr. Mason in Connecticut as soon as the cold 
weather is over. 

I trust it may be the Lord's will for me to continue in 
the harvest work some time longer. I can only do a little, 

page 63 



but esteem that a great privilege, and try to do it in a manner 
acceptable to Him. It is a source of strength and comfort 
to me, and I believe to all the colporteurs to know that we 
have your prayers, and you certainly are remembered day by 
day by us all. May God continue to use you to his glory. 
Yours with Christian love, 

F. L. MONER. 



R3513 : page 63 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

With the last ray of light of this fast fading day, will 
end also the last dying spark of a once substantial bridge— 
the last— the last bridge has been burned, fully consumed. 
In other words, I have severed my connection as an electrician 
with one of the largest street railway companies in 
the world. It was something like parting with a dear old 
friend, as I have been with them for fifteen years. 

The reason for this action will be more clearly understood 
when I state that it was done for the purpose of giving 
my time wholly to the DAWN Colporteur service, although 
the position was quite remunerative (my last month's salary 
being $200 fair average); still the Lord offered me a better 
position, in fact "a hundred fold" better— Mark 10:29-30. 

To be sure, my friends do not understand it, and think 
I am very foolish, which is quite true, viewed from their 
standpoint. But in harmony with our motto for the year 
I have asked wisdom in this matter from him who giveth 
liberally and upbraideth not, and I feel that I have acted 
on the wisdom from above. We have been called to sacrifice, 
and sacrifice we must, if we hope to win the crown. 
I sometimes think the Lord's people put too much value on 
money and not enough on service. I am endeavoring to 
correct my estimates accordingly. We can search the Scriptures 
through, and in no place can we find any intimation 
even of being told to pray for money or any other temporal 
thing, but on the other hand, we are told how great is the 

R3514:page63 

harvest, and few the laborers. "Pray ye therefore the Lord 

of the harvest to send more reapers into the field." Matt. 9:37-38; 

John 4:35. And so in harmony with these verses 

I thankfully and humbly accept the Lord's invitation and 

say, Lord here am I, send me, send me. 

I therefore await your pleasure in the assignment of 
territory, and by the Lord's grace am pleased to subscribe 
myself, A fellow servant in the Redeemer, 

J. H. COLE. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 



I am just in receipt of "Heavenly Manna." It will serve 
to stir up the mind by way of remembrance day by day, 
bringing to our attention precious words of doctrine, reproof, 
instruction, admonition, warning, comfort, consolation and 
encouragement from the divine storehouse provided by our 
Heavenly Father, which I trust He will bless to our good, 
and development into the Christ character. 

I pray that our Heavenly Father will continue to use 
you in the dispensing of "meat in due season" to the household 
of faith, and that he will continue to grant you abundant 
supplies of grace and strength to overcome all the trials 
and temptations and persecutions incident to so prominent 
an office in the Body of Christ. 

With much love and best wishes for the New Year to you, 
Dear Brother, I am 

Yours in fellowship and service, 
A. E. BURGESS, Michigan. 



DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

I received the "Heavenly Manna" book last evening. 
I am sure it will be the source of many blessings to me 
throughout the year. 

This morning we took the January 20th text and read 
your words of comment, and as we realized that we were 
considering the same subject that you all at the "Bible 
House" were discussing, we enjoyed it the more, and were 
stirred to better thought: to a greater endeavor to get every 
point fully before our minds. I trust that as the year goes 
on we may become better able to get the full benefit of the 
subjects. 

All the family join with me in sending you our Christian 
love and best wishes that the present year may be filled with 
rich blessings for yourself and all the brethren there. 
Your Brother in the blessed Hope, 
W. S. MCNAUGHT, Iowa. 



page 63 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I received the copy of "Heavenly Manna," for which I 
now wish to express my sincere thanks and appreciation. 

The contents are so helpful, daily reminding us of our 
privileges and duties as servants of our King. Even the few 
days I have had the book, it has been of great help to me, and 
it certainly will grow more dear to me as the days slip by— 
if the Lord permits me to use it for yet awhile. 

It will seem so good to join in the same Breakfast Table 
topic as the Bible House family. May the Father bless us 
as we do so, and help us to keep more and more in mind the 
Heavenly things. 

May the dear Lord bless you richly throughout the New 
Year, is the earnest prayer of your sister in Christ. 



M. B. SCHLATTER. 



MY DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

"Heavenly Manna" is just received. I have read the 
daily readings up to date, and find it most practical and 
helpful. It is so beneficial to have part of our spiritual 
food apportioned in this way, for it gives us opportunity 
to digest it and act upon it. 

It certainly was supervised by our Heavenly Master. 
Year by year he adds just the helps, to best assist the prospective 
bride in "making herself ready" for the glorious and 
much-longed-for "marriage." 

How we love everything that searches the deepest crevices 
of the heart, and roots out whatever would not be pleasing 
to Him, "who has called us to glory and virtue." 

We render heartfelt thanks to dear Sr. Siebert, the compiler, 
and yourself, the giver, and above all, our dear Heavenly 
Father "who planned it all." With earnest Christian love 
and best wishes, 

Yours in His precious service, 

M. M. SPRINGER. 



R3514:page63 

Dear Brethren of the WATCH TOWER:- 

I want to tell you the story of one little tract. A few 
weeks ago I heard that an old friend, that I had not heard 
from for years until this fall, was in the hospital in Kansas 
City for treatment. I wrote to him immediately, sending 
him Tract No. 7. He received it just as he was starting 
to the doctor's office, so handed the tract to a man in the 
same ward, lying there with an amputated leg and swearing. 
When my friend returned he found the swearing man 
with tears streaming down his face. He said that was the 
best little book he ever saw, and wanted to keep it to hunt 
the references. He said he was done swearing. 

Now, the friend is here visiting us. We found him to 
be a consecrated Christian, but in utter darkness as respects 
Present Truth. To-day he was with us in our little 
meeting and was much surprised to learn of our Lord's 
presence, but he seemed to have a hearing ear, so we rejoice 
and point him to the helps our Lord has provided; 
for our tongues are so clumsy. I do hope our Lord will 
some day loose my tongue, so I can tell the blessed "old, 
old story" more smoothly. 

Yours in love of our Lord, 

MRS. S. B. STRATE,-Illinois. 



page 63 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

The friends here in the South are delighted to know 
that there is to be a general convention in Chattanooga 
sometime in 1905. They and other TOWER readers, at 
other appointments, will be glad to co-operate with the 
Chattanooga brethren, to the extent of their ability and 
opportunity, in making arrangements, etc. 

The amount of good the conventions accomplish is 
simply incalculable. Since the St. Louis Convention I have 
met persons who came out fully for the Truth there. I 
don't know of anything that stimulates the "brethren" 
to holy living and the study of the "Word" more than the 
general and local conventions. 

With much Christian love, 

Your Brother and Servant, 

FRANK DRAPER. 



page 65 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVI. MARCH 1, 1905. No. 5 



CONTENTS. 

The Great Delusion of our Day 67 

The Absurdity of Evolution 67 

Selfishness in all Men 68 

Moral Progress Opposes "Natural Selection".... 69 

Viewed from the Watch Tower 71 

"Watch Ye! Stand Fast in the Faith." 72 

Berean Studies Now Proposed 72 

"Once I was Blind, Now I See." 73 

"Anoint Thine Eyes with Eye-Salve." 74 

How Hindrances May Assist Us 75 

"The Hidden Cross" (Poem) 76 

The General Purpose of God's Message 76 

Ignorance Not a Savior 77 

Encouraging Letters from Foreign Fields 78 

page 66 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



MOTTOES OUT OF STOCK. 



Our stock of mottoes has been greatly reduced by 
the holiday demand. We have no more $1.00 and $2.00 
packages, of assorted sizes, but have still a good supply 
of small cards, at 5c each and 2 for 5c, plus postage at 
the rate of 5c on each purchase of 50c worth. 

TO OUR CORRESPONDENTS. 



Friends would greatly facilitate the office work by 
writing with great legibility on one side of each sheet, 
and placing orders on a separate sheet containing full address. 
Re-read your letter after writing, to be assured 
you have forgotten nothing. Make no allowance for our 
remembering previous communications, but repeat previous 
orders in full when necessary to write about them. 
When you are situated in a town containing an Express 
office, do not forget to enquire there for package to your 
address, as we usually forward merchandise in that way. 
Foreign friends (including Jamaica, but not Cuba or the 
Philippines) are reminded that postage on letters is 2-l/2d. 
per half oz., and any deficiency is charged to us at double 
the amount. Unsealed letters are subject to same rate. 



R3514:page67 

THE GREAT DELUSION OF OUR TIME. 

--J. H. DENNISON, IN "ATLANTIC MONTHLY."- 

IT would be but human if this age were a trifle supercilious, 

not to say deluded, concerning its own 

powers. Great things have been said of it, nor 

can it be denied that it has fallen heir to great things. 

At least it has enjoyed and tested beyond all other ages 

the fruit of the tree of knowledge. "It is an epoch," 

says John Fiske, "the grandeur of which dwarfs all 

others that can be named since the beginning of the historic 

period, if not since man first became distinctively 

human. In their mental habits, in their methods of 

inquiry, and in the data at their command, the men of 

the present day who have fully kept pace with the scientific 

movement are separated from the men whose education 

ended in eighteen hundred and thirty by an immeasurably 

wider gulf than has ever before divided one 

progressive generation of men from their predecessors. 

The intellectual development of the human race has 



been suddenly, almost abruptly, raised to a higher plane 
than that upon which it had proceeded from the days 
of the primitive troglodyte to the days of our 
great-grandfathers . " 

This statement is so far true that it is dangerous. 
Doubtless there are a great many people, possibly a 
majority of so-called educated men, who would, without 
considering the limitations of scientific knowledge, accept 
these words literally, who have formed the habit 
of thinking that the light which we possess to-day is, 
compared with that possessed by Luther or George 
Washington or Socrates, as sunlight to starlight. Their 
view is not only that we know infinitely more than 
George Washington knew, but that we alone possess the 
final criteria of knowledge. Socrates and Washington 
knew a good deal, but they knew vaguely; they could 
not distinguish accurately between fact and delusion. 
Our supreme advantage is supposed to be not only that 
we know, but that we know we know. 

This egotistic cast or vogue of thought envelops 
the mind of the age. It is more authoritative than 
Kaiser or Pope, than dogma or creed. It percolates 
through all classes, it penetrates our literature, it colors 
our judgment. It predetermines our view, shapes the 
outline of our facts, and is interwoven with the texture 
of our thought. In a considerable proportion of our 
typical men it has bred a sense of supreme judicial 
qualification. In the presence of a magisterial equipment 
so vast and complete, men of previous ages appear 
dwarfed; their efforts seem infantile. Even Jesus appears 
to grope. Our Scientific Judiciary does indeed 
reverence the purity of his spirit; but when it comes to 
his authority, or his views about God, they tenderly but 
firmly put him out of court. 

"PRIDE GOETH BEFORE DESTRUCTION." 

Now this sovereign attitude of the human mind has 
in the course of history proved intoxicating, and therefore 
perilous. There was a man once who said, "Is not 
this great Babylon, that I have built?" Too much 
magistracy had begun to impair the finer workings of 
his mind. His next step was to eat straw like an ox. He 
lost sight somehow of organic relations. This suggests a 
vital question. Does our age actually possess the equipment 
for a magisterial attitude? Let us apply a test: 
Let us take those writers who most thoroughly represent 
the magisterial attitude of our times; let us see what 
light they throw on the social problem, what that radiance 
is which has caused the glory of Socrates and of 
Jesus to grow pale, and has made the intellectual distance 
between Washington and ourselves so vast that we can 
hardly see him. I quote from an article by Brooks 
Adams in the Atlantic Monthly for last November: 

THE ABSURDITY OF "EVOLUTION" SHOWN. 



"From the humblest peasant to the mightiest empire 
humanity is waging a ceaseless and pitiless struggle 
for existence in which the unfit perish. This struggle is 
maintained with every weapon and by every artifice, 
and success is attained not only by endurance and 
sagacity, but by cunning and ferocity. Chief, however, 
among the faculties which have given superiority, must 
rank the martial quality, for history teaches us that 
nothing can compensate a community for defeat in 
battle. War is competition in its fiercest form." "Human 
destiny has been wrought out through war." "The 

R3514:page68 

first settlers slew the Indians, or were themselves slain. 

...To consolidate an homogeneous empire we 

crushed the social system of the South, and lastly we 

cast forth Spain. The story is written in blood, and common 

sense teaches us that as the past has been, so will 

be the future." 

Applying this pitiless principle to our commercial 
relations, Mr. Adams argues that our only salvation 
is to maintain it to the bitter end. There is no hope of 
improvement; the human organism must fight or die. 
"The evolution of human society, like that of the brute, 
must be along lines of pitiless warfare." Notice in this 
quotation what the light of to-day is, according to Mr. 
Adams; it is the doctrine of Natural Selection. By its 
"pure white light" he discerns without any illusions the 
pathway of society. "Human destiny has been wrought 
out through war." "Dreams of peace have always 
allured mankind to their undoing." "Nature has decreed 
that animals shall compete for life, in other words, destroy 

R3515 : page 68 

or be destroyed. We can hope for no exemption 
from the common lot." Surely nothing could be more 
logical than this. 

It ought to come with a shock to those who have 
never thought out in their own minds the unlimited application 
of this modern scientific theory to human life. 
It has been said by the highest authority, "Natural 
Selection works through death." As Mr. Adams has 
put it, war is Nature's decree, not human brotherhood. 
The latter, alas, is an illusion, a tradition handed down 
from the vague and inconsequential ages. Nature's 
real decree for mankind is war to the knife. 

SELFISHNESS IN ALL MEN. 

In a powerfully written article by Mr. London on the 
"Scab," the same view is maintained. I quote the 
following:— 

"In a competitive society, where men struggle with 



one another for food and shelter, what is more natural 
than that generosity, when it diminishes the food and 
shelter of men other than he who is generous, should 
be held an accursed thing?. ..To strike at a man's 
food and shelter is to strike at his life, and in a society 
organized on a tooth-and-nail basis, such an act, performed 
though it may be under the guise of generosity, 
is none the less menacing and terrible. 

"It is for this reason that a laborer is so fiercely 
hostile to another laborer who offers to work for less 
pay or longer hours.... 

"Thus, the generous laborer, giving more of a day's 
work for less return,. ..threatens the life of his less 
generous brother laborer, and, at the best, if he does not 
destroy that life, he diminishes it. Whereupon the less 
generous laborer looks upon him as an enemy, and, as 
men are inclined to do in a tooth-and-nail society, he 
tries to kill the man who is trying to kill him. 

"When a striker kills with a brick the man who has 
taken his place, he has no sense of wrong-doing. In the 
deepest holds of his being, though he does not reason the 
impulse, he has an ethical sanction. He feels dimly that 
he has justification, just as the home-defending Boer 
felt, though more sharply, with each bullet he fired at 
the invading English. Behind every brick thrown by 
a striker is the selfish 'will to live' of himself and the 
slightly altruistic will to live of his family. The family-group 
came into the world before the state-group, and 
society being still on the primitive basis of tooth and 
nail, the will to live of the state is not so compelling to 
the striker as the will to live of his family and himself." 

Mr. London scientifically clears up the moral character 
of the Scab, generously including most of us in 
his diagnosis. He shows that, however we may appear 
to the casual observer, we are all Scabs by turn, and that, 
though outwardly we often seem to be generous, we are 
really true at heart to the principle of Natural Selection. 
Concerning each one of us, he remarks, "He does not 
scab because he wants to scab. No whim of the spirit, 
no burgeoning of the heart, leads him to give more of 
his labor-power than they for a certain sum. 

"It is because he cannot get work on the same 
terms as they that he is a Scab. ...Nobody desires 
to scab, to give most for least. The ambition of every 
individual is quite the opposite." 

I pass over the argument by which Mr. London goes 
on to show that everybody, except King Edward and a 
few people whom hereditary advantage has rescued from 
the real struggle of life, is at times a Scab,— the laborer, 
the capitalist, the merchant, the minister of the gospel, 
the American nation, the English nation,— in short, 
every human organism which is in this competitive 
warfare plays by turn the part of Scab, according as the 
strategy of its situation requires. We work for less pay 
to get control of the situation, but having once got 
control of the situation we use it to crush the Scab, 



reduce competition, and secure larger returns. 
SELFISHNESS IS DEGRADATION, NOT EVOLUTION. 

I have quoted these two writers because they are 
representative. Not only have they carefully studied 
the organization of society, but they clearly reflect the 
illumination of that philosophy which, more than any 
other, is the distinguishing and magisterial equipment 
of our day. It is by light of "Evolution" that we feel 
qualified to test the Bible, Christianity, and, in fact, 
every human belief or moral position. For Evolution is 
to the popular scientific mind so absolutely established 
as to seem approximately identical with the cosmos itself. 
It is therefore a final and authoritative test. 

It is evident at a glance that both these writers have 
studied our social problems by the light of Natural 
Selection, and that this is to their minds the only light 
worth considering. This fact classifies them as distinctively 
men of the type referred to by John Fiske. 
They are, according to him, separated from the men 
whose education ended in eighteen hundred and thirty 
by an immensely wider gulf than has ever before divided 
one progressive generation of men from their predecessors. 
For Natural Selection is the authoritative type 
of Evolution so far as living organisms are concerned, 
and Evolution is our distinctive magisterial equipment. 
Scientific observation existed before our time, but it is 
our peculiar glory [?] to have discovered the scientific 
philosophy which appears to coordinate, account for, 
and interpret all known facts, past and present, and 
which has therefore suggested the idea of an apparently 
absolute yet purely intellectual criterion of truth and 
test of reality. 

Moreover, these writers are consistent: they follow 
their logic to the bitter end. They do not mix things 
up. Natural Selection, which works through death, figures 
in their scheme as the sole law of human development. 
It is Nature's decree. "Dreams of peace are an 
illusion."— "Human destiny has been wrought out 

R3515 : page 69 

through blood."— "Common sense teaches us that as 
has been the past so will be the future."— That condemns 
the Hague Tribunal to the Limbo of hopeless phantasms. 
It exposes the folly of our modern attempts to mitigate 
the ferocity of war. We are but trifling with an irresistible 
force; ferocity and murderous cunning are always 
Nature's tools, by which she shapes not only our physical 
but our ethical manhood. 

This, then, is the way in which the magisterial doctrine 
solves our social problems, and this is the present 
social status of the age which has basked in its light, 
which "has been suddenly, almost abruptly, raised to 
a higher plane than that upon which the race had proceeded 



from the days of the primitive troglodyte to the 
days of our great-grandfathers." 

Let us take account of stock. We have society 
actually organized to-day on a primitive tooth-and-nail 
basis. "From the humblest peasant to the mightiest 
empire humanity is waging a ceaseless and pitiless struggle 
for existence, in which the unfit perish," a struggle in 
which "success is attained not only by endurance and 
sagacity, but by cunning and ferocity." In fact, we are, 
according to Mr. London's article, already passing some 
important milestones on the backward road toward the 
moral status of the primitive troglodyte. "When a 
striker kills with a brick the man who has taken his 
place, he has no sense of wrong-doing. ...He has an 
ethical sanction. ...The family-group came into the 
world before the state-group, and society being still on 
the primitive basis of tooth and nail, the will to live 
of the state is not so compelling to the striker as the will 
to live of his family and himself." 

MORAL PROGRESS OPPOSES "NATURAL SELECTION. 

Now, as Mr. Adams would say, common sense 
teaches us whither this points. If the family-group existed 
before the state-group, then family needs existed 
before state or religious ordinances. "Thou shalt not 
steal." "Thou shalt not kill." What are these belated 
requirements of social convention compared to the necessities 
of the family development! If a brother clergyman 
draws away your congregation, reduces your salary, 
and so compels your children to go barefoot, why not 
knock him on the head! This is troglodytism, if the 
present writer understands the word, and he thinks that 
he does. It solves the social question by disintegrating 
society, and the singular fact is that Natural Selection, 
which is supposed to be the principle operating 
in moral development, which is, in fact, identical with 
the cosmic order, should have led us back in a kind of 
blind-man's waltz, till we have, according to these writers, 
actually reached the primitive tooth-and-nail basis, 
from which, according to modern science, we started 
hundreds of thousands of years ago; and have reached 
the lowest point thus far under the guidance of an age 
whose intellectual grandeur dwarfs all others [?]. 

No doubt every optimist in the country will declare 
that this is a stalwart misrepresentation of the present 
facts; but if a sober-minded man considers the present 
aspect of the labor question, the political situation in 
New York, Chicago, St. Louis, and our other great cities, 
the enormous development of graft, the thievish character 
of our new methods of finance, the fact that the 
small investor is to-day, like the man of scriptural times 
who traveled between Jerusalem and Jericho, sure to 
fall among thieves unless personally conducted; if he 
reflects on the Standard Oil operations and the Turkish 
situation and the impotency of our modern civilization 



to put a stop to lynching, or to prevent such a fearful 
catastrophe as war between Japan and Russia, he is 
forced to confess that there is, after all, too much truth 
in this dark picture, and that our conduct is quite often 
on the tooth-and-nail basis. 

THE FALLACY OF THE ARGUMENT. 

But there is nothing new about this; it is the old 
story of a wicked world which always moves in a circle, 
which needs salvation, which cannot save itself because 
it cannot make steady moral advancement, which builds 
empires only that they may perish under the weight 

R3516 : page 69 

of their corruption. It is the old humanum est errare, out 
of which grew that conviction of sin, that cry to Heaven 
for help, which since the time of the Vedas has echoed 
out of every quarter of the globe, from the heart of 
burdened humanity. The Troglodyte we have always 
with us; like the Wandering Jew, he never dies. His 
characteristics are always the same; he takes a few steps 
forward, and then turns back toward the tiger and the 
ape. But he never becomes either tiger or ape. He 
becomes what we call a fiend, or, in modern day parlance, 
a degenerate. He is always arguing plausibly for the 
tooth-and-nail ethics, always ignoring its limitations, 
always confounding the lines at which a higher principle 
should take control. He is always putting the struggle 
for a livelihood before honor and right. 

How many there are of him we never know, though 
we always try to find out before election day. Often he 
lives in high places, and very often he succeeds in organizing 
society. He always controls a great many votes. 
He has a kind of primitive logic which takes hold of men 
with a sort of cosmic force. Behind him is the stern fact 
that man has an animal nature, that this animal nature 
is without doubt engaged in a severe struggle for physical 
existence, that Natural Selection, like gravitation, 
really has a grip on him. In short, it is the old story of 
the world, the flesh, and the devil, apparently, though 
not really, backed up by the cosmos itself. 

It is the same world which Socrates faced, and Jesus 
and Paul. Righteous men have faced it in all ages and 
feared not. Often it has quailed before their rebuke. 
It has recognized an authority higher than intellect, 
greater than that of physical nature, and has cried out, 
"We have sinned!" The only difference in our own 
time is that we have noble-hearted and high-minded men, 
not at all troglodytes as to their personal conduct or 
ideals, who, writing with the magisterial authority 
vaguely supposed to be possessed by our modern science, 
deliberately acquit the wicked world. True, it is cruel, 
it is brutal; they would be ashamed, as high-minded 
gentlemen, to act on such principles; yet they declare 



with the finality of absolute truth that the world cannot 
act otherwise; it is simply carrying out Nature's decree. 

The peculiar feature, then, of our times is, not that 
the world is on a primitive tooth-and-nail basis, but that 
it stands acquitted, nay, justified, by a verdict apparently 
based upon the doctrine of Evolution, and that conscience 
is discredited and put out of court by the apparent 
authority of those standards which have given us a 
supreme and magisterial position among the ages. The 
Troglodyte now has an unassailable backer in the scholar 
who sits on a judgment seat higher than that of Moses, 
and who says to the world, "You have no grounds for 

R3516 : page 70 

crying, 'peccavi:' you have not sinned; you are doing 
just right; you are debtor to the flesh to live after the 
flesh. It is Nature's decree, not that you should be a 
brother to your neighbor, but that you should rob him 
and fight him for a livelihood." 

Words would fail to tell how, from the time when 
Darwin's and Spencer's philosophies were published, 
this magisterial tendency has proceeded to assist the 
Troglodyte in cheapening character, by its judicial decisions 
based on the evolutionary hypothesis. It has 
not only enabled our primitive friend to throw bricks 
with greater cheerfulness, but it has made his creed impregnable; 
nay, it has enabled him to make all other 
creeds look foolish. 

The Troglodyte always believed that preachers of 
righteousness retained the claw-foot under their shoes 
and stockings. He knew that prophets and apostles 
only waited for a chance to show their teeth. His intuition 
told him that generous people were really scabbing 
when they went about doing good. He saw by a 
kind of cosmic light that those great ideals upon which 
our higher morality fed were silly dreams. His reason 
told him that the power which makes for righteousness 
was a sun-god, or a highly developed form of ghost 
worship, or a fetish, due to the effect of environment. 
He always understood that the moral nature itself was 
a product of circumstances without the least atom of 
final authority, a kind of vermiform appendix which were 
best removed, since its place has been superseded by the 
exact knowledge of the cosmic law. Why should a man 
longer be punched by conscience when he has risen to 
an understanding of Nature's decree? What do we want 
of morals when reason has become supreme? 

All this the Troglodyte knew in his heart, but he 
was a little shy of telling it because the stalwart moralists 
had the ear of public opinion. Now, behold a Daniel 
come to judgment, who has not only confirmed his 
suspicions, proved his creed, and made him a prophet of 
the cosmos, but has made the stalwart moralists themselves 
give up the validity of their moral perceptions, 
while they try to explain that their opinions were really 



based on Evolution. 

The scientific moralists are thinking their case over; 
many of them are still trying to patch it up with Evolution. 
They have not yet dreamed of falling back upon 
the validity of the moral perception itself. And there 
are a great many people who want to be good, but have 
lost faith in their moral ideals, and are humbly looking 
to the scientists and the philosophers for their moral 
nutriment. As to the prophets and apostles, their voice 
is still and small in the ear of a moral nature whose main 
study is to supply practical ethics enough to make business 
prosperous and the governing party secure. 

EVEN HUXLEY HEDGED. 

Now Mr. Huxley long ago discovered the blunder 
that had been made in applying the theory of Natural 
Selection to Social Evolution. He saw that the cosmic 
light had failed at this point, and he introduced a variation 
as follows: "There is another fallacy which seems 
to me to pervade the so-called Ethics of Evolution.' 
It is the notion that, because, on the whole, animals and 
plants have advanced in perfection of organization by 
means of the struggle for existence and the consequent 
survival of the fittest, therefore men in society, men as 
ethical beings, must look to the same process to help them 
toward perfection. Social progress means a checking 
of the cosmic process at every step, and the substitution 
for it of another which may be called the ethical process. 
What we call goodness or virtue involves a course of 
conduct which in all respects is opposed to that which 
leads to success in the cosmic struggle for existence. 

"In place of ruthless self-assertion it demands self-restraint; 
in place of thrusting aside or treading down 
all competitors it requires that the individual shall not 
merely respect, but shall help his fellows. Its influence 
is directed not so much to the survival of the fittest, as 
to the fitting of as many as possible to survive. It repudiates 
what we call the gladiatorial theory of existence. 
Laws and moral precepts are directed to the end of 
curbing the cosmic process and reminding the individual 
of his duty to the community, to the protection and interest 
of which he owes, if not existence itself, at least 
the life of something better than a brutal savage." 

Mr. Huxley made this discovery just as any one of 
us might, by a simple common-sense observation of 
human nature as it works practically. He did not, however, 
sympathetically observe all the phenomena involved, 
and he excluded some of them for this reason. 
So that his theory of Social Evolution never could claim 
magisterial authority, simply because it is incomplete. 
It is no doubt a profound discovery that the altruistic 
principle conserves and builds up human society, while 
antagonism disintegrates it; that love conquers, overrules, 
and fructifies the lower competitive forces, as 
animal life conquers, overrules, and fructifies chemical 



affinity or gravitation in organic development. 

But it was not original with Mr. Huxley; thousands 
of people had seen and applied it before he was born. 
Jesus was the real discoverer [revealer]; He first mastered 
the social or ethical principle. He found it to be universal 
good neighborhood or brotherhood, traced it to 
its source in God's fatherhood, flooded it with Divine 
affection, put it into his own self-sacrificing life, and 
showed us how we might practically attain to it through 
his help. Since then the idea has been symbolized by 
the Cross of Christ, and has for eighteen centuries been 
regarded as the Christian solution,— though Christendom 
has too often been antagonistic to it. 

Mr. Huxley asserted that this ethical process must 
be substituted for the cosmic process. Jesus and Paul 
declared it to be the supreme force in the cosmic process 
itself. Mr. Huxley's trouble was that he, too, fell under 
the great delusion of fancying that this philosophic 
form of truth was the final and ultimate one, and, therefore, 
he identified Natural Selection with the cosmic 
process itself; but when he followed his new light he 
lost his magisterial authority over the high church evolutionists; 
and they are, to-day, barking at the same old 
tree up which they suppose their truth has climbed, 
though it has gone out of sight. 

INTELLECTUAL MAGISTRACY WRONG. 

But, whichever theory is correct, could there be a 
greater delusion than this sense of magistracy? Have 
we anything to back it up? Have we any theory on any 
subject which is universally accepted or can be reckoned 
as a final and absolute form of knowledge? Philosophy 
is surely an enormous help to both intellectual and moral 
perception, but is it possible to have a philosophy that 
can take the place of perception? And if it were possible, 
what would become of perception, and of individuality, 

R3517 : page 71 

and of genius, and of inventive discovery under such a 
predetermining influence? I would not be understood 
for a moment as holding these writers whom I have 
quoted as responsible for this tendency. We are all 
infected. We all take turns at it. Let us say that it 
is the Zeitgeist that has done it, and shake hands all 
around. 

It was Count Ito who said that when he was preparing 
the Japanese Constitution he tried to think how 
Buddha would look at the matter, and he added, "I 
think that I did succeed fairly well in getting into his 
skin." It might be worth while if some of us would 
occasionally try to get outside the epidermis of our 
so-called modern thought, and take a straight look at 
the age from an exterior point of view; it need not be 
so far off as Buddha, but sufficiently remote to afford a 



good perspective. It is quite possible that from such a 
clear, cool height of vision our generation might seem to 
be, like Nebuchadnezzar, a little touched in the head. 

I have selected these writers because they are strictly 
logical, and, unlike some of us, they do not straddle. 
They take the most authoritative type of Evolution, 
the one which most deserves to be regarded as Nature's 
decree, the one which Mr. Huxley styles the cosmic 
process, the only type of philosophy which could at the 
present day by any possibility be exalted to the rank of 
a final standard, and they think it out to the bitter end. 
If we have any clear cosmic torch, this is the one. They 
hold it high and wave it wide. By its illumination we 
see the column of humanity with reversed arms turning 
its back on all the great ideals toward which it has 
crawled upward in the space of a hundred thousand 
years or so, cheapening the moral nature, and marching 
back without conviction of sin toward the original 
homunculus. This is a dark picture, certainly. 

True, if we remove this cosmic torch things do not 
look so dark. There are at least as many people to-day 
as ever working for the interests of righteousness and 
peace and human brotherhood. They make fewer practical 
blunders, they keep the issues clearer, they utilize 
the results of science, they bring to the task a broader 
scientific knowledge, a profounder sympathy for human 
conditions, a greater willingness to look at all sides. 
Witness President Eliot's noble contribution to a better 
understanding between labor and capital. These people 
are putting up a stout fight for the moral nature, and 
they meet with much success among the plain folk. They 
vitalize character, for the moral nature feeds upon revelations 
and ideals as the body feeds upon bread. 

BLIND LEADERS OF THE BLIND. 

But the great difficulty with these people is that 
they are all fools. This does not mean that they are 
obliged to have guardians appointed over them; in 
reality, many of them are guardians of the commonwealth 
or community to which they belong. They are 
not dull in practical affairs; their foolishness consists 
in the fact that all their high ideals and inspirations rest 
upon a so-called semi-mythical or subliminal basis 
which they cannot prove before this infallible tribunal 
that has endorsed our friend the Troglodyte. They 
cannot make their articles of faith square with any 
specific type of evolutionary doctrine, or prove their 
revelations to the latest type of scholarship. Our magisterial 
authorities are withholding a verdict on their 
case until the Society of Psychical Research has finished 
its investigations. 

This lack of intellectual status gives them a phantasmal 
appearance, which probably caused Mr. London 
and Mr. Adams to overlook them altogether. Indeed, 
one frequently hears in intellectual circles the statement 



that no one to-day believes in such articles of faith. 
But it is the fools who bring practical light to the social 
question. 



VIEWED FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



We devote considerable space to the foregoing because 
it treats an important subject from a standpoint 
with which we agree,— although it differs from our own 
in that it ignores the divine revelation on which we build 
everything. We added sub-headings to assist the elucidations. 
From the Scripture standpoint alone is this 
subject perfectly clear. From God himself we get "the 
white light" of absolute truth on these matters. From 
this our standpoint all is much more plain. Ours is 
the true "magisterial" or decisive view which alone can 
speak with authority and silence criticism. "Let God 
be true though it make every man a liar." 

The fall of our race from the divine likeness, through 
disobedience explains why all men have a basis for 
moral sense and higher attainments, which for a time 
have been dwarfed by the over-cultivation of the selfish 
propensities. The tendency of Sin is ever downward, its 
offspring is Death, its Husband is Selfishness. Righteousness 
has for her husband Love, and the offspring by 
divine arrangement is Life-everlasting. 

Many are the voices and influences favoring degeneracy 
through Sin, appealing to the powerful selfish 
desires. One voice from on high appeals for righteousness 
to our higher qualities of mind, weak and impaired 
by the fall and atrophied through lack of exercise. 

The great appeal of the Law Covenant was made 
only to the Jewish nation, and its influence was beneficial 
not to the Hebrews only, but also to neighboring 
nations who took knowledge of Israel's hopes and aims. 
Other appeals were through the Prophets to Israel, and 
they too were partially effective. But the great appeal 
of God to men was made in due time through his Son, 
The Voice from Heaven. The message was not merely a 
law showing our woe-begone condition, but additionally 
it spoke peace with God, the forgiveness of sins, through 
our Lord's great sacrifice for our sins. This was God's 
true voice or message of love and mercy. 

"HE THAT HATH AN EAR, LET HIM HEAR." 

But alas, only a few hear at all, and still fewer hear 
the voice distinctly. The ears of moral and religious 
perception are dulled by the fall, and additionally by 
the confusing din of selfishness and necessity aggravated 
by the god of this world. Those who hear also see 
things invisible to others,— see with the eye of faith. 



The opening of the eyes of their understanding comes to 
them as a result of their hearing and accepting the Voice 
and being begotten again to a newness of life. These are 
"the very elect," now being called and prepared for the 
Kingdom honors and services. 

From these "elect" even now radiates an influence 
which affects many favorably— many who see not the 
heavenly vision open to the "elect" and who hear not 
the voice from heaven. These are the civilized whose 

R3517 : page 72 

moral perceptions are quickened, and amongst whom 
arise many of the moral reformers who battle nobly 
against the degenerate conditions common to the entire 
race. 

Shortly, as soon as "the very elect," the Church, 
the "Bride" of Christ, shall have been selected and prepared 
by the trials and disciplines of this present evil 
world, and been glorified and united to her Lord, the 
Redeemer,— then the next great step in the divine 
program for the uplift of the world will begin. Then, 
for the thousand years of Christ's Messianic reign, He 
and his "elect" bride will bless the world of mankind by 
restraining Satan and every form of sin, and by inculcating 
Righteousness and uplifting to the lost image of 
God all who then, knowing righteousness, shall will to 
follow its dictates. 

"THE WORLD KNOWETH US NOT." 

Meantime, however, the Lord's plan is seen clearly 
only by the "elect." The worldly wise, although benefited 
by its influences, wander into labyrinths of their 
own confusing notions, and attribute the progress in 
the world not to the voice from heaven but to Evolutionary 
progress. Framing a theory accordingly, they are 
ignoring the work of God's grace and claiming "the 
survival of the fittest." The foregoing article explodes 
again the error of this theory— criticising it from its 
own level of human reason. 

A little while,— a very little while— and the world 
will witness an exemplification of its God-ignoring 
theory, when Anarchy will prevail and anarchists will 
claim that they are the "fittest" type of the human 
family. Ah! that will be a rude shock to these philosophers 
and their dreams. Thank God for his Word 
instructing us that he has so timed matters that at that 
very juncture the "elect" will be glorified and take the 
control of earth's affairs— at the very point where otherwise 
selfishness would so run riot that "no flesh would 
be saved." 



R3517 : page 72 



"WATCH YE! STAND FAST IN THE FAITH." 

BEREAN SCRIPTURE LESSONS,-SUGGESTIONS 
AND OUTLINES FOR PROFITABLE 
CLASS STUDIES. 

FOR some time past we have been receiving letters 

inquiring how little gatherings of the Lord's people 

can use the hour of their Sunday gatherings 

most profitably. Some of these letters are from brethren 

chosen as Elders or leaders, saying that they are 

quite incapable of getting up a "sermon" and find it 

impossible to prepare even a Bible Study in an attractive 

and interesting form, though the dear brethren, 

full of love for the Truth, do not complain, but rather 

encourage them. 

Other letters are from those who take no public 
part and who, while sympathizing with their meeting -leaders 
in their endeavors to imitate nominal church 
purveyors, are wishing and praying for the opening of 
some "door" of help which will make the "assembling 
of themselves" more profitable to all. 

It was in response to this "cry" of the Lord's people 
that we prepared the WATCH TOWER Bible, in the 
margins of which, in addition to the Scripture references, 
we gave DAWN and TOWER references. In the 

R3518 : page 72 

front of that Bible, which so many of you possess, we 
gave some suggestions on "Berean Bible Study," and 
in the back part we gave extended references and also 
a Topical Index. It was our hope that these would 
meet the requirements, but we find that they do not. 
Many of the Lord's earnest ones have so long been used 
to "swallowing" whatever was offered them as spiritual 
nutriment that they had never learned how to feed 
themselves at the Father's table. Others who knew 
how to get at the food properly found their time so 
consumed in the "things needful" and pressing that 
they had little time to prepare lessons of a profitable 
kind for themselves or others, even after the matter had 
been outlined as in the Topical Index. 

THE BEREAN STUDIES NOW PROPOSED. 

Appreciating the needs, we requested some of the 
"Pilgrim" brethren to give examples of these Berean 
Studies at the various places visited. However, even 
this did not serve the purpose, because the visits of the 
"Pilgrims" being few and more like those of the apostles 
of old, the friends begrudged the time of even one 
service— particularly since it requires several meetings 
of the Berean type to demonstrate its value and 
arouse the proper enthusiasm. 



Now as meeting all these requirements we are having 
prepared Outline Lessons for each month of this 
year, beginning with March. One peculiarity about 
these lessons is that they do not teach, but merely question, 
and refer the student to the Scriptures and the 
WATCH TOWER publications bearing thereon. Thus 
thought is stimulated and the Truth the more clearly 
impressed. 

The thirty questions of the March Lesson following 
might serve for thirty Sundays; but having so much 
good food we can afford to fare sumptuously and take 
several questions for each meeting. As to how many, 
would depend somewhat on the number in attendance, 
and how accustomed they are to analytical study, and 
how expert the leader of the meeting. It might be well 
for the classes to appoint several of the seemingly capable 
brethren to lead in turn, that the most able in this 
respect might be discerned. These will probably be 
found amongst those you have already chosen as Elders. 

If the class be a small one, of say seven, it might be 
well to apportion to each one question for the following 
Sunday. The Elders, for instance, might be requested 
by vote to make such apportionment of the questions. 
A week for the examination of the one question should 
enable each one to bring on the next Sunday thoughts 
and texts and WATCH TOWER and DAWN quotations 
that would be helpful, interesting, profitable to all. As 
all are WATCH TOWER readers assignments can be made 
by number, thus: Brother A—, question No. 4; Sister 
H-, No. 5, etc. 

Where the class is larger, say twenty to forty, the 
questions would best be apportioned to seven or eight 
of the most capable members of the class to present the 
answers to the questions. In any event, each subject 
or question should be open to general discussion after 

R3518 : page 73 

the presentation of the formal reply by the one appointed 
to that service. 

So used the thirty questions below should furnish 
abundant food for profitable study by the largest classes 
for nearly or quite a month. Our prayers go with these 
suggestions, that the result may bring praise and honor 
to our Lord and strength and victory to his people. 



CONCERNING FAITH--MARCH LESSONS. 

(Following each question are texts of Scripture in reply, 
then references to page numbers of DAWN and WATCH TOWER 
giving comments; the first six letters of the alphabet represent 
the respective DAWN volumes, and the TOWERS are designated 
by the letter "Z" and the year. The mark par. refers 
to paragraph in article containing comment.) 



1. What is faith? Heb. 11:1; 1 Jno. 5:4; E.125, par. 1; 
F.689 (1st line). 

2. Name the two component elements of faith. 
Z/95-134. 

3. How does faith differ from credulity? F.689, par. 1. 

4. What is the importance of a proper faith? Heb. 1 1:6; 
F.315,693, par. 1; Z/94-329 (2nd col. par. 1-3). 

5. What is the relation between faith and knowledge? 
Rom. 10:17; A.13, par. 1; A.20,par. 2; A.21,par. 1; 
Z/94-329 (1st col. par. 2); Z.'99-3 (2nd col. par. 1). 

6. How is faith "the gift of God"? Eph. 2:8; Z/98-107 
(1st col. par. 2); Z. '01-156 (1st col. par. 2,3). 

7. Is faith in Christ necessary to salvation? Acts 4:10-12; 
Jno. 3:16,36; A. 102, par. 3; Z/97-278. 

(See Topical Index,-"FAITH.") 

8. What is the immediate result of faith in Christ 
during the Gospel Age? Rom. 5:1; A. 231, par. 4; 
Z/00-188 (1st col. par. 3, and 2nd col. par. 1,2). 

9. How is Jesus the "author and finisher of our faith"? 
Heb. 12:2; Z/95-147 (1st col. par. 1). 

10. Is a simple confession of faith necessary? Rom. 10:10; 
Z/00-149, (2nd col.); Z/00-180 (1st col. 

par. 5); Z/02-270 (1st col. par. 1,2,3). 

1 1. Is feeling an essential part of faith? Z. '92-267. 

12. Explain the difference between faith as a basis for 
justification and faith as a fruit of the Spirit. 
F.688-692. 

13. What is "the good fight of faith?" 1 Tim. 6:12; 
Z.'98-153,158, (2nd col.) 

14. How should we fight the good fight? Z.'95-201,202; 
Z/98-158, (1st col. par. 2); Z/98-159 (2nd 

col); Z/01-72 (2nd col. par. 3). 

15. For whom and against whom do we fight? Phil. 2:12; 
1 Jno. 3:16; Eph. 6:12; Z/98-153-155; 

F.599-658. 

16. What does it mean to "walk by faith"? 2 Cor. 5:7; 
F.631,par. 2,3;Z.'00-57 (1st col); Z.'95-92,93; 

F. 142, par. 2. 

17. Why are trials of faith permitted? Jas. 1:3,4; 
1 Pet. 4:12,13; F.642-644; Z/96-54; 
Z.'95-134,135. 

18. What are some of the present rewards of faith? 
1 Cor. 2:9,10; F.689 (par. 2) to 692; F.686, par. 3. 

19. What is the future inheritance of faith? 1 Jno. 3:2; 
Rev. 2:10; F.693,694, F.721 (par. 1,2) to 

729. 

20. What is the "rest" of faith? Heb. 4:1-11; F.392-394; 
Z.'95-168,169; Z/99-253 (1st col. par. 1). 

21. Define "full assurance" of faith and hope. Heb. 10:22; 
6:11; Z/00-169, par. 1. 

22. How may we attain and retain full assurance of 
faith? Z/98-247; E.249,250. 

23. What are the hindrances to full assurance of faith? 
Z.'00-169,170. 

24. How may we increase our faith? F.691, par. 2; Z. '96-86 



(2nd col. par. 3). 
(a) By prayer. Z. '96-162,163. 
(b)By study. F.315. 

(c) By repeating and claiming the promises of 
God. Z.'00-170 (1st col. par. 4). 

(d) By watching our experiences. Z. '00-170 
(2nd col. par. 1,2). 

25. Name some features of "present truth" which have 
increased your faith. 

26. What is the relation between faith and works? 
Jas. 2:14,17,18,22; Z/00-343 (1st col. par. 1,2); 
Z.'0 1-231 (2nd col. par. 2,3). 

27. Who constitute the "household of faith"? Gal. 6:10; 
Z/00-368, (2nd col.) 

28. Explain Jas. 5:14-16. F.63 1-638. 

29. What is the significance of the symbols, shield and 
anchor, in connection with faith and hope? Eph. 6:16; 
F.657,par. 5; Heb. 6:19; Z/02-345 (1st col.) 

30. What will be the relation between faith and knowledge 
in the Millennial Age? Z/00-238 (2nd col. 

par. 1,2) to 239; F.106, (par. 3) to 107. 



R3518 : page 73 

"ONCE I WAS BLIND, NOW I SEE." 

JOHN 9: 1-11. -MARCH 19. 

Golden Text:— "I am the Light of the world." 

OUR LORD'S miracles and parables touch almost 
every side of every question when rightly understood. 
True, our Lord's own explanations of 
his parables and dark sayings are not elaborate, not deep. 
He left the elaboration for his disciples under the guidance 
of the holy Spirit. The reason for this is given in 
his own words, "I have many things to tell you, but ye 
cannot bear them now." The reason for their being 
better able to bear them, understand them and appreciate 
them later on was because then the work of our 
Lord's sacrifice having been finished at Calvary, and he 
having ascended on high, presented the merit of his 
sacrifice as the atonement price for the sins of his Church, 
and thus made it possible for them to receive the holy 
Spirit not previously given unto them— not enjoyed even 
by the disciples as a begetting Spirit before Pentecost. 

One of these partially expounded lessons of our 
Lord's ministry is found in the lesson before us. A man 
born blind, a wayside beggar, had drawn the attention 
of the Lord and the apostles, and his healing and the 
preparation therefor serve as an opportunity for a far-reaching 
lesson, only a part of which, however, the 

R3519 : page 74 



apostles could learn at this time. They had the thought 
that all the sickness and pain and sorrow in the world was 
the result of sin. They had this thought properly, because 
the Scriptures had so indicated, assuring them 
that if they walked in the Lord's ways they would have 
blessings of health and prosperity in all of life's affairs 
for themselves, their families, their flocks and their 
herds. Properly enough, then, they understood that the 
various evils witnessed on every hand were in some 
degree the result of sin, either of the individual or of his 
ancestors, inherited. 

NEITHER THIS MAN NOR HIS PARENTS. 

The man blind from his birth started a query in 
their minds as to the sin which led to the blindness, 
and being "unlearned and ignorant men" it need not 
surprise us that they were not very logical in their 
thoughts nor in the question they asked, "Whether did 
this man sin or his parents, that he was born blind?" 
Of course the man himself could not have sinned before 
he was born; of course, therefore, whatever responsibility 
there was came to him through inheritance, as 
the Lord had declared that "I will visit the iniquity of 
the fathers upon the children to the third and fourth 
generation of those that hate me," those who wilfully 
violate his laws. True, there was at this time a heathen 
idea respecting the transmigration of souls, which taught 
that all humanity had at some previous time lived in 
some other condition either better or worse than the 
present one. But it would be extremely unlikely that 
the apostles, "unlearned," should have any particular 
knowledge of these theories of the heathen, which were 
known chiefly to the educated; and as for the Hebrew 
Scriptures, not a word in them favored such a thought, 
but the very contrary. 

This same heathenish thought still prevails in the 
far East, India, etc., and has been slightly introduced 
again in civilized countries under the name of Theosophy. 
It is one of the main delusions ensnaring the people 
known as Mormons. The Scriptural teaching is that 
God created man in Eden, and that all the families of 
the earth are the posterity of this first man, Adam; 
and because of this relationship to Adam as their father, 
and their consequent relationship to his sin and its 
penalty, death, therefore all in Adam die— his entire 
race is a dying race. The belief in the ransom settles 
this doctrine most thoroughly, showing that our Lord's 
life redeemed the life of father Adam, and thus incidentally 
redeemed all who lost life through him. "As 
by man came death, by man also came the resurrection 
from the dead; as all in Adam die, even so in Christ shall 
all be made alive." "Of one blood God hath made all 
nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth." 
-Acts 17:26. 



Our Lord's reply, that neither the blind man nor his 
parents had sinned, is not to be understood as implying 
that these people were absolutely perfect, sinless, spotless 
—not to be understood as contradicting the Scriptures 
which declare, "There is none righteous, no not one; 
all have sinned and come short of the glory of God." 
The words simply signified that the blindness of this 
man was not a penalty for his personal sin or for some 
special sin of his parents. This need not imply either 
that God had specially intervened to cause blindness in 
this case— rather we may suppose that the blindness 
came through the general weakness of heredity, or by 
what might be termed the accidents incidental to our 
present imperfect condition as a race of sinners. A 
similar expression on our Lord's part was made in respect 
to those men upon whom the tower of Siloam fell, killing 
them. Our Lord said, "Suppose ye that these men 
were sinners above others? I tell you, nay; unless ye 
shall repent ye shall all likewise perish." 

The thought is that the whole world is under condemnation 
to death. We are a race of convicts, and 
death conditions are properly, justly permitted to prevail, 
not interfered with, because the lives of all humanity 
are forfeited through original sin and disobedience, 
and through our inheritance of the weaknesses and imperfections 
and unfitness resulting. All are thus perishing, 
and had it not been for divine mercy, in providing 
the Redeemer and the great sacrifice for sins, there 
would be no hope for any as respects the future life; 
death to all would signify that they had perished. And 
even though all the way has been opened for the dying 
race, nevertheless repentance for sin, acceptance of 
Christ as the Savior, and obedience to his voice, are 
necessary to our escape from the sentence of sin— death. 

Many will agree with us thus far who would fail to 
go further along what we believe to be logical, scriptural 
grounds, namely, that in God's providence not 
only has his love provided the redemption and the opportunity 
for blessing to the world, but that the same 
love and wisdom will ultimately provide that all shall 
see the great light and hear the voice of him that speaketh 
from heaven, and thus either accept or reject the 
favor divine, the life everlasting, on terms of full obedience. 
We hold that it is in full accord with the entire 
testimony of Scripture that few now have the ability to 
see or to hear; that the majority are both blind and deaf 
to this message in the present time, some completely 
blind and completely deaf, others partially blind and 
partially deaf. The glorious assurance of the Lord's 
Word is that in God's due time all the blind eyes shall 
be opened and all the deaf ears unstopped. 

THE MORN COMETH AND A NIGHT ALSO. 

This was the very lesson which the Lord taught 
from this incident— taught to the extent that his hearers 



were able to appreciate it. He declared, "While I 

am in the world I am the Light of the world; I must 

work the works of him that sent me while it is day, for 

the night cometh when no man can work." Then he 

proceeded to the opening of the blind man's eyes, that 

the latter might see him as the Light of the world. True, 

the opening of blind natural eyes could not give sight 

to the eyes of his understanding, the eyes of the heart; 

but it could and did figure or illustrate this which was 

the real essence of our Lord's teachings, of which this 

miracle was a part. Without in the slightest degree 

disparaging our Lord's many miracles upon the blind, 

lame, deaf, etc., we can readily see that these were incidental, 

and only in a secondary sense his mission. 

We can see, too, that while multitudes were healed, 
still greater multitudes remained unhealed; and that if 
it had been our Lord's special mission to heal all the 
lepers and all the blind and all the deaf, and to have 
awakened all the dead of Palestine, then he failed most 
signally in accomplishing the work. But that was not 
the work which he came to do. He came to be the Light 
of the world in a much larger sense than this. He came 

R3519 : page 75 

to do the work of him that sent him; and to finish that 
work and the special feature of it that was then due was 
the sacrificing of himself, the laying down of his life in 
the service of his brethren, in the declaration of the good 
tidings, in the teaching of the people through parables, 
dark sayings and miracles, which subsequently under 
the holy Spirit's illumination would guide a certain class 
to the real seeing, the real understanding and the real 
fellowship of heart with him and his work and with the 
Father, that was intended. 

It will be at his second advent that our Lord will 
be "the Light of the world" in the full, glorious sense 
which the Scriptures everywhere set forth:— "The Sun 
of Righteousness shall arise with healing in his beams." 
With the ushering in of that glorious sunlight begins the 
new day for which we hope and pray,— the "day of 
Christ." We now reckon the day as beginning at midnight, 
but God supervised the Jewish reckoning on this 
subject and under that supervision the day begins in 
the evening, progressed to midnight and then to the 
dawning, and by and by to the full light of day. In 
harmony with this God-given picture of the day we may 
see that our Lord's ministry was in the eventide which 
followed the Jewish day, the day of Moses. A little of 
its light still remained, and in that light the Lord personally, 
and subsequently through his disciples, established 
the Gospel Church. He well knew of the dark 
night that would follow his ministry, in which darkness 
would cover the earth and gross darkness the 
heathen. 

The Lord's words then signified that he realized the 



opportunity at hand and did with his might what his 
hands found to do, what was possible to be done under 
all the circumstances and conditions prevailing, and with 
a realization that the night was drawing rapidly upon the 
Jewish people, and that not only his own work would 
be cut short soon by his death, but that all opportunities 
for dealing with the Jews would soon be at an end. The 
apostles after Pentecost entered fully into the Master's 
spirit in respect to this shortness of the time, and 
labored incessantly first with the Jews and only subsequently 
with the Gentiles, until all the elect had been 
gathered from the once favored nation, even though these 
were but a remnant, as the apostle explains. The rest 
were blinded, went into complete darkness, while the 
light of divine favor through the Lamp, the Word, was 
sent amongst the Gentiles to gather out of them also an 
elect class for membership in the spiritual Israel, for 
membership in the body of Christ, to be light-bearers 
under present conditions, through trials and difficulties 
and oppositions, and, by and by, to be associates with 
the Lord as members of the glorious Sun of Righteousness, 
the great Light which in the duly appointed time 
shall enlighten the whole world. 

As we near the morning watches we have the evidence 
of day drawing on; and as we listen to the voice of 
the Prophet, we hear him declare in answer to our query, 
"Watchman, what of the night?" the message, "The 
morning cometh, but a night also," and then assures 
us that although we are now in the very dawn of the 
morning a fierce storm is to break and cause another 
"night" of darkness and of trouble upon the world and 
upon Christendom, to sift, to separate, to purify the 
elect. Our hearts, however, are encouraged with the 
assurance that with the breaking of that storm will 

R3520 : page 75 

come the full splendor of the Millennial morning, and 
with it the Sun of Righteousness blessing and illuminating 
the world. Moreover, in that time the assurance 
is that all the blind eyes shall be opened so that the 
whole world will be able to discern that "The Light of 
the world is Jesus." 

"ANOINT THINE EYES WITH EYE-SALVE."-REV. 3:18. 

The making of an eye-salve of the dust of a Palestine 
road, mixed with the saliva of our Lord's mouth, 
seems rather peculiar at first. We would naturally be 
inclined to say, "How strange! Do not put that stuff 
upon the man's eyes, for that will only make them worse. 
That dust is full of all manner of impurities; that very 
dust has helped to blind thousands and thousands of 
the people of this country." A traveller in that vicinity 
says, 

"Blindness is common 



in Palestine to a 

degree which we in 

western lands can 

scarcely realize. There 

is probably no country 

in the world, except 

Egypt, where 

this affliction is so 

prevalent. At Gaza, 

for instance, it is said 

that one-third of the 

population has lost 

one or both eyes, and 

from my own observation 

of that city I 

should not hesitate to say that the statement is not 

exaggerated." 

Why, then, did our Lord use a clay or ointment 
made out of that dust, apparently so unsuitable, and 
then send the blind man to the Pool of Siloam to wash 
and receive his sight? We answer that probably a deep 
spiritual lesson is contained in it, a lesson for all the apostles 
and for the followers of Jesus from then until now. 
As the blindness of the man was figurative of the general 
blindness upon the people, blindness to the Truth, 
blindness to the light of the world, so this method of 
healing the blindness will illustrate the method the Lord 
has been using throughout this Gospel age. The secretions 
of our Lord's mouth might well represent his 
grace and truth, while the earth used may well represent 
the poor earthly talents of us and his disciples. Who are 
we, that we should be made the instruments of God in 
opening the eyes of the blind— we who are imperfect 
ourselves, blemished, fallen? But the spirit of the Lord's 
lips coming upon us so transforms our energies and 
talents as to make them useful in his service. By the 
grace of God, as his mouthpieces, representatives, his 
followers have opened the blind eyes, not of all people, 
but of many, nevertheless. 

What a blessing we realized when such human clay 
was used of the Lord for the anointing of our eyes, and 
what a privilege was granted in that we have been made 
the clay ointment the Master has used in the blessing of 
others. But the anointing was not sufficient, it needed 
more; it needed the washing at the fountain. And so 
after the Lord has used us, his servants, as the clay in 
his hands for the anointing of blinded eyes, it is necessary 
that we should direct them to the fountain of his truth 
and grace, where they may wash, where they may 
realize that the cleansing is of the Lord's provision entirely, 
and that however good the clay and however 

R3520 : page 76 

thorough the anointing, no blessing could come except 
as they obediently and in faith accepted the grace and 



truth as the refreshing stream of divine favor to their 
enlightenment. 

The miracle of the opening of the eyes of 
one born blind was so notable that it attracted the 
attention of all in the neighborhood. None had ever 
before heard of any physician able to restore sight to 
one who was born blind. The matter was brought to 
the attention of the Pharisees and Doctors of the Law 
as a wonderful instance of divine power, or to see if 
they could offer any other solution for the matter. 
Evidently this was a part of our Lord's design and a part 
of what he meant when he declared that the man was 
not born blind as a punishment for sin but for the glory 
of God. God allowed nature to take its course in this 
manner and to produce an exception or freak of nature, 
and now the one who had been thus afflicted in the past 
was made the recipient of a special blessing which fully 
compensated him. Let us learn to view all of life's 
affairs from this standpoint. Whatever we may have 
that by nature would seem to be disadvantageous or a 
hindrance to us, the Lord is able to so overrule as to 
make of it a blessing, a proportionately greater 
blessing. 

The Pharisees, full of envy against Jesus, perceived 
that his influence was gaining daily with the people, and 
this made them the more bitter against him. In their 
wrong condition of heart they had already prejudged his 
heart and his motive, not by the fruits of his life, but by 
their envious sentiments. Of course, under the circumstances, 
the judgment would be warped and twisted, 
leading to wrong conclusions. They catechised the parents, 
who feared to give any expression on the subject, because 
they had heard that the rulers of the synagogue 
had determined that if any one should confess Jesus he 
should be excommunicated, should not be permitted to 
attend the synagogue or fellowship with others or enjoy 
its religious privileges, should be counted unworthy the 
name and privileges of a Jew, should be treated as an 
outcast from God and his people. They, therefore, 
answered that their son was of age and that he could 
speak for himself. 

The son was questioned over and over with an evident 
desire to find some fault with the procedure, to 
show that it was not a genuine miracle, etc. The man 
formerly blind became justly indignant at the special 
attempt to traduce the one who had so befriended him, 
and in answer to the Pharisees' statement that he should 
give glory only to God, because the one who had performed 
the miracle was a sinner, he demurred. As they 
repeated their questions he became more indignant at 
their evil spirit and said, Why do you ask so many 
questions? Are you anxious to become his disciples? 
He touched a sore spot and aroused their wrath, and 
they declared that he was a disciple of Jesus, and cast 
him out of the synagogue and ostracised him. It was 
after this that Jesus found him. We read, "Jesus 



heard that they had cast him out, and when he found 
him he said unto him, Dost thou believe on the Son of 
God? and he answered, I believe, and worshipped." 

HOW HINDRANCES MAY ASSIST US. 

In this we have a fresh illustration of how hindrances 
and difficulties and obstacles may become the 
greatest helps and aids under God's providences to those 
who are of the right condition of heart. This poor 
blind man, an ignorant beggar, seemingly most unfortunate 
of men, seemingly least cared for by the Lord, 
was evidently at heart honest and sincere. This was 
demonstrated by his after conduct, because character, 
principle, cannot be put on in a moment, but is a matter 
of development. It was, doubtless, because the Lord 
saw in his heart this sincerity that he specially favored 
him with the blessing of the opening of the eyes, and that 
it was because he was honest enough and fearless enough 
to confess the Lord in a proper manner that he was 
still further favored, and that the Lord sought him out 
and granted him the opening of the eyes of his understanding 
in addition to the opening of his natural eyes. 
If we could but receive this lesson fully and completely 
into our hearts, what a great blessing it would bring us 
as impressing upon us the necessity for honesty of heart, 
and as proofs to us of the willingness of the Lord to 
make all things work together for good to them who love 
him— even to them who are of the right attitude of heart, 
which would love the Lord if it knew him. To such he 
is willing to grant his favors and the opening of the eyes 
of their understanding— not suddenly, but step by step. 
As we follow the Lord's directions we get one blessing 
after another. 

Let us draw further a lesson as between the experiences 
of this blind man and the spiritual lesson 
already suggested. Some of us were born blind or nearly 
blind as respects the ability to see our heavenly Father's 
glorious face and the reflection of the same in our Lord 
Jesus. We were born blind through no folly of our own 
and through no folly of our parents, perhaps. Darkness 
covered the earth and gross darkness the people— the 
darkness of idolatry and heathendom upon the majority 
of the world, and the darkness of the Dark Ages upon the 
so-called Christian world. We saw not the Lord, and 
our fancies, inspired by the great Adversary, were gross 
misunderstandings of the wisdom, justice, love and 
power of our Creator. 

The Scriptures tell us that the darkness or blindness 
came from the Adversary, the god of this world, 
who blinds the minds of them who believe not, lest the 
glorious light of God's goodness should shine in their 
hearts from the face of Jesus Christ our Lord. In the Lord's 
own time and way he sent us a blessing through the poor 
dust of the earth, blended and tempered with the secretions 
of his mouth, and sent the message, too, that we 



should wash at the fountain. Thus washing we realized 
the forgiveness of sins and saw in a new light the love 
and mercy of our Father in heaven. Then came testings, 
not to destroy us but to prove us and to develop 
us if we were sincere at heart. 

The agencies used by our Lord for our blessing were 
produced perhaps by our friends. The threat of ostracism 
was before our mind as we confessed the blessing we 
had received and the source from which it came. All 
possessed with the right spirit in the matter surely followed 
the course of this blind man of our lesson, and 
courageously confessed the blessings received and the 
quarter from which they came. Now as then such a 
confession brings repudiation, contempt, sarcasm and 
casting out, but now as well as then obedience and the 
acceptance of such experiences mean an additional 
manifestation to us of divine favor. 

It was after we had endured something for the 
Lord's sake and for the Truth's sake, and rejoicing in 

R3521 : page 77 

our opened eyes, that the Lord found us in a particular 
sense and revealed himself to us in a still higher and 
more favorable blessing, and thus we became his disciples 
in the highest sense— his followers. Let us continue 
to follow him; let us continue to take whatever 
experiences come to us in the path of duty, and realize 
that it is a privilege to be on the side of the right and the 
Truth. Those who are faithful now in the present 
time of trials and testings will, as the Lord's disciples, 
be privileged in turn to be used of him in anointing the 
eyes of others, and thus all the members of the body 
under the guidance of the Lord, the Head, will during this 
present time work the works of him that sent us, and 
let the light shine out, realizing that the opportunities 
for service will soon now be closed— the night is coming 
when no man can work. 

The great time of trouble just preceding the shining 
forth of the Sun of Righteousness is near. The little 
time between now and then is for the very purpose of 
selecting out the Lord's true people and applying to 
them the eye-salve of Truth and informing them where 
they must wash, and in general in bringing to them the 
blessings of joint-heirship and discipleship until the body 
of Christ shall be complete. Very shortly, to those 
thus faithful, will be the privilege also of association with 
our Lord and Head as the Light of the world in the blessing 
of all the families of the earth. 



R3521 : page 77 

THE HIDDEN CROSS. 



The multitude saw but the cross of olive wood 
The Man of Sorrows bore, nor knew how underneath, 
Close pressed upon his heart, a hidden cross he wore— 
A dark and bleeding weight of sin and human woe, 
Made heavier with the sentence of God's broken law, 
And crowned with thorns of scornful and malicious hate,— 
A cross the world's Redeemer found on Jordan's brink, 
Nor laid it down until he came to Calvary. 

Oft times it seemed he almost craved some human aid, 
Some sympathizing heart to share that cruel cross. 
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, hadst thou but known 
What time that cross bore heaviest on the yearning heart 
Of him, thy King ! And yet, O slow of faith and hard 
Of heart, "Ye would not," and the King passed on his way; 
And of the people there was none with him! He trod 
Alone the valley of this dark world's shame and woe. 

O, chosen three, had ye but watched with him "one hour" 

That awful night in dark Gethsemane, ye might 

Have lightened some the cruel weight of that dread cross,— 

Have known and shared with him that agonizing woe. 

Alas! alas! Your eyes were heavy and ye slept. 

So now, "sleep on and take your rest," ye weary ones. 

An holy angel's wing hath eased the hidden cross— 

Your Master, strengthened, waits that other cross to bear. 

Which one bore heavier on the way to Calvary? 

The cross the cruel Roman soldiers laid upon 

The Blessed One? Ah, no! it was the unseen cross 

That crushed him to the earth, that wrung from those pale lips 

The agonizing cry, "My God! my God! oh, why 

Hast thou forsaken me?" In grief earth rent her breast, 

The sun grew dark; "Tis finished," and the price is paid,— 

The hidden cross had pierced that loving, tender heart! 

"Take up thy cross and follow me," the Master said. 
Ah, yes! his faithful Bride must also bear a cross,— 
The hidden cross, made not of life's vicissitudes 
Alone, its ills and pains, its loss and poverty,— 
The outward signs the multitude behold. 
Ah, no! we follow in his steps who went before 
Us in the narrow way. We, too, must bear the woe, 
Be touched with feeling of the world's infirmity, 
Its weary weight of sin and curse of broken law. 
Let us therefore, go forth to him "without the gate," 
Lay down our lives in sacrifice, spend and be spent; 
And while we clasp this cross more closely to our breast, 
Press on toward Calvary, for there our Bridegroom waits 
To take the cross of woe, and give a crown of joy ! 

-G. W. S. 



R3521 : page 77 



THE CENTRAL PURPOSE OF GOD'S MESSAGE. 

--JOHN 20:31. -MARCH 26.- 

"But these are written that ye may believe that Jesus 
is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing ye may 
have life through his name." 

THE beautiful words of our text set forth clearly the 
entire object and purpose of all of God's messages 
during this Gospel age, and hence the object or 
purpose of all the preaching done in his name and by 
his authority. When we consider the unlimited power of 
God, we are at first inclined to wonder why so little of 
it is displayed during this Gospel age in connection with 
the proclamation of the great Gospel message— with the 
legions of angels who could communicate with mankind 
and instruct them respecting God and his character, 
who could communicate as in the olden times, as when 
Moses was taught from the burning bush and Abraham 
by the visit of strangers to his tent. 

When we consider, too, how God could teach the 
world by signs and lessons and disciplines, without a 
word of instruction either from human lips or from angels 
—if he would punish their wrong doing and reward their 
right doing promptly and markedly, it would leave no 
question in the minds of any respecting right and wrong, 
respecting that which would be pleasing to the Lord and 
that which would be displeasing. How speedily this 
course would have brought in the reign of righteousness 
and have effected a world reformation. Again, the Lord 
could blazon out in letters of fire upon the sky, in every 
language under heaven, the messages respecting his 
pleasure and displeasure. No wonder that some have 
thought it strange that divine wisdom should adopt the 
plan which has been adopted and which has seemed to 
have been so ineffectual as respects the righting of the 
world of mankind— so ineffectual that now, after more 
than eighteen centuries of preaching, the great mass of 
the world are in absolute ignorance of Christ and the 
Father, and almost none see clearly and distinctly the 
true significance of the message he has sent us. 

However, as we begin to get the eyes of our understanding 
more and more widely open to the appreciation 
of the teachings of the Lord's Word, we see more and more 
clearly his plan and the wisdom of the course he has adopted, 
which is briefly expressed by the Apostle when he says, 
"It has pleased God through the foolishness of preaching 
to save them that believe." (1 Cor. 1:21)— preaching 
which seems to be so foolish, to be so weak, to be the 

R3521 : page 78 

poorest way the Lord could have possibly chosen to 
make known the riches of his grace— a way so open to 
hindrance through the weaknesses and imperfections 



of the human channels used! 

IGNORANCE NOT A SAVIOR. 

Nor will it do to answer, as some have done, that 
not merely those who hear the Gospel message are 
profited by it, but that "millions are saved who have 
never heard of the historic Christ." The words of the 
Apostle quite contradict this thought: "It pleased God 
through the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe,' 
implies that those who do not believe are not 
saved, and implies also that not the belief of anything 
or everything is saving but merely the believing of that 
which is preached by divine authority— "The faith once 
delivered to the saints."— Jude 3. 

How closely in line with this is our text in this 
lesson, "These things were written"— the Gospel narrative 
of the words and acts of our Lord, and also the words 
and acts of the apostles, in order that men might believe 
on Jesus as the Messiah, the Son of God, and that believing 
they might have life through them. No hope is 
here held out of life without believing, and no hope held 
out on a vague faith will be satisfactory. It was not 
sufficient to believe that Jesus was the God-Man and 
that he died on a cross at the hands of his enemies, a 
notable martyr for liberty and righteousness;— more 
than this must be believed. 

It is not sufficient to believe anything less than that 
Jesus was the Son of God— not the son of Joseph; it is 
not sufficient to believe in him in any other way than as 
the Son of God, and that additionally he is the Messiah— 
the one long promised as the seed of Abraham, whose 
mission it shall yet be to bless all the families of the 
earth: "In thy seed shall all the families of the earth be 
blessed." All this seems to be the Gospel; to believe 
anything less seems to be lacking the faith here enjoined; 
to believe all of this seems to be essential to 
discipleship. We cannot help how many of the wise and 
learned and good have rejected this scriptural statement 
of the object of this Gospel age, and have determined 
that it must be otherwise and prefer their own opinions, 

R3522 : page 78 

their own reasoning, to the message of the Lord through 
his Son and his inspired apostles. 

If such a statement as this were held in our minds 
alongside some false theory— such, for instance, as the 
one which declares that all who are not saved in the 
present time pass to an eternity of torture without hope 
of escape— then such a blending of the truth of God 
with the errors inspired by the Adversary would be sure 
to cause confusion in our minds; and the word of the 
Lord, to the effect that salvation could only be had 
through faith in Christ, would seem to leave the way to 
God too narrow and to practically destroy all hope for 



the world in general and to make the God of love to appear 
to be heartless, loveless, and evil-intentioned, since 
he knew the end from the beginning and had the power 
to have brought all to the knowledge of Jesus, or to have 
made some other arrangement than the preaching 
through imperfect vessels the way of access to faith and 
his favor and love and the life which he will give. 

But we notice that our text says nothing about the 
lost receiving life eternal in torture. On the contrary, 
it implies that they are without life, declaring that only 
those who believe in the proper manner can have the 
life which he gives. And this reminds us of our Lord's 
own words to the same effect— "He that hath the Son 
hath life, he that hath not the Son hath not life." 

"THAT THE WORLD MIGHT BELIEVE THROUGH HIM. 

It is a fact beyond dispute that few come under the 
conditions of our text. Few believe in Jesus as the Messiah, 
the Son of God, whom he will use according to the 
prophecies for the blessing of all the families of the earth, 
and few thus believe to the extent necessary to enter into 
life with him. Few believe enough respecting our Lord 
to bring them to the point of full faith in his blood as 
their cleanser from sin, or to bring them to the further 
step of a full consecration then to his service, or to hold 
them in the narrow way to the end of the journey, when 
the crowns of life will be given at the appearing of the 
Life-Giver at his second advent. And if only a few, 
only a little flock, thus hear the message, the preaching, 
and if these things were merely written for the benefit of 
these, where comes in the world?— the world which, 
according to one view, is in eternal torture or going 
thither; or, according to a more moderate view, is in 
death, the Second Death, or going thither— on the broad 
road to destruction. 

How can the Lord Jesus ever fulfil the prediction 
that he is to be the Light of the world to those who have 
never seen him and never heard his name, either with 
the natural or spiritual eyes or with the natural or 
spiritual ears? How can the declaration ever be fulfilled 
that the Lord tasted death for every man, and that 
all the families of the earth are to be blessed through 
him? 

We answer that there is but the one way of understanding 
this entire matter and that is the Scriptural 
way, which takes in not merely the few isolated texts, 
but includes comprehensively all the teachings of the 
Scriptures from Genesis to Revelation. It is to the effect 
that during this Gospel age God's purpose is merely 
the selection of those who have an ear to hear— of those 
who, when the message is sounded, have heard and to 
some extent understood and appreciated it, and who will 
go on in the understanding and appreciation to a full 
and grander grasp of the lengths and breadths and 
heights and depths of the love and mercy of God. 



These "the love of God constraineth," the still 
small voice is heard by their hearts, they "walk by 
faith and not by sight," and need not to have the heavens 
emblazoned with the divine commands. To them day 
unto day uttereth speech and night unto night showeth 
knowledge, and the entire heavens are ablaze with messages 
of God's favors and blessings, which imply also 
his justice and his love. To these the message of salvation 
through the blood of Christ appeals; they are not 
wise above what is written; they accept divine wisdom 
as better than human wisdom and the divine Word as 
preferable to the traditions of men. These, under the 
guidance of the holy Spirit, are making increase not only 
in their numbers century after century, but also making 
increase of their character development individually; 
and when the age shall close it will be found that God's 
wisdom and love and power will have been exercised in 
such a manner that they shall have found and prepared 
the peculiar people of the Lord, the little flock, the Royal 
Priesthood, who, at the second coming of their Master, 
shall be received by him as a Bride company, to be his 
joint-heirs in the glorious kingdom for which we pray, 

R3522 : page 79 

"Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done in earth as it is 
done in heaven." 

"THEN SHALL THE RIGHTEOUS SHINE." 

With the completion of this elect class— chosen because 
they were found to be lovers of righteousness and 
haters of iniquity, and because they were willing to 
walk in the narrow way and to follow the Lamb through 
evil and through good report and to walk by faith and 
not by sight— shall ultimately come the blessing of the 
Lord in the First Resurrection, and they shall be made 
partakers of glory, honor and the divine nature. Then, 
the Scriptures assure us, they shall shine forth as the 
Sun in the Kingdom of their Father,— shine for the blessing 
of all the families of the earth, shine for the scattering 
of all the ignorance and superstition and clouds and 
darkness which now enslave the race, shine that all the 
blind eyes may be opened and all the deaf ears unstopped, 
shine that the knowledge of the glory of God may fill 
the whole earth, shine out that the willing and obedient 
of the world may see the right way and be drawn by 
the light of grace and truth of God along the highway of 
holiness to the end thereof, life eternal, through the 
merit of him who loved the world and bought it with his 
own precious blood. 



R3522 : page 79 



ENCOURAGING LETTERS FROM FOREIGN FIELDS. 

A TESTIMONY FROM EAST INDIES. 

The following testimony is from a native East Indian, 
who was formerly an active ordained minister in 
the Methodist Church Mission there and in Jamaica. He 
is using this testimony amongst his former associates in 
ministerial work, to arouse their interest in the Harvest 
message: 

DEAR FRIEND :- 

It is with pleasure that I write to you about what I 
have found to be so ennobling and satisfying, and with 
which I am now being blessed. I cannot here attempt to 
give the kind of testimony I would like to give of the Lord's 
gracious dealings with me, to his glory and for the edification 
of fellow creatures. 

While working for the Society of Friends in St. Thomas 
several religious books were put into my hands from time 
to time to read. Although I was conscious of justification and 
enjoyed more or less the joy and peace resulting from this 
condition since 1884, the perusal of these books led me to 
think that there was something yet higher, richer and more 
satisfying to be had which I had not attained. I made it 
a matter of prayer, and thought much over it. 

In due time another book, entitled "The Divine Plan 
of the Ages," was sent to me on loan from America, in case 
I did not like to purchase it. I began to read this carefully 
and with prayer. To my surprise I found it more- 
far more instructive and enlightening, containing more food 
for the mind on almost every page of it than any other production 
of uninspired pen I had ever known before or since. 
When I reached the place where the pious and able author 
treats on consecration and its object, I could not resist the 
temptation of going down upon my knees and giving up 
myself to God in a particular sense, and in every respect. 
The act of thus yielding oneself to the Lord was a pleasurable 
one to me. I arose from my knees feeling that I 
had done the right thing, and the joy that filled my soul 
I could hardly contain. 

Allow me to recommend to you as a duty and a pleasure, 
this little work of 356 pages. It contains rich messages 
from the "Great King," calculated to make the bad good 
and the good better, and so it does wherever it is rightly 
used. It is a real eye-opener— a veritable key of the Bible. 
It is more than a match for the enemies of the Bible— the 
"higher critic," "evolutionist," "Christian Scientist," "skeptic," 
and "infidel." If you wish to be aided to see things 
in their harmonious, consistent and soul-refreshing beauty- 
things that go to show what wonderful provision God has 
made for his Church— "the sanctified" ones "in Christ 
Jesus," and for the world of mankind— things which duly 
magnify his love, justice, wisdom and power as a harmonious 
whole, without contradicting each other in the least— 
if you wish to see these, then read this telling little book, 



"The Divine Plan of the Ages," which will lead you into 
the treasury of God's own Word— the mine of things "new 
and old." Read it with Bible in hand and then think of 
the result of your investigation. I am acquainted with the 
main teachings of the leading denominations or "orthodoxy" 
—hence I know what I am recommending to others. 

"Light is sown for the righteous." The "sure word of 
prophesy. ...shineth more and more to the perfect day." 
It is of a growing nature— outgrows all that are fixed and 
stationary— the creeds of men which cannot keep pace with 
the verities of a progressive revelation. Faulty translations 
and human traditions have done much to obscure the 
clear and consistent teachings of God's Word. Hence it 
becomes us "to give the more earnest heed to the" inspired 

R3523 : page 79 

injunction: "Prove all things, hold fast to that which is 
good." 
I remain, dear friend, 

A BELIEVER IN AND SERVANT OF PRESENT TRUTH. 



CHEER FROM NORWAY. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

You will surely be interested to hear something about 
the harvest work in Norway, and the progress it has made 

to this time. As you know, Brother G has been 

laboring near here, and the result that can be seen by us is 
some thirty or forty interested in that town. During this 
last summer he has visited the towns in North Norway, 
and has noticed some evidences of interest among a few 
Christians in that region. 

Brother F has visited the towns in South Norway, 

and especially in Havanger (population 30,600). The Present 
Truth has been received with joy, so that quite a few 
dear Christians there are now deeply interested, especially 
among the members of the Free Mission Church here. Many 
have already seen much of the light— besides there are some 
interested not belonging to any denomination. 

At present Brother F and Brother G ai 

both in Bergen (population 72,000) where they intend to 
work together during this winter. There the DAWNS seem 
to have already set on foot a remarkable movement. In 
no other place in Scandinavia has harvest truth been so 
quickly and heartily received by so many, as in Bergen. 
A prominent preacher of the Free Mission Church of that 
town has become thoroughly grasped by the clear light, 
and he is now setting forth the full and true Gospel to his 
always large and attentive audiences. Also another prominent 
man there, an old teacher and editor, is strongly touched 
by the Truth. The testimonies of these two dear brethren 
seem to make a very strong impression upon the minds of 
other Christians. 



But there is every appearance of a coming persecution 

also. In a letter of December 13th, Brother F tells of 

an interested sister, who for many years has been working 
as a teacher in the Sunday School of "Indre-missionen," 
and who has been summoned to leave that post. But the 
friends do not fear. 

The light has been spreading itself in the following 
way: Some time ago a few interested were arranging "reading 
meetings," in which one was reading from the DAWNS, 
and the others, with their open Bibles in hand, trying every 
point. When there came a point which any could not apprehend 
clearly, the reader would stop, that some one able 
might get an opportunity to make that point clear. These 
meetings still continue and the interest and blessings grow. 
I don't know how many really interested there are, but at 
one such meeting, held in a private family, there were twenty-three 
present, all seemingly being of one mind and spirit. 
Of course these facts bring great joy to the dear Colporteur 
brethren. 

In spite of the financial distress the Present Truth 
is accomplishing its work, spreading about the light more and 
more. This makes us satisfied, even though we would be 
bound to endure many privations. With much love, your 
fellow servant in Christ, FRITIOF LINDKVIST. 



page 81 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVI. MARCH 15, 1905. No. 6 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 83 

The Czar's Speech to Workmen 83 

Prospects of a Russian Revolution 83 

The Influence of Spiritism Widens 84 

Some Truth from Dr. Huntington 84 

Canadian Church Union Movement 85 

Rev. W. Spencer Walton's View of Nominal 
Christendom 85 

National Federation Seems Assured 86 

Our "Passover" Memorial 86 

True Shepherd, True Sheep, True Fold 88 

"Lazarus, Come Forth" 91 

Readings from the Swedish Revised Bible 95 

Public Ministries of the Truth 96 

Special Items 82 

page 82 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 



--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R3528 : page 82 

BAPTISM SERVICE, APRIL 16. 



At Bible House Chapel the first Sunday in each quarter 
is open for appointments for symbolic immersion. This rule 
will be set aside next quarter. Because of the Memorial Service 
coming on Sunday, April 16th, the Baptism service will 
take place on the same date,— at 3 p.m. 

ROLLING TOGETHER OF THE HEAVENS. 



An article under this caption has been crowded out of 
two issues, but D.V. will appear in our next. It clearly indicates 
the approach of conditions we have long been expecting 
from Revelation 13:11-17. 

page 82 

SWEDISH TABERNACLE SHADOWS. 



We have now this pamphlet in TOWER form. Tract Fund 
contributors, also the poor, may order these without price. 
Others who so prefer may purchase what they can use at 3 
for 10 cents. 

A NEW WALL CHART. 



A new Chart, similar to the one in the front of DAWN I., 
five feet long, done in solar tint (blue print) has been prepared. 
These we can supply at $1.00 each, express prepaid. 
We still have the 5-ft. Charts, painted, at $1.50 each, express 
prepaid. Either style is excellent for your sitting room. The 
explanation of it is entertaining as well as instructive to your 
friends who may call, and will prove very helpful to yourself; 
for if you learn to explain it to others you will have a good 
store of information for your own heart. 



R3523 : page 83 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
THE CZAR'S SPEECH TO WORKMEN. 



FOLLOWING the appeal to the Czar, of the striking 

workmen of St. Petersburg, which was refused, 

and the bloodshed which resulted when the crowds 

attempted to enter the palace grounds after being forbidden 

to do so, the Czar sent an invitation to some 

of the leading workmen to visit him at his palace. 

They responded, and the following is a detailed report of 

their reception:— 

VISITING THE CZAR, THE "LITTLE FATHER." 

Emperor Nicholas adopted the traditional fatherly tone 
in his talk with the workmen yesterday. He chided them for 
allowing themselves to be misled into engaging in a movement 
imperiling the internal order of Russia and aiding the 
foreign foe, and for attempting to demand by force what he 
otherwise would be willing to do voluntarily. 

WILL PACIFY THE STRIKERS. 

This interview, face to face with their "Little Father," 
in whom their faith has not been shaken by the events of 
the bloody Sunday of January 22, has had a far greater and 
more reassuring effect than any number of proclamations by 
Ministers and Governors General, and the workmen of St. 
Petersburg are now generally inclined to accept the promises 



of Governor General Trepoff and Finance Minister Kokovsoff 
at their face value. 

The gift by the imperial family of $25,000 to aid the 
families of the victims of the conflict of January 22 also has 
had an excellent effect; and as the news slowly permeates the 
laboring classes of Russia it is expected it will make them 
content to wait for the promised reforms. 

The workmen received the royal assurances of reform 
with cheers, and after a lunch at the imperial table returned 
to St. Petersburg in the best of humor to report to their 
fellows, as enjoined, the words of His Majesty. No attempt 
was made by them to present their desires, which already 
are sufficiently evident. 

WILL GET PAY FOR STRIKE TIME. 

The action of the St. Petersburg manufacturers in placing 
themselves in the hands of the Government in the matter 
of the adjustment of the main points of the dispute, and 
promising to grant the men pay for the time they have been 
on strike, not as a matter of right, but as a favor, and their 
contribution in aid of the sufferers among the families of 
their workmen, are expected to add to the prevailing good 
feeling. 

The workmen's deputation was accompanied to the 
Czar's palace by Minister of Finance Kokovsoff and Governor 
General Trepoff. The workmen bowed low to the Emperor, 
who said: 

"Good day, my children." 

The workmen replied: 

"We wish Your Majesty good health." 

The Emperor then said: 

"I have summoned you in order that you may hear 
my words from myself and communicate them to your 
companions. The recent lamentable events, with such sad 
but inevitable results, have occurred because you allowed 
yourselves to be led astray by traitors and enemies to our 
country. When they induced you to address a petition to 
me on your needs, they desired to see you revolt against me 
and my government. They forced you to leave your honest 
work at a period when all Russian workmen should be 
laboring unceasingly in order that we might vanquish 
our obstinate enemy. 

"Strikes and disgraceful demonstrations led the crowds 
to disorders which obliged, and always will oblige, the authorities 
to call out troops. As a result, innocent people were 
victims. 

PATIENCE IS COUNSELED. 

"I know that the lot of the workmen is not easy. Many 
things require improvement, but have patience. You will 
understand that it is necessary to be just toward your employers 
and to consider the condition of our industries. But 
to come to me as a rebellious mob in order to declare your 
wants, is a crime. 



"In my solicitude for the working classes I will take 
measures which will assure that everything possible will be 
done to improve their lot and secure an investigation of their 
demands through legal channels. I am convinced of the 
honesty of the workmen and their devotion to myself, and 
I pardon their transgression. Return to your work with your 
comrades and carry out the tasks allotted to you. 

"May God assist you." 

At the conclusion of his speech the Emperor told the 
members of the deputation to communicate his words to 
their comrades, and said he would supply them with printed 
copies of his address. 

PROSPECTS OF A RUSSIAN REVOLUTION. 



The London Spectator, in an able article on Russia 
says: 

"The probability that the dynasty will be crippled and a 
revolution of some kind inaugurated is very great. The true 
pivot of power in Russia, the mystical belief in the autocratic 

R3523 : page 84 

Czar, has been shaken, if not destroyed. The autocracy substituted 

for his is that of the elder grand dukes, who have no 

'divine' claims, who are divided by incurable jealousies, spites 

and rival female pretensions, and who are, with one exception, 

men without great parties behind them. If they make, 

as is possible, a palace revolution, they run the risk of dividing 

the troops, for the baby heir and the sickly Grand Duke 

Michael stand between the strong Vladimir and the succession, 

and the army, or sections of it, might pronounce for different 

men. Every ambition will be unloosed, and under an 

autocracy fear makes all ambitions fiercer. Meanwhile Kuropatkin 

will be hampered by want of supplies and reinforcements, 

and a new discredit must fall on Russian arms, which 

are now employed six thousand miles from St. Petersburg, 

and liable to paralysis from any interruption en route. The 

R3524 : page 84 

great cities, Moscow, Odessa, Kieff, Riga, and perhaps others 
farther east, are seething with agitation; the Reservists are 
furious and have arms; and it is hardly conceivable that the 
millions of revolutionaries, all white men and most of them 
drilled men, should not produce a competent leader who 
when he appears will be recognized in a flash. Even if we 
discredit the very minute accounts of the mutiny of the Black 
Sea sailors, and the refusal of the troops to crush them, it is 
clear that the vastness of the empire which has so long protected 
the central power is turning against it, and that the 
authorities may be more than bewildered by the necessity of 
violent repression in so many places at once. Prophecy is 
of course, futile; but we should say that unless the imperial 



family produces, or can attract, a chancellor of genius who 
understands how to preserve the autocracy by conciliation, 
or to transmute it into a despotism bound by laws like the 
governments of India and Germany, the days of the terrible 
regime which has prevailed in Russia for more than two 
centuries are approaching to an end." 

THE INFLUENCE OF SPIRITISM WIDENS. 



Recently a Catholic priest (Mgr. Doane) on his death 
bed related a vision he had— that he was taken to 
heaven and saw the Lord and the throne and a great 
crowd in which he definitely recognized one person at 
least. There was some error about the matter, surely, 
for Catholics admit that practically none of their Church 
go directly to heaven— that all go first to purgatory. 
We doubt not masses were said for poor Doane, for the 
easing of his soul in purgatory. And if priests and popes 
know and teach that they can and do liberate such 
souls from time to time they surely ought to know who 
are there. Otherwise how could they know whom to 
attempt to deliver. 

Our point is that poor Doane's words were taken up 
by a leading newspaper, and reporters sent to interview 
leading ministers of various denominations on the subject. 
These interviews were published, and several of 
them show a remarkable tendency toward Spiritism. 
As a whole they show that the leaders of the nominal 
Church are prepared to lead their flocks toward Spiritism. 
Nay, the words we quote will doubtless influence thousands 
in that direction. We quote the words of two of 
the more prominent as follows:— 

REV. VAN DE WATER, D.D. 

Dr. George R. Van de Water, rector of St. Andrew's 
Episcopal Church, said to an "American" reporter last night 
that he considered the vision of Mgr. Doane as direct and indisputable 
evidence of the belief that he had always held, 
that it was possible for people on earth to hold communion 
with the souls in Heaven. 

"I have always maintained the possibility of communication 
with the other world. Any man with the experience of 
dying persons which a clergyman or a physician has cannot 
fail to know positively that glimpses of Heaven are often 
vouchsafed to persons of great faith and saintly lives on their 
deathbeds. 

"Personally, I consider that it is just as unscientific 
to deny the possibility of supernatural manifestations and 
the meaning and significance of dreams and visions as it is 
unscientific to swing to the other extreme and attribute to 
perfectly natural phenomena occult and supernatural 
meaning. 

"Mgr. Doane's vision has unquestionably made a wide 



and profound impression on the mind of the public, just as 
it appeared to have made a deep impression upon his own 
mind at the time. The fact that these things are not to be 
understood or explained is no reason why they should not 
be believed." 

REV. C. H. PARKHURST, D.D. 

The Rev. Dr. Charles H. Parkhurst, discussing with an 
"American" reporter last night the wonderful vision of 
Mgr. Doane, frankly avowed a deep interest in the investigation 
of these problems that hitherto have been regarded as 
entirely outside the domain of strict religious thought. 

He declared that he saw nothing incompatible with 
Christianity in the earnest efforts that are being made by 
well-known scientists to reach a point of view where avowed 
spiritualists and devout Christians may agree on an explanation 
of the recurring phenomena in the unseen world. 

HE SUGGESTS AN INVESTIGATION. 

"I myself have been impressed recently with the belief 
that there are spiritual manifestations going on about us 
in the unseen world which might profitably be investigated 
by some such organizations as that which Professor James, 
of Harvard, Professor Quackenbos, Dr. Hyslop and others 
are striving to form. 

"As to dreams and visions, and this one in particular, 
I have no word to say. The matter, I should say, belongs to 
the psychologists. I should say that such things might be 
investigated by such a jury as I have referred to, and some 
practical results might thereby be attained." 

"According to the story told by two men to whom Mgr. 
Doane related his dream, he had a distinct view of heaven, 
and was even conducted to the foot of the throne," said the 
reporter. "He disclosed to his friends the fact that he recognized 
at least one person whom he knew on earth, and spoke 
with him. Will you say, Dr. Parkhurst, whether or not this 
agrees with your conception of heaven?" 

"No, I will not discuss that," replied Dr. Parkhurst. 

"There has been an awakening along these lines recently, 
as is evidenced by the fact that such men as Professor James 
are giving serious attention to it. The danger lies in irresponsible 
persons, or those not fitted by study and temperament 
for the work, taking it up and exploiting it." 

Dr. Parkhurst laughed at the idea that he was verging 
upon a belief in spiritualism, but referred to the remarkable 
experience of Dr. Funk with Mrs. Pepper in the matter of 
the lost widow's mite and the late Henry Ward Beecher. 

"These are vastly interesting problems," he said in conclusion, 
"which we are not yet able to explain." 



VISIONS AND DREAMS IN GENERAL. 



It is not necessary to claim that all visions are of evil 
origin. Doubtless some of the worst dreams have resulted 
from improper eating. We know of no reason why the 
Lord might not permit his people a special warning through 
a dream, although his proposal that we must learn to "walk 
by faith and not by sight" implies that such special guidances 
outside the Word will be very exceptional. 

Visions, etc., occurring in connection with the delirium 
of fever or with the last flicker of life on a death-bed need 

R3524 : page 85 

not be considered uniformly miraculous— of a holy or of a 
Satanic inspiration. Bad people have had pleasing experiences 
of the kind, and the very best have experienced 
a horror of great darkness at the dying moment. Our 
Lord, for instance, cried aloud, "My God! my God! why 
hast thou forsaken me?" with his latest breath. Evidently 
our sleeping thoughts even more than our waking ones 
require supervision and rectification in the light of God's 
Word,— to which alone the Apostle commends us, and never 
to dreams and visions— our own or those of others. 

SOME TRUTH HERE FROM DR. HUNTINGTON. 

PHYSICAL TORTURE FOR CHRISTIANS MAY BE REVIVED. 



"Readiness to suffer persecution is the supreme test 
of fidelity. That, perhaps, is the reason why Christ puts it 
at the very topmost round of his ladder of perfection. The 
special passion that distinguishes the persecutor is relentlessness. 
The figure is that of a bloodhound on the track of 
his victim. Earnestness turned to a bad use, describes the 
persecutor, for only so long as he is terribly in earnest is he to 
be feared. Curiously enough, the sorest persecutions that 
befell the early Christians befell them under the so-called 
'good emperors.' The good emperors were given their 
epithet because they were diligent in attending to their business 
of governing. They saw that the new religion was 
eating into the very vitals of the Roman system, and that 
if not arrested, it would eventually overthrow the empire. 
Therefore, they persecuted the new religion's adherents, 
persecuted them to the death. 

"The modern Church ought to be not a little mortified 
at observing how largely it is obliged to draw upon the annals 
of the far past for illustrations to supreme fidelity to duty. 
We interpret the 'faithful unto death' as meaning while 
life lasts, but there was a time when the words bore a sterner 
sense of faithful at the cost of dying. The Church of to-day 
is very much in the position of a man living on an inherited 
fortune; he may know how to enjoy it, but he has a very 
meagre knowledge of the toil and struggle that went to the 
amassing of it. The title deeds to this goodly heritage we 
call Christian civilization were written in blood, and in 'the 



place of the seal' we note, dim and faded by lapse of years, 
the sign of the cross. 

"Whether the days of active persecution for conscience' 
sake have passed never to return is a question upon which 
only a rash thinker would venture an opinion. The time 
may conceivably come when a Christian minority may make 
itself so obnoxious to a non-Christian majority that there will 
be a renewal of physical pains and penalties. To-day toleration 
is the favorite word; it may not be to-morrow. As 
things are, the true reading of the Beatitude is that which 
applies it to those who dare to be unpopular rather than 
surrender what they know to be right. Under the soft condition 
of life as it is now lived, unpopularity is the nearest 
approach to persecution that is allowed. 

"The age of the fagot and the axe is passed. The only 
flames of martyrdom to-day are those kindled by hot, burning 
words. It is with the breath of his lips or by the stroke 
of his pen that the modern lictor does his work. The desire 

R3525 : page 85 

for popularity is a natural instinct. The man never lived 
who was wholly devoid of it. The child desires popularity 
with his playmates, the college student with his class, the 
politician with his party, the man of business with the public, 
the seeker after social promotion with the particular set or 
circle in which he or she is ambitious to shine."— N.Y. Tribune. 

CANADIAN CHURCH UNION MOVEMENT. 



Although there seems little likelihood that definite union 
will be accomplished for a long time to come, the movement 
in Canada toward an amalgamation of the Methodist, Presbyterian 
and Congregational churches of the Dominion, is progressing 
and leading men in all three bodies are seriously 
working for its accomplishment. There have been several 
meetings of committees, and the present status of the matter 
is that at the last joint meeting of the committees there were 
appointed sub-committees to consider the subjects respectively 
of "Doctrine," "Polity," "The Ministry," "Administration" 
and "Law." 

Each sub-committee has forty members (sixteen Methodists, 
sixteen Presbyterians and eight Congregationalists), 
except the committee on law, which has but fifteen members. 
These committees will study the subject assigned them and 
report to some future meeting of the full joint committee, 
trying to find some basis on which all three bodies may agree. 
There is no disposition among Canadian leaders to hurry 
matters, for it is realized that so large a subject needs the 
most painstaking consideration, and that a successful union 
will need the hearty approval not only of leaders, but of the 
entire membership of the churches.— Boston Transcript. 

IS CATHEDRAL BUILDING TO BE A "FORM OF GODLINESS" 



FOR OUR DAY? 



Are we entering upon a new age of cathedral building? 
asks the New York Tribune. Not long ago it was announced 
that $750,000 had become available for work on the new 
cathedral of St. John the Divine; it is a matter of months 
only since the great Roman Catholic Cathedral of Westminster, 
in London, was finished; and it is less than a year 
since a bequest of $1,000,000 toward the construction of 
a cathedral for Boston was recorded. These facts lead The 
Tribune to remark: "The vast commercial structures, the 
luxurious hotels, must reach at last a limit beyond which 
men will go only for 'God and country.' Has the time come? 
In this period of magnificence and lavishness in building, are 
we at last turning some of our riches to the visible glorification 
of religion? If we are, we are coming indeed to a new 
age of cathedral building." 

REV. W. SPENCER WALTON'S VIEW 

OF NOMINAL CHRISTENDOM, AFTER FIFTEEN YEARS IN 
AFRICA. 

"After fifteen years' residence as a missionary in Africa, 
I find upon my return to America that the Church here is 
dead. I find that the Church has gone away backward; I find 
an immense amount of empty profession. The Church for the 
most part is dead, and why? Because she has opened her doors 
to the world. The spirits of sedition that are abroad have entered 
in. The people are running after Dowieism, Spiritualism, 
and all kinds of fads which make a pretence of being scientific. 

"I ask you here, do you think that if Christ walked the 
streets of this city to-day he would be popular? I tell you 
no. To be a Christian means to take up your cross and follow 
him. When a Christian says that he can get along with 
everyone it is because he is not following close to Christ."— 
Toronto Star. 

NOAH'S ARK AS A MODEL. 



Recent despatches from Denmark tell of remarkable 
experiments, carried on in the Sound between Denmark and 
Sweden, for the purpose of testing the seaworthiness of a 
vessel built according to the dimensions of Noah's Ark, as 
given in Gen. 6:15. According to the Copenhagen Daily 
Dannebrog: "Naval architect Vogt, who has experimented 
for a long time with the dimensions of Noah's Ark as given 
in the Bible, has recently completed a model of that ancient 
craft.. ..It measures 30 feet in length by 5 feet in width 
by 3 feet in height, the actual measurements of the Ark of 
Noah being 300 x 50 x 30. The model is built in the shape of 
an old-fashioned saddle-roof, so that a cross-section represents 



an isosceles triangle. When this queer-looking craft was 
released from the tugboat which had towed it outside the 
harbor and left to face the weather on its own account, it 
developed remarkable sea-going qualities. It drifted sideways 
with the tide, creating a belt of calm water to leeward, 
and the test proved conclusively that a vessel of this primitive 

R3525 : page 86 

make might be perfectly seaworthy for a long voyage. 
It is well known that the proportionate dimensions used by 
modern shipbuilders are identical with those of the diluvian 
vessel." 

NATIONAL FEDERATION SEEMS ASSURED. 



Eighteen religious bodies, including all of the principal 
ones, have now responded favorably to the proposition of 
the National Federation of Churches and Christian Workers 
to come together in a representative way and effect organization 
through which they may, on all great problems, speak 
as one body. Acceptances have behind them a constituency 
of nearly eighteen millions of communicants. Thus it may 
be said that Protestant America is getting ready to act. 

The National Federation, which led in suggesting the 
scheme, has to some extent turned the working out of the 
details over to representatives of these bodies, who have set 
to work on their own account. The aim is not union of the 
bodies. Neither is it one designed to interfere with forms 
of government, much less to frame a doctrinal standard. 
It is, instead, unity on all moral questions, such as laws 
governing divorce and remarriage, Sabbath observance, 
temperance, and the scores of other matters with which 
form of denominational government and creed have nothing 
to do. 

It is purposed to have the supreme judicatories of all 
the religious bodies joining in the movement appoint a commission 
or delegates, to represent them in the organization, 
if one be effected, and authorized to speak for them, to the 
end that the Church may be heard in no uncertain way. 
The meeting to effect this organization is to be held in Carnegie 
Hall, New York, next fall, and its sessions are to extend 
over six days, with various auxiliary meetings in the same 
period. A committee is now at work on the programme.— 
Boston Transcript. 



R3525 : page 86 

OUR "PASSOVER" MEMORIAL. 

EVERY year this celebration of our Redeemer's 
death seems more full of meaning and more 



impressive. The very fact that the date 

changes, and must be reckoned after the Jewish method 

of calculation, adds to the impressiveness, and brings 

afresh to our minds the various details of the Passover 

type and their fulfilment in the death of the Lamb of 

God— "Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us."— 

1 Cor. 5:7. 

The severe bondage of Israel under Pharaoh, the 
god or ruler of Egypt, calls to mind the bondage of corruption 
under which "the whole creation groans," being 
burdened under the reign of Sin and Death; and Pharaoh 
fitly typified Satan, "the god of this world." In the 
deliverance of all Israel under the leadership of Moses we 
see the deliverance, the liberation, of all who reverence 
God and his Laws under the leadership of the greater 
than Moses,— Christ, head and body, during the Millennium. 
In the overthrow of Pharaoh and his hosts 
we see the type of the destruction, in the Second Death, 
of Satan and all who follow his course. These anti-typical 
blessings are all the pictured results of the 
anti-typical Passover, of which Christ is the central figure. 

THE LAMB SLAIN. 

The Scripture which refers to our Lord as the Lamb 
slain from before the foundation of the world indicates 
to us that all the details of this Passover were clearly 
in the mind and plan of God, not only since the Fall of 
Adam under the death sentence, but from long before 
Adam's creation. It thus assures us that although the 
Justice of God only was manifested for centuries, although 
divine Love was not "manifested" until the first 
advent of Jesus, nevertheless Love was in God's heart 
toward his creatures,— from the beginning. 

As the Passover deliverance represented the Millennial 
blessing, so the Passover night represented this 
Gospel Age, in which all who trust in God wait for his 
salvation;— in which the entire "household of faith" 
feeds on the unleavened bread of Truth, mingled with 
the bitter herbs of trial and testing, waiting for the Morning; 
—in which the Church "of the first-born," under the 
protection of "the blood of the Lamb," is passed over 
from condemnation to justification, from death to life. 
Ah! there it is! For that reason we keep a continual 
feast of rejoicing in the Lord, feeding on our Lamb and 
unleavened bread and herbs. For this reason, also, we 
keep the annual Memorial of all this, "for even Christ 
our Passover is sacrificed for us, therefore let us keep the 
feast."-l Cor. 5:7. 

It was this that our Master enjoined upon all his 
disciples, saying, "As often as ye do this, [as, year by 
year, ye shall frequently, before my second coming, do 
this] do it in remembrance of me;— and no longer in 
remembrance of the typical lamb and the typical passing 
over of the typical first-born of typical Israel. 

For centuries the Adversary blinded the Lord's 



people to this simple custom of the early Church, persuading 

them first of all that the Romish Mass was 

the same thing, and later that the quarterly, monthly 

and weekly celebrations of Protestants would do as 

well. How much we were losing under those delusions 

R3526 : page 86 

we never knew until graciously brought to see the 
truth respecting "Christ our Passover, sacrificed for 
us," on whose account we, "first born," celebrate. 

We will no longer be defrauded of the blessing our 
Lord designed for us. We will "keep the feast." And 
so surely as the consecrated believers of this age are the 
"Church of the first-born," so surely will there be a 
deliverance later of all of the household under the lead 
of the first-born (Christ), even as the type showed. And 
that the after-born delivered by Moses will ultimately 
consist only of the obedient the Apostle clearly shows.— 
Acts 3:23. 

"IN THE SAME NIGHT." 

How much more impressive and inspiring it is to 
celebrate an important matter on its anniversary;— to 
recall the deeds and words and looks, and place ourselves 
with the chief actors of that greatest of all dramas which 
over eighteen centuries ago ended at Calvary. It even 
strengthens our general faith in divine providence to 
note that the very day, the very hour, as well as the very 
year of this tragedy God had predetermined, so that 
although previously the Jews sought to take him to 
put him to death, no man laid hands on him, because 

R3526 : page 87 

"his hour was not yet come." The precise time of this 
great event had not only been typified for centuries 
with careful precision as to the very day, but our Lord 
with equal exactness declared "Mine hour is come," 
and when instituting the bread and wine Memorial of 
his own death as the antitypical lamb he waited, "and 
when the hour was come he sat down" with his disciples 
to eat the Passover Supper, saying, "With desire have 
I desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer." 
-Luke 22:15. 

"LET US KEEP THE FEAST." 

With equal carefulness to that shown by our Lord 
and his apostles, let us keep the feast, the Memorial of 
his death, as he directed— not at any time, morning, 
noon or night, but only as a Supper— not any day, but 
only on its anniversary— if we would "do this," 
rather than commemorate something else, on some 
other date. 



This year, Monday, April 17th, will correspond to 
the day on which our Lord was crucified, from 9 a.m. 
until 3 p.m. when he died, crying, "It is finished." 
He was laid in Joseph's new tomb before 6 p.m., and the 
next day (beginning at that hour) was the first day of 
the Feast of Passover celebrated by the Jews, corresponding 
this year to Tuesday, April 18th. We celebrate 
nothing in common with our Hebrew friends, but refer 
to their date by way of making clear the date on which 
we locate our Lord's death and its Memorial Supper of 
the preceding evening. 

Our Lord instituted the Memorial Supper, which he 
requested his followers to celebrate, after six o'clock on 
the evening before he was crucified, "in the same night 
in which he was betrayed." This, however, as we have 
previously shown, was on the 14th of Nisan, the very 
same day on which he died— God having provided the 
Jews a custom for counting their days from 6 p.m. 
to 6 p.m., from sundown to sundown. 

WASHING ONE ANOTHER'S FEET. 

Jesus and his disciples, being Jews, were obligated 
to keep the Jewish Passover Supper, and ate together 
a literal lamb, with herbs and unleavened bread, and 
wine; but we are no longer interested in those typical 
matters, which have forever passed away by being fulfilled 
in Christ. It was after the Jewish Passover Supper 
that our Lord instituted the new, the Memorial Supper, 
commemorative of his own sacrifice for the first-borns, 
and of their joint-sacrifice with him, as we shall show. 

Whether the washing of his disciples' feet by our 
Lord was after the Passover Supper and before the Memorial 
Supper or after the latter, we can not be too positive, 
but apparently it was the latter (Matt. 26:26); and 
was intended as an example in humility and a lesson to 
the apostles who seem still to have had a spirit of rivalry 
for preeminence. In any event the feet washing was 
not a part of the Memorial, nor do we understand it to 
have been enjoined as a custom amongst our Lord's 
disciples, though we have no quarrel with those who 
think differently and choose to wash each other's feet 
literally. To our understanding, the lesson was that our 
Lord's followers were not to shun any service, however 
menial, that would enable them to assist or comfort one 
another. Performing this service to-day is usually far 
from a convenience to those who practice it, whereas 
other comforting services are often neglected. 

"THIS IS MY BODY." 

Apparently it was just when the regular Jewish 
Passover Supper was ended that our Lord took some of 
the left-over unleavened bread, blessed it, broke it into 
pieces, and gave them to his disciples saying, "Take, 
eat; this is my body given for you; this do in remembrance 



of me."-Matt. 26:26; Mark 14:22; Luke 22:19. 

These words "This is my body" have caused endless 
disputes for centuries amongst the Lord's people, 
the basis for the dispute being the Roman Catholic 
doctrine of the Mass, which claims that under the 
priest's blessing the bread is changed into the actual 
flesh of Jesus, which the priest then adores and proceeds 
to bread (a fresh sacrifice) for the sins of those for whom 
the Mass is said. To have this procedure resemble that 
of our Lord, great stress is laid on the words, "This is 
my body," thereby to prove the body in the bread and 
the possibility of its sacrifice. But the whole matter is 
very quickly settled when we remember that our Lord 
had not yet died when he said these words. Hence he 
must have meant, "This bread represents my body," 
for any other interpretation or meaning would have been 
untrue,— for he was still flesh, his change not having yet 
come in any sense. 

Taking our Lord's words in their simple obvious 
sense, how beautiful is their lesson. Unleavened (pure) 
bread henceforth would at this Memorial represent our 
Lord, the bread from heaven, of which we may eat and 
have everlasting life. The next thought is that this 
heaven-supplied "bread" must be "broken" in order to 
be appropriated. And so we see that it was necessary 
not only for our Lord to come from heaven as the 
"bread;" but necessary also that he be broken in death 
—sacrificed for our sins— ere we could appropriate his 
merit and enjoy everlasting life. 

"THE BLOOD OF THE NEW COVENANT." 

The "fruit of the vine" was next introduced as a 
part of this Memorial of our Lord's loving sacrifice. 
He explained that it represented his blood— "The blood 
of the New Covenant, shed for many for the remission 
of sins." (Matt. 26:28.) What a reminder this is of the 
ransom-price necessary and paid on behalf of the sins of 
the world. The broken bread taught a part of the lesson, 
the "cup" taught the remainder of it. We not only 
need nourishment, strength, assistance to come back to 
God and his favor, but we need the precious blood— the 
life of our Lord as our redemption price to release us 
from the condemnation of Justice. 

The Lord's disciples must, by faith partake of (appropriate) 
both the "bread" and the "cup," or they cannot 
be one with him. More than this: the Apostle shows 
that there is another subsequent view of this Memorial. 
We who thus eat and drink— who thus partake of our 

R3526 : page 88 

Savior's merits— are reckoned in with him as his "members," 
as his "body," being broken; and our lives sacrificed 
in his service under his direction are counted as a 
part of his sacrifice. The Apostle's words are: The cup 



of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion 
[common-union] of the blood of Christ? The loaf which 
we break, is it not the common-union of the body of 
Christ? For we being many are one loaf, and one body, 
because we are all partakers of that one loaf [Christ]."— 
ICor. 10:16,17. 

Ah, yes! How deep are the Lord's lessons! and the 
deeper we look the more beauty we see, the eyes of our 
understanding opening more and more as we appreciate 
and heartily obey. "Let us keep the feast" in both 
senses, then: (1) Appropriating and feasting on the 
great work done for us by our Redeemer and the riches 
of grace granted us through him; and (2) Appreciating 
our privilege of joint-sacrifice with our Redeemer— laying 
down our lives in his service, for the brethren, etc., 
and thus "filling up that which is behind of the afflictions 
of Christ."-Col. 1:24. 

Left behind, not because our Lord could not suffer 
enough for all, nor because his sufferings were not 
sufficient for all, but because he wished to have us with 
him to share his nature and his glory, and only by suffering 
with him and as his members could we be allowed to 
share his glory, honor and immortality. 

"SHOW FORTH THE LORD'S DEATH." 

We exhort all the Lord's brethren everywhere to 
join us in observing the Lord's Memorial on its proper 
anniversary, as above stated. Gather with as many as 
profess faith and consecration— urge not others. Let 
us meet in twos and threes and larger groups as opportunity 
permits. Take a day or two off if necessary 
to assemble with brethren nearest you. Do not let 
monetary considerations decide everything. One spiritual 
feast with the Lord and those who celebrate his 
Memorial in sincerity is worth more to us than several 
meals of natural food. Man shall not live by earthly 
bread alone, but specially by the bread from heaven. 

Even the solitary ones who cannot possibly meet 
with even one more should celebrate. "Soda biscuits" 
are unleavened bread and will do very well— though if 
you live near a Hebrew family they will be pleased to 
sell you an unleavened loaf (cracker) for a cent or two. 
As for "fruit of the vine:" it is advisable to put away a 
bottle of grape juice every summer; but if you have 
none you can stem raisins and use the juice, which will 
be "fruit of the vine" as truly as any other. 

But do not let us allow preparations for the Memorial 
to so fill our thoughts that the real meaning of the 
emblems will be forgotten. On the contrary, let us give 
as much of the preceding and the succeeding days as 

R3527 : page 88 

possible to prayer, and to meditation on the stupendous 
events memorialized, and feed upon the Living Bread in 



our hearts with thankful joy. 

We again recommend that after the season of communion, 
while partaking of the symbolic bread and cup, 
the meetings all close as did the one our Lord conducted 
as an example. "They sang a hymn and went out." 
Let us do the same. Omitting our usual greetings, etc., 
let us keep our thoughts with the Lord in Gethsemane, 
at the High Priest's Court, before Pilate, before Herod, 
before Pilate again— beaten, condemned to death, carrying 
his cross, crucified— for our sins. These thoughts 
are sure to make us appreciate our Lord the more and 
to hate sin the more, and thus will help us to realize 
better "what manner of persons we ought to be in all 
holy conversation and godliness." 

We would like to have a postal card from each 
little company thus celebrating, stating the number 
present and participating. Please appoint some one, 
for what is everybody's business is not attended to 
properly. But have the appointment made a week or 
more before, so that it will not disturb the proper closing 
of the meeting. 



R3527 : page 88 

TRUE SHEPHERD, TRUE SHEEP, TRUE FOLD. 

-JOHN 10:7-18.-APRIL 2.- 

Golden Text:— "The Good Shepherd 
giveth his life for the sheep." 

THE PARABLE of the Good Shepherd opens with 
the first verse of John 10, and really concludes 
with the incidents of our last lesson, which showed 
the Scribes and Pharisees angry with the blind man 
who had been healed at the Pool of Siloam, who had 
confessed Jesus, and as a result had been cast out of 
the Synagogue. This parable seems to be a continuation 
of our Lord's remarks anent that incident. From 
this standpoint it seems to have had special force as 
teaching that whatever the Scribes and Pharisees had 
previously done or attempted to do in the way of shepherding 
the sheep they were merely hirelings, seeking 
their own advantage, honor of men, influence, wealth, 
etc., and willing to sacrifice the sheep to serve these 
ends. This was illustrated in the treatment of the man 
whose eyes had been opened: his interests as a sheep 
were entirely sacrificed to their personal ambitions and 
fear of the loss of influence through the growing popularity 
of Jesus. 

The lesson declares that the Lord is the "door" of 
the sheep— the door by which the true sheep entered 
the true fold. All who ever preceded Jesus, claiming 
to be the shepherds of the sheep, were deceivers, (thieves 



and robbers). The word here rendered thieves contains 
the thought of craftiness, embezzlement, while the word 
robbers contains the thought of open violence, free-booting. 
In combining these two words our Lord represents 
the foes of the flock, some of them being crafty, 
"wolves in sheep's clothing," and some of them open, 
bold, aggressive. The Adversary's attacks have always 

R3527 : page 89 

been along both lines, and the sheep still need to be 
on guard against both classes of deceivers, but chiefly 
against the deceitful foes who cloak their ambitious 
designs under the ministerial garb, affecting to be caretakers 
of the flock, while in reality their conduct shows 
that self interest controls them. 

The late Mr. Ruskin in his book, "Sesame and 
Lilies," quotes from Milton's writings a characterization 
of these false spiritual shepherds, as follows: 

"Blind mouths: that scarce themselves know how to hold 
A sheep hook, or have learned aught else, the least 
That to the faithful herdsman's art belongs! 



"The hungry sheep look up and are not fed, 

But, swollen with the wind and the rank mist they draw, 

Rot inwardly, and foul contagion spread; 

Besides what the grim wolf with privy paw 

Daily devours apace and nothing said." 

Ruskin's comment is, "These two mono-syllables 
['blind mouths'] express the precisely accurate contraries 
of right character in the two great offices of the Church 
—those of Bishop and Pastor. A Bishop means a person 
who sees. A Pastor means one who feeds. The 
most unbishoply character a man can have is, therefore, 
to be blind. The most unpastorly is, instead of 
feeding, to want to be fed— to be a mouth." 

"I AM THE GOOD SHEPHERD." 

The pretended Shepherd, self-seeking, is called a 
thief because he not only steals or misappropriates the 
title of Shepherd or Pastor, but in his self-seeking greed 
is willing to risk the destruction of the spiritual life of 
the sheep that the sectarian lines may be kept up, that 
his own personal interests may be served. We see this 
illustrated to-day. How many of the Protestant Shepherds 
of the Lord's flock in all denominations seem 
willing to misrepresent the harvest message, and everybody 
and everything connected therewith, that thereby 
they may preserve their hold upon the sheep, maintain 
their standing and influence in the denomination, and 
withal get goodly clippings of the golden fleece of the 



flock. 

The Good Shepherd is the reverse of all this— his entire 
thought is for the sheep, their welfare. Our Lord 
himself was the true Shepherd, and he demonstrated 
his devotion to his office by the sacrifice of everything, 
even life itself, on behalf of the sheep. The Lord would 
have his true sheep to recognize the distinction between 
the true and the false shepherds, and he would have 
his sheep of to-day similarly recognize his appointees, 
representatives, in the flock by the same signs. Those 
elders in the Church to-day who manifest the blind-mouth 
disposition should be avoided, should not be encouraged, 
should be reproved; while those whose loyalty 
to the Lord and the flock is continually manifested 
should be recognized, and, because of their likeness to 
the true Shepherd, they should be loved "for their works' 
sake" as well as for their intellectual worth. The self-sacrificing 
spirit, blended with humility, should be recognized 
by all of the sheep as the spirit of the true 
Shepherd, and from such alone should be expected the 
leading which the Good Shepherd promised to the flock 
throughout this Gospel age. 

Our Lord defended the interests of the sheep against 
the false spirits and the wolves of his day, and it cost 
him his life. And so the faithful followers of the Lord 
throughout this Gospel age have been obliged either to 
fight with the wolves in the sheep's clothing, and thus 
incur their hatred, malice and opposition, in synods, 
presbyteries, counsels, etc., or else ignominiously flee before 
them by silence and allowing the sheep to be starved 
and misled. Our Lord could have taken this course: 
he could have refrained from antagonizing the Scribes 
and Pharisees and chief priests: he could have said, "Why 
should I expose myself to opprobrium and persecution 
and all manner of reproach and death by opposing these 
blind leaders of the blind?" For him to have done so 
would have been for him to have fled responsibility and 
duty. His love for the sheep would not permit this, and 
his faithfulness demonstrated him the true Shepherd of 
the flock. In this he made it plain that he was not a 
"hireling," not merely serving for the sake of the golden 
fleece, but out of a true heart with true love for the 
sheep. 

The true Shepherd thus commends himself to all 
who are truly sheep, and such admire this spirit of 
their Master wherever they find it. That is to say, 
whoever are the true sheep will love and appreciate 
such a spirit and none other, and will thus differentiate 
themselves from those who are merely the followers of 
men, partisans, sectarians. The Lord knoweth them 
that are his, and they know him. The Lord appreciates 
those who thus recognize principle, and that class 
recognize, know, the Lord more and more intimately 
day by day, and find their love and devotion to him 
continually increasing. Our Lord's words on this matter 
are more clearly presented in the revised version, 



namely, "I know mine own and mine own know me, 
even as the Father knoweth me and I know the Father." 
This intimacy of acquaintance, this fellowship divine, 
is something which cannot be explained to others, but 
which is certainly appreciated by all the true sheep who 
know the true Shepherd, and who have been, under his 
guiding care, led to the green pastures and still waters 
and also into the fold for safety. 

OTHER SHEEP OF ANOTHER FLOCK. 

When the Lord said, "Other sheep I have which 

R3527 : page 90 

are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they 
shall hear my voice; and they shall become one flock 
and one Shepherd," he was voicing the same truth 
which was afterward, under the guidance of the holy 
Spirit, elaborated by the Apostle Paul, saying that the 
heavenly Father hath purposed himself that in the dispensation 
of the fullness of times he might gather together 
in one all things in Christ— the things in the 
heavens and the things upon the earth.— Eph. 1:10. 

The flock which the Lord was gathering to himself 
at the time of this parable was not natural Israel, but 
spiritual Israel. Natural Israel had existed under Moses 
and the Law for centuries, but the Law made nothing 
perfect and could not give them the liberty and blessing 
requisite to their attaining everlasting life. They 
were "shut up" under the Law Covenant, as the Apostle 
Paul expressed it. Various pretenders came claiming 
that they were proper shepherds of the sheep and able 
to lead them to the necessary nutriment, the green pastures 
and the still waters of truth, but they were all 

R3528 : page 90 

unfaithful, thieves and robbers, who sought their personal 
honor and social advantage at the expense of the 
sheep. Our Lord became the "door" (vs. 7,9) of the 
sheepfold; those who accepted him were the true flock, 
he knew them and they knew him, and heard his voice 
and followed him. They were a small flock indeed compared 
with the large nominal Jewish system, the majority 
of whom followed the false teachers because they 
did not have the true spirit of the sheep. 

All "Israelites indeed" heard and recognized the 
voice of the true Shepherd and became his followers. 
Our Lord as the "Door" gave these true sheep that 
access to the blessings and mercies of this Gospel age 
in the fullest sense which began at Pentecost and will 
not be finished until all the true sheep shall have heard 
the Shepherd's voice and shall have entered into his 
rest and have been fed and refreshed by following him. 
Jesus as the "Door" represents all the privileges and 



blessings of the true sheep. By him we enter into rest 
in the fold or resting place provided for the true sheep 
—the rest of faith. By him also we may go out to enjoy 
the liberties and refreshment to which as our Shepherd 
he leads his flock. We go in and out continually, enjoying 
the liberties and privileges secured to us by our 
Shepherd. We thus enjoy "the liberty wherewith 
Christ has made us free."— Gal. 5:1. 

This rest and liberty we obtain, first, through our 
justification by our Lord's sacrifice of himself; and, secondly, 
through our consecration as his sheep and our 
adoption through the holy Spirit, which brings us under 
his care and feeding. 

"FELLOW -HEIRS OF THE SAME PROMISE." 

We who are not Jews by nature, but Gentiles, when 
we come into Christ are members of this same flock. 
This the Apostle distinctly states, declaring that God 
hath broken down the middle wall of partition to make 
of the twain one; wherefore we are no longer aliens, 
strangers, foreigners, but are brought nigh, and are permitted 
to enjoy all the privileges and blessings accorded 
to any by the great Shepherd. We were not the Lord's 
sheep in any sense of the word before, but foreigners, 
strangers, aliens. Hence the view that some have taken 
that we who are of the Gentiles or "other sheep" mentioned 
are now being brought into the one fold is not 
correct. We were not the Lord's sheep at all at the 
time of this parable. 

The Apostle in Romans 11 pictures our relationship 
to natural Israel. He represents the Jewish people as 
the olive tree, the outgrowth of the fat root of the Abrahamic 
promise, the Oath-Bound Covenant, and shows 
that the branches or people of that nation were broken 
off from the relationship of the root of promise except 
the few who properly received the Lord Jesus. He then 
points out that the Gentiles are being engrafted instead 
of these broken off branches. Thus the Jewish flock 
as it previously existed was not accepted of the Lord 
but merely those who heard the good Shepherd's voice, 
and with these we, who are Gentiles, are made fellow-heirs, 
members of the one body, the one flock. This 
same thought is held before us in Revelation 7 where 
our Lord pictures the entire elect Church as 144,000, 
12,000 from each tribe. God's election was made in 
respect to the twelve tribes of Israel; and, when many 
of all these tribes were found unworthy of the highest 
honor and rejected, the elect number in each tribe was 
filled up from believing Gentiles. We may not know 
to which of these tribes we have been accredited, even 
as we do not know which crown has been apportioned 
to us; but we do know that all of the elect of God, the 
overcomers, are thus reckoned of him as Israelites indeed 
in whom is no guile, and these shall be heirs with 
the Lord in the Kingdom. 



Evidently these "other sheep" mentioned in this 
parable are those who will become the Lord's sheep 
after the present "little flock" shall have been completed. 
The entire Millennial age will be required for 
the finding of the Lord's true sheep amongst the world 
of mankind, including those Israelites who, because 
blinded by sin and error, were unworthy to be sheep 
of the present flock and were turned aside and blinded, 
but whose blindness shall be put away in the Lord's 
due time. 

The Lord refers to this other flock of sheep, and 
explicitly tells us about the gathering of those sheep 
to his favor under him as the great Shepherd. He definitely 
fixes the time, and shows that the parable of the 
sheep and goats belongs not to the present age but to 
the Millennial age by the declaration with which it 
opens, namely, "When the Son of man shall come in 
his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then shall 
he sit upon the throne of his glory: and before him shall 
be gathered all nations, and he shall separate them from 
one another, as a shepherd divideth the sheep from the 
goats. "--Matt. 25:31,32. 

It will require all of that Millennial day, that thousand 
years, to demonstrate who amongst the world of 
mankind desire to be the Lord's sheep, to hear the voice 
of the good Shepherd and follow him in the paths of 

R3528 : page 91 

righteousness and truth and to the attainment ultimately 

of life everlasting. Others who will not hear 

him shall be cut off from amongst the people— destroyed 

in the Second Death. (Acts 3:23.) These are the goat 

class of the parable, whose destruction is pictured elsewhere 

in the lake of fire and brimstone, which is explained 

to mean, the "Second Death."— Rev. 20:14. 

At the close of the Millennial age all of the sheep 
of that age will be received into full favor with the 
Lord, and will be brethren to all who are the Lord's on 
any plane of existence. They will be brethren to the 
Church which is now being selected, the "elect," who 
will sit with the Lord in his throne during the Millennial 
age and be associated in the work of judging both the 
sheep and the goats (1 Cor. 6:2), and they will be brethren 
also of all the angelic hosts. When all things in 
heaven and in earth are brought fully into subjection 
to our great Shepherd, in that sense of the word all 
will be his sheep on whatever plane of existence they 
may be— the "Church" partakers of the divine nature, 
the angelic hosts, restored and perfected men. 

"THEREFORE DOTH MY FATHER LOVE ME, BECAUSE I LAY 
DOWN MY LIFE THAT I MAY 
RECEIVE IT AGAIN." 

The special love of the Father for the Son above 



all others is here referred to. The basis of that special 
love was the Son's complete trust in the Father and 
thorough harmony with and obedience to the divine 
will. We can see at a glance how such a noble, faithful 
character would be appreciated by the Father. Our 
Lord had always been obedient to the Father, but he 
learned the meaning of obedience, he learned to appreciate 
how much obedience might cost by the things 
which he suffered— his self-denial, humiliation, death. 
No wonder all noble hearts love this noble Shepherd, 
and what wonder that we who are his sheep, and who 
realize so great a blessing and advantage through his 
sacrifice for us, should love him in return. 

No wonder, as the Apostle says, that we find such 
a love constraining our hearts to a responsive love. 
The Apostle exhorts us that we should have this same 
mind that was in Christ Jesus— not only the elders of 
the Church, who as under-shepherds, pastors, seek to 
safeguard the interests of the flock in every way, but 
all of the Church, seeking and attaining more and more 
of a likeness to the great Shepherd— have more and 
more of his spirit. The Apostle urges such, saying, 
"We ought also to lay down our lives for the brethren." 
This spirit should be manifested in all of the Lord's 
sheep, and should be considered as a prerequisite to 
recognition as one of the under shepherds. 

Our Lord's commission was not merely to lay down 
his life, but also to receive it again. Evidently he had 
the promise of the Father of a resurrection from the 
dead. He intimates this in his prayer, "Father glorify 
thou me with the glory I had with thee before the 
world was." Doubtless the Master had been promised 
some still higher glory and honor, but he waived 
all reward and was content that he should please the 
Father and accomplish his purposes for mankind. The 
Father was not content to merely restore him to his previous 
high position of the past, but made him a partaker 
of the divine nature in the fullest and most absolute 
sense. The same promise, through our Lord, is open 
to us if we are faithful— "if we suffer with him we shall 
also reign with him," sharing his "glory, honor and immortality" 
—the divine nature.— 2 Pet. 1:4. 

Our Lord wished it to be understood that his life, 
which would shortly be given was voluntarily submitted 
on his part. It was necessary that his disciples 
should know this, not merely that they might esteem 
their Lord more highly, but especially that they might 
realize him as the Redeemer whose voluntary sacrifice 
for our sins redeemed Father Adam and his entire race. 
To have confidence in the result they must have confidence 
in his resurrection— that the Father had so pleased 
and had given his sanction or authority or power to 
this end. Our Lord acknowledged that all the authority, 
all the power in connection with his resuscitation 
was of the Father. He was trusting implicitly to the 
Father, and so doing was able to lay down even life 



itself on behalf of the flock. The same will be true of 
all who would walk in his steps. In order to be faithful 
in the laying down of our lives, we must have faith 
in the Father and in the great plan of salvation which 
hinges upon the sacrifice of our Lord. With this matter 
clearly before our minds we may have grace and strength 
for every time of need. 



R3529 : page 91 

"LAZARUS, COME FORTH." 

--JOHN 1 1:32-45. -APRIL 9.- 

Golden Text:— "Jesus said unto her, I am the 
resurrection and the life."— John 11:25. 

IT has been supposed by some that the rich young 

ruler who came to Jesus for advice and subsequently 

went away very sorrowful was his friend Lazarus, 

who, with his sisters Martha and Mary, resided at Bethany, 

near Jerusalem, and at whose home our Lord was frequently 

entertained— a welcome guest. Lazarus was 

taken sick suddenly, probably with one of the fevers 

common to that part of the country, similar to the one 

from which our Lord recovered Peter's wife's mother. 

The illness developed very rapidly, and about the time 

the messenger from Bethany reached the Lord beyond 

Jordan, a distance of only about thirty miles, Lazarus 

had died. Even then our Lord made no haste to reach 

Bethany, but on the contrary tarried two days. According 

to his own statement, this matter of Lazarus' death 

was a part of the divine program, as was also his subsequent 

awakening from the tomb. 

The message sent to Jesus was, "He whom thou 
lovest is sick." It was not a prayer that he should come 
to his relief nor that he would exercise power for his recovery; 
it was merely a statement of the facts, submitting 
the whole matter to the Lord. This message alone 

R3529 : page 92 

tells us of a deep work of grace in the hearts of the family 
of Bethany— that their intercourse with the Lord had 
been profitable, that they had learned of him. We commend 
the words of their message to all spiritual Israelites 
as the proper form for bringing before the Lord's attention 
our various burdens and troubles. We are not 
wise enough to direct the Lord as to what should be 
done in respect to our affairs. If we have committed our 
all to him, a proper faith bids us trust him, bids us rely 
upon the divine wisdom and love and power, which 
promises to make all things work together for good to 
us— better than we could ask for. It was quite sufficient 



to say, 

"He whom thou lo vest is sick." 

Let the Lord do as seems best to him. And so it is 
quite sufficient in respect to our dear ones who are sick, 
to comfort our hearts by going to the Lord in prayer and 
making mention of the facts, although we are sure that 
he knows them. Our burdens should be left at the Lord's 
feet and our faith should firmly trust him, come what 
may, and accept the results as of divine providence— 
meantime, of course, doing all that we know how to do 
reasonably and properly in the aid of the ailing ones or 
to rectify the troubles, just as we may be sure that the 
sorrowing sisters, while sending this message to the Lord, 
neglected not to do everything in their power for the 
relief of their brother from his illness, for the assuaging 
of his pain. 

It speaks volumes for the character of Lazarus as 
a man that he had the love of the Lord Jesus. We remember 
that in the record concerning the rich young 
ruler it is written that after he had related to the Lord 
that he had at least outwardly kept all the commandments 
from his youth, Jesus beholding him, loved him— 
even though he was not in the condition of heart to make 
a full consecration and thus to become a true disciple. 
So we are bound to love all in whom we see the beauties 
of a noble character, whether they be of the consecrated 
ones or not— but our love and esteem for them of course 
increases as we see them recognizing their "reasonable 
service" and presenting their bodies living sacrifices to 
him who redeemed us. 

Let us all more and more cultivate such elements of 
character as will make us lovely and lovable in the estimation 
not only of the brotherhood, who overlook our 
imperfections and cover them with the robe of Christ's 
righteousness, but also in the estimation of the world, 
that they may behold our good characters and glorify 
our Father in heaven on our behalf. It has been inferred 
that later on Lazarus did become a fully consecrated 
follower of the Lord. 

"OUR FRIEND LAZARUS SLEEPETH." 

Although the messenger brought word that Lazarus 
was sick, our Lord reported the matter to his disciples 
according to the facts of the case, for Lazarus had already 
died. He said, "Our friend Lazarus sleepeth." The disciples 
did not at first catch the import of these words, 
and thought that he referred to the taking of rest in 
sleep; and then, coming down to their comprehension, 
Jesus said to them plainly, "Lazarus is dead." Here we 
have the two standpoints of viewing death: actually, 
"plainly," death is the complete cessation or discontinuance 
of life, of being, and this discontinuance would 
have been eternal death, eternal non-existence for the 
whole human family, had it not been for the divine 
favor which provided the ransom-price for Adam, and 



incidentally for all of his race, in Christ Jesus our Lord. 

In view of this purpose on God's part to ultimately 
call forth the dead from the tomb, he uniformly mentions 
the subject of death to his people as a sleep— a cessation 
of consciousness, which, however, would not be eternal 
but from which they would recover consciousness and 
being in the glorious resurrection morning which the 
Father had purposed in himself from the beginning. 
As many as exercised full faith and confidence in the 
resuscitation promised, spoke from the Lord's standpoint, 
and hence throughout the Scriptures we find death 
repeatedly mentioned as a sleep— Abraham slept with 
his fathers, so did all the prophets and kings of Israel, 
that nation having much advantage every way over 
other nations in that the Lord had revealed to them 
through the covenant promises and prophecies that, 
although weeping endure for a night, joy cometh in the 
morning. 

Tarrying two days, in order that the miracle might 
be more pronounced, our Lord and the apostles spent 
portions of two more days in reaching Bethany. Martha 
learning of his coming, went down the road to meet him 
in advance. While greeting him, the burden of her 
salutation indicated a measure of disappointment. She 
was still sorrowing for the loss of her brother, and her 
heart was pained additionally with the thought that the 
Lord might have prevented this calamity, yet had not 
done so. She said, "Lord, if thou hadst been here my 
brother would not have died." How apt we all are, 
while laboring under the weight of sorrow, disappointment 
and trial, to look to the Lord and wonder why his 
omnipotent power does not intervene on our behalf to 
save us from some of the ordinary experiences common to 
the world,— feeling that because we are his special 
friends we should have had special consideration. 

"BE NOT FAITHLESS, BUT BELIEVE." 

Let us learn a lesson on this point from the experience 
of Martha and Mary. Let us learn to trust the 
Lord even where we cannot trace his providences in all 
of our affairs. Let us remember the love divine which 
already has done so much for us, redeeming us and inducting 
us into the divine favor, and providing for us 
exceeding great and precious promises respecting the 
things unseen as yet. "Only believe," was the keynote 
of our Lord's reply to Martha. And so to each of us in 
the many experiences which affect our interests, we must 
learn the lesson of faith, confidence in the Lord's wisdom, 
love and power. The lesson eventually learned by 
Martha and Mary more than compensated them for all 
their tribulation, and so it will be with us if we will 
allow our faith to firmly trust him. In the end we shall 
be stronger in our faith, closer to the Lord, and full of 
appreciation of his favors. 

In answer to Martha's expression of confidence in 



R3529 : page 93 

our Lord's power to have preserved her brother from 
the tomb, our Lord suggested the great consolation he 
had to offer, not only to the sorrowing sisters, but to 
the whole world of mankind, namely, that the divine 
power within him was not only such as could keep the 
sick from dying and heal them, but a power of resurrection 
—a power to bring forth from the tomb and, more 
than that, a power to raise up out of all the imperfections 
of the fallen condition, up, up, up, to the original 
perfection, the fullness of life enjoyed before the curse 
of death came upon our race. 

All this is in the words, "I am the resurrection and 
the life," the Golden Text of our lesson. These are the 
great lessons for all of the Lord's people to learn: (1) 
That death is a just penalty because of imperfection, 
(2) that God has had mercy upon us as a race, and has 
provided a ransom; (3) that the Ransomer is the divinely 
appointed and commissioned and empowered one who, 
by and by, shall, in God's due time, bid all in the tomb 
come forth, and he will, then, additionally grant an 
opportunity to all to escape entirely from all the weaknesses 
and blemishes of the fall, and eventually, if they 
will obey him, secure the perfection of life which he 
purposed for all at the sacrifice of his own life. 

As faith is able to recognize Jesus as the Redeemer 
whose sacrifice is sufficient for the satisfaction of Justice 
—as faith discerns that this ransom-sacrifice was made 
to the intent that the blessing of the Lord might reach 
every individual of our race,— as faith is able to look 
forward to the second coming of this Redeemer as the 
Life-Giver to his people, in that proportion faith is able 
to rejoice and to permit even in the presence of sorrow, 
sighing, tears and dying, the looking forward beyond the 
tomb to the glorious morning of the resurrection. In 
proportion as faith can lay hold of the precious promises 
of God's Word, it is able under the most trying conditions 
to sorrow, not as others who have no hope, but it 
is able to believe that as Jesus died and rose again as 
our dear Redeemer, so also all who sleep in Jesus, the 
world of mankind, will God bring from the dead through 
or by him.— 1 Thess. 4:14. 

It has been assumed that there was a special heart-fellowship 
between our Lord and Mary, and it is in full 
harmony with this thought that we find the latter remaining 
at home until she received the message that the 
Lord had inquired for her. Our lesson opens with her 
response: she came to the Lord and fell at his feet, her 

R3530 : page 93 

burdened heart giving utterance to the same expression 
that Martha had used, "Lord, if thou hadst been here 
my brother would not have died." If the words contained 



a measure of chiding or suggestion of wounded 
hopes, it was a very delicate one. 

MARY, WHO "CHOSE THAT GOOD PART." 

Our Lord gave no suggestions of the kind usually 
offered in consolation to the mourner in our day. He 
said not, Thy brother is much better off than he was 
before; he is in heaven amongst the holy angels, etc. 
Nothing of the kind. Why? Because this would not 
have been the truth, and our Lord's message must be 
strictly true, and if error had even comforted more than 
truth he dare not tell the untruth. And so it is with all 
who are his followers— they must tell the good tidings 
of Jesus and the resurrection, and must do nothing to 
corroborate the false theories that have been received 
from heathendom to the effect that the dead are not 
dead, that they are not asleep— to the effect that at the 
moment of dying they are more awake, more alive and 
more intelligent than ever they were before. No! 
Those who are of the Truth must speak the truth and 
nothing else; they must tell plainly, "There is no work, 
nor knowledge, nor device, nor wisdom, in the grave 
whither thou goest." (Eccl. 9:10.) They must point as 
the only hope of a future life to Jesus, the Redeemer, 
and to the resurrection power by which he will ultimately 
deliver from the tomb all whose ransom price he paid in 
the sacrifice of himself. 

FULL OF SYMPATHY, "JESUS WEPT." 

Travelers in the East relate that the mourning 
practices for the dead are most distressing: 

"At the very moment of death, a wild, piercing 
shriek, high and prolonged, a quavering wail announced 
the fact. This cry is taken up and repeated by the friends 
of the family near and afar. Every sympathizing woman 
friend hastens to share the mourning, and announces 
her approach by the conventional shriek and then adds 
her voice to the shrieking chorus. 

"Oriental wailings before the funeral include a 
calling of the dead by name: 'O, my father! O, my glory! 
O, my strength!' as David wailed over his son, 'O, my 
son Absolom! My son, my son, Absolom!' The mourning 
continues violently for three days, and then for 
four more feastings and wailings are the prominent 
characteristics." 

While a certain amount of this emotion was of a 
perfunctory kind, but, nevertheless, had in it the element 
of sympathy for the bereaved, it illustrated in a most 
forceful manner what the Apostle expressed, saying, 
"The whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain 
together, waiting." 

Such was the scene upon which our Lord entered on 
reaching the house of mourning on the fourth day. The 
grief of the sisters broke forth afresh in the Lord's 



presence as they thought of what might have been if 
the Lord had been there before their brother died. 
Likewise we are all more or less inclined to think of what 
might have been if something had been different— apt to 
forget that our Lord and Master has full charge of all 
of our affairs if we are truly, consecratedly his, and that 
no "if" of chance has to do with the little flock. 

When Jesus looked upon the scene of sorrow, we 
may well suppose that it brought vividly before his mind 
the abject sorrow and despair of the groaning creation— 
"Jesus wept." Indeed we may suppose that, being perfect, 
all the circumstances and conditions of fallen 
humanity would be much more weighty and impressive 
upon the Lord than upon those whose minds were less 
acute to the situation. We are glad of those words which 
constitute the shortest verse in all the Bible— "Jesus 
wept." They tell us as no elaboration could have told of 
the sympathies of our Master's heart; they tell us that 

R3530 : page 94 

we have an High-Priest who can be touched, who was 
touched, who is touched still with a feeling of our infirmities, 
a sympathetic feeling. How unlike all the great 
ones of this world, whose greatness so often is represented 
in their coldness, stoicism, and really represents 
their lovelessness, their lack of sympathy. The Lord 
presented to us in the Scriptures is the only great and 
sympathetic Immanuel known to the world— "To us he 
is precious." 

It is worthy notice, however, that the Greek word 
translated wept, when referring to our Lord, is not the 
same word used in respect to the weeping of the sorrowing 
sisters and the Jewish friends. Theirs was the weeping 
of wailing or emotion, our Lord's was the silent tear 
of sympathy. The friends of the sisters, who were not 
yet believers in Jesus' Messiahship, took note of his tears 
and commented, "Behold how he loved him," and these 
queried why he had not in some manner interfered to 
save him from dying. 

The tear of sympathy is not to be understood as a 
sign of weakness. Our Master's tears proved this, and 
additionally we have his exhortation that we should be 
moved with a sympathy for others in their sorrows as 
well as in their joys. He himself has bidden us weep with 
those who weep and rejoice with those who rejoice. 
The cold, stoical hearts which neither weep nor rejoice 
are not after the fashion of our great Pattern. Let us 
be more and more like to him and permit our sympathies 
to have some reasonable measure of expression. Nevertheless 
let us remember that great wailing and weeping 
are not appropriate to us, for, as the Apostle says, "We 
sorrow not as others who have no hope;" our blessed 
hope, confidence and trust moderate our expressions of 
both earthly sorrows and joys as well. 



"TAKE YE AWAY THE STONE." 

The tomb 
of Lazarus 
we are told, 
was a cave, 
the doorway 
of which was 
closed by a 
large stone 
which our 
Lord directed 
should be removed. 
In 

answer to his 

call Lazarus came forth, still wrapped in the grave clothes 
or the winding sheet customary at that time. He was 
in a measure bound, although loosely— what we would 
call swathed. Our Lord directed that assistance be 
rendered for the setting of him free. This stupendous 
miracle, which testified to our Lord Jesus as the special 
messenger and representative of the heavenly Father 
and authorized to use divine power, was not one whit 
abated but rather intensified by the fact that he permitted 
those about him to do as much as was in their power 
in connection with the miracle— first the rolling away 
of the stone and subsequently the loosing of the winding 
sheet. Undoubtedly the same power that could restore 
the dead to life could much more easily roll away the 
stone and could subsequently have loosed the clothing. 

One lesson to us in the matter is that we should 
not call upon nor expect divine interposition in matters 
which we are competent to control. It is ours to do 
whatever is in our power for our reasonable protection 
from sickness and poverty and accident. It is ours also 
to do everything in our power toward recovery from any 
of these, but it is also for us to look to and to trust the 
Lord in connection with all of our experiences, and to 
realize that he is able to make all things work together 
for our welfare; that with him our extremity becomes 
the Lord's opportunity, as his people have often proven 
by experience. Furthermore, true faith is inculcated 
and developed along these lines— a faith that is not 
merely credulity. 

"IN ALL THY WAYS ACKNOWLEDGE HIM." 

Before performing the miracle our Lord lifted his 
eyes to heaven in acknowledgment of the Father's 
power and that he was acting as the Father's agent and 
representative. What a manifestation we have in this 
of true humility. It was so in all of our Lord's utterances; 
he freely acknowledged that he had come to do 
the Father's will and not his own; that the Father was 
above all, and that what he did in the way of wonderful 
works was but the Father's power. His prayer was in 



the nature of a conversation as between a Son and his 
Father, "I know that thou hearest me always; but for 
the sake of them which stand by, I said it." 

From this we may assume that it would have been 
entirely consistent on our Lord's part to have proceeded 
to speak as the Father's representative without offering 
prayer, but that he offered his petition in acknowledgment 
of the Father's power for the sake of the hearers 
that they might know that he did nothing of himself, 
that he claimed nothing of himself. We, his disciples, 
have in this a beautiful example of what should be our 
course on every occasion. In all our ways we should 
acknowledge the Lord— not only whether we eat or 
drink or whatsoever we do, to do it to the Lord's glory, 
and in a manner pleasing to him, but we should be careful 
to glorify him, to let it be known that we claim nothing 
of ourselves either as to wisdom or ability in the expounding 
of the divine plan. Our conduct should be simple, 
unassuming, devoid of boastfulness, in everything manifesting 
humility of heart and simplicity. 

"Rather be nothing, nothing— 

To him let their voices be raised; 
He is the fountain of blessing, 

Yes, worthy is he to be praised." 

As might have been expected, this wonderful 
miracle, the revival of a man dead more than three days, 
created no little stir. No wonder that we read that many 
of the Jews seeing these things believed. It would be 
wonderful indeed that they could disbelieve under such 
conditions. We remember, too, that subsequently the 
Jews sought the more to take the life of Jesus because of 
the fame of this miracle. Verily, the truth of God is 
either a savor of life unto life or of death unto death. 

R3531 : page 95 

All we know of divine power and goodness either affects 
us favorably or unfavorably, to draw us nearer to the 
Lord or to separate us the more from him if we are not 
at heart disposed for righteousness but are controlled 
by envious or wicked motives. 

"ALL THAT ARE IN THEIR GRAVES SHALL COME FORTH.' 

Lazarus was not resurrected— he was merely awakened 
from the sleep of death— resurrection would signify 
the complete raising up out of sin and death conditions, 
to perfection and life conditions. The calling forth of 
Lazarus, therefore, is a good picture of what may be 
expected early in the Millennial reign, after the living 
nations shall have been to some extent enlightened and 
brought under the influence of the heavenly Kingdom. 
Then all that are in their graves, order by order, class 
by class, generation by generation, will come forth as 



Lazarus did to a measure of health and a measure of 
strength, but not to perfection of being. Their cases, 
however, will be different from his, in that his release 
from death was merely a temporary one: later on he died 
again. Those in the Millennial age, on the contrary, 
who will come forth under the new conditions of that 
Millennial Kingdom, need never die again, but instead, 
by hearing the voice of the Son of Man, by obeying the 
same, going onward step by step, they shall emerge 
gradually from all the weight of the curse, from all the 
weaknesses and imperfections of the present dying condition, 
to the full life and perfection and joy of the life-eternal 
condition, at the close of the Millennial age. 

Theirs will be the resurrection by judgments, by 
disciplines, by corrections in righteousness— by their 
gradual attainment under the systems of rewards and 
punishments then in vogue— to all the glorious perfections 
of human nature, as our Lord declared, "Though 
dead, yet shall they live." This will include not only the 
dead in the tombs, but also the other dead who buried 
their dead— those who are now nine-tenths dead and 
under sentence of death, but who, contrasting themselves 
with those in the tomb, speak of themselves as 
alive. Then, whosoever living shall be obedient to the 
Lord at heart shall never die, but will be granted an 
entrance to the eternal conditions beyond the Millennial 
age, approved by the Father as true sheep.— 
Matt. 25:34. 

LAZARUS NOT IN HEAVEN. 

It would be preposterous to suppose that Lazarus 
was in heaven for four days and that the Lord in mercy 
and compassion called him away from blessed scenes 
there. The tears of Jesus and his failure to offer any such 
explanation of death, no less than his awaking of his 
friend Lazarus as a mark of his sympathy and love, all 
forbid the thought that Lazarus had been in heaven. 
Besides this, we have the Lord's positive declaration that 
"no man has ascended up to heaven." (John 3:13.) 
Again the uniform testimony of Scripture is that death 
is death, and further our Lord's declaration is that when 
Lazarus was dead he was asleep. In his sleep of death 
the four days were but as a moment; his awaking thought 
was next to the one he had when he fell asleep in death. 

"GREATER THINGS THAN THESE SHALL YE DO." 

Stupendous as this miracle was, we ourselves see 
in some respects still greater miracles. Many of the 
Lord's people have seen in themselves and in each other 
great transformations spoken of in Scripture as passing 
from death unto life. At our recent New York Convention 
one person in attendance spoke to the Editor after 
the meeting about consecration, and remarked that for 
some years she had been an infidel, estranged from the 



Lord and his book by her acquaintance with some whose 
conduct in life caused her to lose all faith in Christianity. 
She explained that the remarkable conversion of her 
sister-in-law by the Truth had drawn her attention to it. 
She added, "I never saw so great a change in any human 
being in my life, nor did I suppose such a change possible. 
It led me to believe there was a power in Christianity, 
and I began to investigate the religious teachings set 
forth in MILLENNIAL DAWN which had so powerfully 
affected my sister-in-law. I am convinced of its truth, 
and am considering the subject of consecration, and trust 
that you will pray for me." 

"So let our lives and tongues express 
The glorious Gospel we profess; 
So let thy glories in us shine, 
That all may know that we are thine." 



R3531 : page 95 
READINGS FROM THE SWEDISH REVISED BIBLE. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Herewith I hand you 
some interesting readings from the Revised Swedish 
Bible. Yours, KIHLGREN. 

Isa. 21:12. "The watchman answereth: Morning 
has come, and still it is night. If ye will ask more, 
[than the question in verse 1 1] ye may ask; come back 
again" [for more information?]. 

Isa. 28:8-13. "For all tables are full of nauseating 
vomits, not a clean spot is found. Who then [asks the 
class mentioned in verse 7?] is it he desires to learn understanding 
and who can he make to give attention to his 
preaching?— Are we then recently weaned from the 
mother's milk, recently taken from the mother's breast? 
For it is nagging upon nagging, nagging upon nagging, 
prating upon prating, prating upon prating, a little here, 
a little there [as if this class should say: 'What does he 
take us for?— we are no babies either; it was not yesterday 
we discarded the old-fashioned theory of the fall 
and the redemption of man, etc.,— we are full-grown 
mature Higher Critics; and yet there are a few old fogies 
who never let us alone, but are nagging at us ceaselessly, 
giving out tracts, papers and books, which represent us 
before the public as deceivers,' etc.] Well, yes, through 
stammering lips and in a strange language shall he 
speak to this people, he who nevertheless has said unto 
them: 'Here is the place of rest, let the weary get rest; 
here is the place where refreshment is given,' but such 
they would not hear. And thus the Lord's Word shall 
be for them, 'nagging upon nagging, nagging upon nagging, 
prating upon prating, prating upon prating, a 
little here, a little there, so that they, as they walk on, fall 
backward and are crushed, become ensnared and captured." 



[Refusing to accept God's grand plan for salvation, 
which would give them rest, they are annoyed by 
those who are pointing out its beauty, which to them is 
merely prating, and the result is that they fall completely 
into the snares of the adversary]. 

The context seems to favor the thought brought out 
in this rendering, though differing from the English 
rendering. 



page 97 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVI. APRIL 1, 1905. No. 7 



CONTENTS. 

The Heavens Rolling Together 99 

Trades Unions and Religious Divisions 100 

The Pope's Expression on the Subject 100 

"Kaiser and Pope" 101 

A Catholic Critic's View 102 

Perfume Very Precious 103 

Jesus in Social Life 103 

"She Hath Done What She Could" 104 

Honor to Members— Honor to Head 105 

Let Us Do It Now 106 

Humility and Meekness— Bible Study for April 107 

"Hosanna in the Highest" 108 

The Time of Their Visitation 109 

Spiritual Israel's Antitype 110 

Terms of Discipleship Ill 

page 98 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R3534 : page 98 

THE NEW EDITION A LITTLE BEAUTY. 



Friends having made request for DAWN Volumes split up 
into several parts for convenience in carrying in the pocket 
for reading on the cars, etc., we tried that plan, but the appearance 
was not satisfactory. We conceived the idea of an 
edition of DAWN on India paper and have gotten out an edition 
of Volume I. that is a beauty. These are bound in flexible 
leather, red under gold edges, 1/4 inch thick. Cost price, 
including postage, 68 cents. We have not placed orders for 
other volumes, waiting to ascertain what demand may spring 
up after Vol. I. has been seen. If published, Vols. II. and 
III. would cost the same money, and Vols. IV., V. and VI. 
would cost about 75c each. When ordering, specify "India 
paper, Vol. I." Foreign readers may order through Branches 
and books will be sent from here. 

ABOUT VOLUNTEER MATTER. 



Order for Volunteer matter should be in our hands before 
May 1st. Select your Captains and Lieutenants at once. Say 
how many copies you think you can use. Order too few rather 
than too many: more can be ordered later. We will fill a part 
of your order soon as possible and the remainder afterward. 

VOLUNTEERING BY MAIL. 



Our output of tracts free as sample copies is limited. This 
year please follow this plan: Procure wrapping paper of the 
size in which your tracts go to you, write on these the addresses 
of all of your friends and acquaintances of the godly 
sort and mail the bundle to us. Do not this year send us "all 
sorts" of addresses. Do "sharp shooting" rather. You may 
repeat the lists every quarter if you desire, indicating other 
tracts for same, as we would not remember which were previously 
sent. 



R3531 : page 99 

THE HEAVENS ROLLING TOGETHER. 

DURING the past twenty-five years we have several 
times called attention to the Scriptures 



which speak of the Day of the Lord and declare 
that in it the "heavens shall roll together like a scroll." 
(Isa. 34:4.) We have pointed out that this means a coming 
together of the extremes of Christianity, Roman Catholicism 
and Protestantism. Other Scriptures show us 
that the consolidation, federation and unification of 
Protestants is now in order. This is already well under 
way and constitutes in the symbolic book of Revelation 
the "image of the beast"— the symbolic beast itself 
represented by Papacy. We might here remark that 
nothing in this word "beast" is specially derogatory or 
invidious— neither in our use of the word nor in the 
Scriptural use. Throughout the Scriptures, in the 
symbolisms of Daniel and the Apocalypse, beasts are 
freely used as symbols for nations, governments, earthly 
powers, though never used as representing the divine 
power— the true Church, the true Kingdom, which shall 
ultimately prevail. 

We have already pointed out a general organization 
of "the image of the beast" effected in 1846, and are 
waiting for what in the symbol is referred to as the "giving 
of life to the image." This life, or vital energy, 
which the image is to receive shortly, comes from what 
is described as the two-horned beast, which in our understanding 
is the Church of England and Ireland. Our 
expectations, as heretofore set forth in these columns, 
are that after the federative influences already begun in 
Protestantism shall have knit the joints and members 
the more closely the one to the other, the entire federation 
of Protestants will receive some kind of Episcopal 
sanction, recognition, or ordination through the Episcopal 
system, and that thenceforth Protestantism the world 
over will assume a more active and dogmatic influence 
in the civil and political affairs of Christendom, cooperating 
with Roman Catholicism as a sister institution. 

These are the two extremes of the heavens or 
ecclesiastical powers of the present time, and our Lord's 
declaration that they shall be rolled together as a scroll 
signifies, not that they will ever become one roll, but, 
remaining two rolls, will be drawn together by mutual 
interest and necessity for cooperation. These things 
must be expected before the outbreak of the great tribulation, 
which will eventuate in the symbolical burning 
or destruction not only of the present social structure 
represented as the earth, but the burning and consuming 
also of the symbolical heavens rolled together as a 
scroll. That dreadful anarchy, which will destroy everything 
of our present conditions and civilization, will in 
so doing prepare the way for the establishment of the 
heavenly Kingdom. In view of these things the Lord 

R3532 : page 99 

bids us, even with such terrible calamities before us, 

to lift up our heads and rejoice, knowing that our deliverance 

draweth nigh, and knowing too that our deliverance, 



our "change," signifies ultimately the deliverance of 
all the groaning creation from the curse of sin and death 
now resting upon the race. 

"ROLLED TOGETHER AS A SCROLL." 

For sometime we have been wondering how this 
rolling together of the heavens would come about. A 
few years ago we witnessed a great Romeward movement 
on the part of the High Church Episcopalians of 
Great Britain, and were somewhat surprised that Pope 
Leo XIII. refused to recognize the movement. However, 
we can see now that the repulsion of the High Church 
Episcopals has proved the better to keep the two parts 
of the scroll intact. As a result, the Episcopal Church is 
yearning for a closer alliance with all Protestants as 
well as with Romanists. Now we see in Germany what 
seems to be the start of this rolling together of the 
heavens, and it is to it that we now call special attention. 

The relationship between Protestants and Catholics 
in Germany, as is well known, has been quite strained 
for years, but has been gradually easing up. It was Bismarck 
who, discerning that Catholic influence was 
inimical to the interests of Germany, secured the enactment 
of laws expelling the Jesuits and otherwise curbing 
the influence of the Catholics in that empire. But with 
the restraint of Catholicism and with the increase of 
enlightenment in Germany came enormous gains to the 
ranks of Socialists. The representatives of the German 
nation, in their Reichstag or Congress, became divided 
along religious as well as political lines. The Roman 
Catholics, under the guidance of their religious teachers, 
formed a solid party by themselves, and used their 
power on every possible occasion to defeat the Emperor's 

R3532 : page 100 

plans, except as he would to some extent purchase their 
cooperation by granting, one after another, numerous 
concessions to Catholics— numerous releases from the 
restraining laws. The Socialists on nearly every question 
were opposed to the Emperor's policy, and as they have 
grown remarkably in numbers, the Emperor, in order to 
have measures passed by a proper majority in the Reichstag, 
has been obliged to conciliate the Catholic element 
of his empire more and more, until at the present time 
he can scarcely secure an appropriation of money for 
any of his favorite schemes without the aid of the Catholic 
party, called the Centrist party. It is indeed the pivotal 
party. 

TRADES UNIONS AND RELIGIOUS DIVISIONS. 

Another element is unexpectedly making itself felt 
in the direction of union between Catholic and Protestant 
in the German Empire, namely, trades unionism. The 



common interests of the working people led them about 
a year ago to a confederative cooperative association 
between the Catholic unions and the Protestant unions. 
The influence of the Roman ecclesiastics was not sufficient 
to hinder this cooperative movement among the 
working men for the protection of what they esteemed 
to be their vital interests. Altogether matters are so 
shaping themselves in Germany as to draw Catholic 
and Protestant more closely together. 

Added to this is a recent expression by the new 
Pope which intimates a fellowship of feeling between 
himself and the German Emperor, and suggests a cooperation 
between them for the upholding of Christianity. 
Since the Emperor is a Protestant, and Germany 
is recognized as a Protestant country, this expression 
by the Pope seems to imply a willingness on his part to 
acknowledge Protestantism as a part of Christianity, 
and a general disposition on his part to favor cooperation 
between Catholics and Protestants along lines political, 
social and to a considerable degree religious. This is 
one of the most remarkable incidents of our time, and 
points in exactly the direction in which we have been 
looking. It points to a cooperation between Catholics 
and Protestants for the control of Christendom, and once 
the power has been tasted and the authority exercised 
we may be sure that it will increase, reaching out after 
more and more of the liberties of the people and bringing 
them under the combined control. 

Doubtless, some of the first enactments will be 
against anarchy, social evils, immoralities, etc., and be 
very gratifying to all lovers of peace and order. Subsequently, 
however, we may be sure that this power will 
be exercised against Socialists, as being of a class calculated 
to disturb the public peace and to unsettle the 
present order of things. Still further along, all who are 
dissenters from the Church confederation will come 
under the ban and under the pressure, with a realization 
that liberty of thought on religious subjects has much to 
do with all liberty, and with the thought that the repression 
of liberty must mean the suppression of all 
religious teaching along independent lines, or, as we 
say, along Scriptural lines. When that hour shall come 
—probably within eight years— it will surely mean the 
suppression of ZION'S WATCH TOWER and all propaganda 
of the Truth. 

We may expect that by that time all of the "elect" 
will have been found, and we will incline to expect such 
a suppression as corresponding to the point marked by 
our Lord's parable when the "door was shut"— that no 
more might go in to the wedding. (Matt. 25:10.) So 
far as we are concerned these restrictions and suppressions 
must not move us to an abandonment in any degree 
of the wisdom that cometh from above, which is first 
pure, then peaceable, easy of entreatment and full of 
mercy and good fruits. 

Instead of feeling even angry with those who would 



use restraint, we must be prepared to regard their course 
as our Lord regarded the course of those who suppressed 
him, and his answer to Pilate must satisfy us. His 
words were, "Thou couldst have no power at all against 
me except it were given thee from above." (John 19:11.) 
If the power for suppression is given by our Lord it 
will mean to us the good tidings that the Kingdom is 
very near at hand, and all the more we will lift up our 
heads and rejoice, knowing our deliverance is at hand, 
and that just a little further, after the great storm of 
anarchy, the Sun of Righteousness shall shine forth 
clearly and gloriously to the blessing of all the families 
of the earth, under the administration of the Kingdom 
of God's dear Son, of which, by the grace of God, we hope 
to be members. 

THE POPE'S EXPRESSION ON THE SUBJECT. 

While matters have been thus shaping themselves 
in Protestant Germany a very opposite condition of 
affairs has prevailed in Catholic France. The French, 
though still nominally a Catholic country, have lost considerable 
of their reverence for the Papacy, have expelled 
the clergy from being teachers in the public 
schools and will not even allow nuns any longer to teach 
in their religious garbs. Altogether, the relationship 
between France and the Pope is quite strained. Naturally 
enough, this alienation between the Church and the 
nation which so long has been known as the eldest son 
of the Church, has led the Pope and his counsellors to 
look for sympathy and assistance from other quarters, 
and no doubt this condition of things has had much to 
do with the greater sympathy prevailing between the 
Pope and the Emperor William, who is seeking more and 
more to conciliate the Catholic element of his empire. 

Pastor Adolph Storcker, who some time ago was 
court preacher to Emperor William and the royal household, 
but who it was thought could exercise a wider influence 
in another sphere, resigned his pastorate, and was 
elected a member of the Reichstag, where he is recognized 
as being not only a champion of Protestantism but also 
of the Emperor. When recently in the Reichstag one 
of the members, Dr. Spahn, a leader in the Catholic 
party, made the demand that Catholics should have 
full and equal rights and liberties with Protestants 
throughout Germany and that this should include the 
Jesuits, once expelled, Dr. Storcker replied: 

"Delegate Dr. Spahn has demanded full and equal 
rights for the adherents of both Churches [Protestant 
and Catholic]. To me this is not the question at issue, 
nevertheless I wish to answer his proposition. If this 
thought of his [of full equality of Catholic and Protestant 
in the empire] is to penetrate into and win the heart 
of the German people, then not only a civil but a religious 
toleration [of Protestants] must take place on 
the part of the Catholic Church. Recently some one 



showed me the letter of a gentleman who had interviewed 
the Pope in Rome. That letter said that the Pope had 
spoken to the writer of the decay of the Church in Catholic 
countries, for instance in France, and had used the 
words, 'I expect, in harmony and in cooperation with 
Emperor William, to lead the world back to Christ.' 

R3532:page 101 

The words in French were, 'Restituer le monde dans le 
Christ' 

"This is a grand thought; who would not wish that 
it might be realized! But to attain this mutual religious 
recognition it is wholly indispensable to make an end 
of strife. The Catholic Church must recognize Protestantism 
as an authorized element of Christendom, and 
the Protestant Church as an authorized feature of 
Christianity. Without this there need be no thought of 
peace. Only thus can we think of placing the world 
again upon a Christian foundation. I know full well how 
difficult this is, but since certain things cannot be developed 
except by transplanting them to a new soil, 
so must it also be in the religious domain. Otherwise 
the wild disputations which confuse and devastate our 
people will not cease." 

Here we have not only the suggestion of the Pope 
that this shall be the mutual work of a Protestant 
Emperor and himself, but we have also laid before the 
German Congress the very correct thought that such a 
union, such a reestablishment of a community of fellowship 
and interest along religious lines, must mean some 
recognition of Protestants as the other end of the 

R3533 :page 101 

scroll, and a bringing together of the two general 

parts for mutual well being, for mutual defence 

against the increasing power of Socialism. And, 

by the way, the expectation of the Socialists is 

that at their next general election, less than two years 

hence, their power will be so great that they can practically 

control Germany's affairs. It is broadly hinted, 

too, that if such be the case the Emperor will find some 

means of overthrowing popular government and holding 

lines of government on a more autocratic basis— as an 

emperor, autocrat, by divine authority. As a preparation 

for this emergency, we cannot wonder that he has 

strengthened his hands with the Catholic element of the 

empire and to a considerable degree will be guided by 

the Pope. 

PASTOR STORCKER'S VIEWS ON THE SITUATION. 

The above expression by Pastor Storcker in the 
Reichstag was some little time ago: recently he has made 
a much more elaborate statement of the same thought, 



which on December 20th, 1904, was laid before the public 
of Germany through the columns of Das Volk, a journal 
published under the Emperor's special sanction. By 
the way, the motto of this newspaper is "With God for 
the Kaiser and the Kingdom." We have secured a 
translation of this article, whose importance lies not 
merely in the phraseology but also in the fact that its 
writer is Pastor A. Storcker, honorable member of the 
Reichstag. The article, after referring to the Pope's 
language above quoted, proceeds to say, under the 
caption: 

"KAISER AND POPE." 

"This matter is well worthy of being made prominent 
for public discussion. For there can be nothing 
more fatal to our people than bitter strife between the 
two churches, and nothing more beneficial for a harmonious 
control of the Fatherland than through an 
understanding of the matter. That this desideratum is 
possible is proven by a coalition known as 'The Alliance 
of Christian National Trades-Unions,' effected at Frankfort 
last year. To my knowledge not the least discord 
has yet come forward in the Alliance between the adherents 
of the two creeds. Rather the Catholic working 
men have held their position by an overwhelming 
vote against the efforts of the Bishops to hinder the harmonious 
interchanges between the labor organizations, 
and they have induced the Episcopate to assent to the 
understanding. 

"It is praiseworthy for the working classes and instructive 
for the others that amid the raging of the 
poisoned strife a plane of peace has been created upon 
which Catholic and Protestant have joined in practical 
work for the combating and overthrow of all opposers 
of Christianity. Why should not this event be followed 
in other domains? 

"The thought of the Pope, unless its point be lost, 
can surely mean nothing else than a more moderate 
Catholicism and Bible-believing Protestantism, which, 
when the possibility of joint action is found, can do 
much to deliver Christianity from the condition of unrest 
and excitement— from apostasy and immorality— from 
lack of authority and piety. 

"The fact that the Pope, viewing the Catholic 
world, especially France, acknowledges the necessity for 
such action, is a proof of his perception as well as his 
energy. The Evangelical [Protestant] world suffers also, 
but at different points. From different causes, more 
particularly in the German world, she [Protestant religion] 
is sharply affected by Socialism and enmity to 
divine revelation, and similarly needs the restraining and 
reconciliation of the struggling elements. Of this there 
can be no doubt in the minds of the friends of the Fatherland, 
especially such as are disposed toward our social 
reforms [but not toward Socialism]. 



"That the Pope did express those very words is 
certain. The man to whom they were spoken is a prominent 
man, sufficiently bright to rightly perceive the 
significations of a remark of such wide bearing, and careful 
enough to repeat it verbatim. The interesting question 
is, How deep a meaning did the head of the Catholic 
Church attach to this extraordinary expression? 

"Such a cooperation as the Pope's words imply can 
never rest upon present religious and ecclesiastical 
foundations. Catholicism and Protestantism are too 
much at variance in their principles as well as in their 
practices, in their doctrines as well as in their lives, to 
come to an understanding with one another. The stimulation 
which the humanity of to-day needs does not lie 
in that which is common to both Churches, nor even perhaps 
in a still stronger avowing of matters pertaining to 
salvation as harmoniously asserted by Rome and Wittenburg 
in the Apostolic Creed. Our task rather is spiritual 
mediation respecting the divine revelation to mankind, 
torn by doubts and denials, confusion concerning 
Bible history by the laws of nature and casualty. Protestantism 
cannot alone undertake this mediation, much 
less could Catholics alone succeed with it [hence the 
necessity for united efforts]. 

"What the Pope meant can signify nothing less 
than a cooperation in the sphere of social and moral reawakening 
And that in this some sort of partnership is 
possible is shown by the already existing equality of 
the two churches in the social and political economy of 
our Fatherland and in the cooperation for the suppression 
of alcohol, traffic in girls, immorality and bad 
literature. But these matters fail to reach a community 
of interest and action because the ecclesiastical chasm 
separating the two conditions prevents this, and the 
enmity breaking forth ever anew puts again in doubt 
every good result achieved. 

R3533 : page 102 

"For the removal of this difficulty I have made the 
request that the Catholic Church should recognize the 
rights of Protestants. In our day, when numerous members 
of both Churches refuse in principle the doctrines of 
the apostles, it is senseless to ignore and deny as true 
Christians such [Romanists] as do hold to the Apostolic 
teachings. On the other hand, it is unhistorical to refuse 
to recognize as parts of the great Church system the 
evangelical Protestant churches, which for the last four 
centuries have done such great things in Christian 
development. 

"It is self evident that the present strife must continue 
between the evangelical and ecclesiastical; that a 
different position than that of conflict is not conceivable 
between the two churches upon German soil; but the 
mutual misunderstanding of one another and disregard 
of one another should cease. 



A CATHOLIC CRITIC'S VIEW. 

"The Saechsische Volkszeitung, the organ of the 
Catholics in the kingdom of Saxony, considers my demand 
obscure and unnecessary. It considers, on the 
one hand, that a discussion of religious toleration does 
not belong to the Roman Catholic; one could just as 
well discuss Jews and atheists. On the other hand, the 
recognition of Protestants as Christians is being continually 
conceded even by Catholicism. However, the 
Catholic Church being convinced that she possesses the 
truth, must, therefore, consider every opposing doctrine 
false. 

"To these replies I would only say that Delegate 
Dr. Spahn has demanded full, civil, equal rights for 
Catholics, including the Jesuits; and that, as a consequence, 
it is absolutely necessary to discuss that which 
hinders equal rights, namely, the religious intolerance 
of at least the majority of the German people. Secondly, 
the discussion is not about Jews and atheists, but about 
churches with a Christian creed. Thirdly, it matters 
not that Rome calls the Protestants Christians, but that 
she should recognize and esteem them as such. Fourthly, 
I hold that Rome should not only recognize the individual 
Evangelicals [Protestants] as Christians, but the 
Evangelical Churches as well, as recognized parts of 
Christendom. 

"We Protestants, reared as Lutherans, hold the 
Lutheran doctrines of the Lord's Supper as the correct 
one, and that of Zwingli, therefore, as being wrong; but 
we do not draw from this the conclusion which Rome 
derives from the opinion that she possesses the truth. 
One can argue about differences and each hold his own 
opinion as to which is the right one, yet need not exert a 
decisive influence upon the judgment of the whole. 

"In religious matters we have to deal with the material 
world and with revelation, both of which, according 
to their nature, are capable of various constructions on 
different points. Therefore, it would only be a reasonable 
expectation, a self-evident matter, if Rome were to 
withdraw from that harsh point of view [respecting 
Protestants as being anti-Christian] with which Protestantism 
originally viewed Rome [as anti-Christian]. 

"At all events, the Pope's declaration shows that 
such a change in his point of view is not far off. Indeed, 
we have had times in which a mutual recognition of 
both stand points was evident. I remember that in 
my student years, the remark of the Catholic Professor 
Kuhn of Tubingen was repeatedly mentioned as illustrating 
a changed Catholic view. His words were, "Who 
of us Catholics could wish the Reformation had never 
taken place?" I fully understand his position. In 
Protestant countries [by reason of the divisions amongst 
Protestants] the Catholic Church stands out as by far 
the strongest, most favored and influential. 



"But the considerations which cause me to urge my 
demands are not of a theoretical or historical kind, but 
that expression of the Pope which upon stern Catholic 
ground loses its significance. A further consideration is 
the expression of a still greater than the Pope— Christ— 
who, in his High-Priestly prayer that all Christians 
might be one, laid the foundation for the faith of the 
world. That our Lord in that prayer thought only of 
the Roman Catholic Church united under the Pope no 
intelligent Catholic will assert; consequently he must 
have meant and deemed possible another unity which 
would cause the world more rapidly to believe in the 
sending of the Son. A further argument is found in the 
Epistle to the Galatians, namely, 'If you bite and devour 
one another, beware lest ye be consumed one of another.'" 

R3534 : page 102 

The argument drawn from our Lord's prayer, "That 
they all might be one, that the world may believe that 
thou hast sent me," is an illustration of how the most 
precious truths may at times be so understood and 
wrested as to support fallacies and to hide their real 
meaning. Pastor Storcker considers that this Scripture 
favors the drawing together into a confederation the 
various Protestant denominations of Christendom in a 
sympathetic cooperation with the Church of Rome. He 
is blind to the facts of the case, both as respects the 
great anti -Christ and the image of the beast; and the great 
majority of Christendom are similarly blind on this 
subject. The Lord has indeed hidden his great divine 
plan from the wise and prudent and makes it known 
merely to the babes, the humble. 

Can we think that it will be possible for Roman 
Catholics and Protestants ever to become one in the sense 
that our Lord prayed in this petition— "that they might 
all be one even as thou, Father, and I are one"? Surely 
we can not think so for a moment. What communion 
hath light with darkness? What fellowship hath wheat 
with tares? The fulfilment of our Lord's prayer will be 
on a much grander scale, although all who are his and 
who will be one with him and the Father will be but a 
little flock, to whom it will be the Father's good pleasure 
to give the Kingdom, in joint-heirship with the 
Messiah. 

The Lord's real disciples have been one in heart, 
in purpose, with himself and with each other throughout 
this Gospel age, and they are one to-day. With fellowship 
of heart and with purpose true and real, they are 
all both justified and sanctified in Christ Jesus, who 
counts not in their number any of those who are tares, 
goats or wolves. "The Lord knoweth them that are his." 
Soon they shall be one in a larger and more complete and 
comprehensive sense, when they all shall be gathered to 
and united with the Lord their Head as his Bride and 
joint-heirs. Then they shall be one in the fullest sense, 



and then indeed the world shall believe, for the Millennial 
Sun of Glory shall then shine out, revealing fully the 
divine character and plan and filling the whole earth with 
the knowledge of the glory of God. 



R3534 : page 103 

PERFUME VERY PRECIOUS. 
JOHN 12:1-11. --APRIL 16. 

Golden Text:— "She hath done what she could."— Mark 14:8. 

IT WAS Saturday night, as we reckon it, the evening 
following the Jewish Sabbath day— after six 
P.M.— that Jesus and his disciples and Lazarus, 
whom he had previously awakened from the sleep of 
death, with some other friends of the family, sat down to 
a feast prepared in special honor of Jesus at the home 
of his friends, where he was always welcome and where 
he stopped more frequently than at any other house 
during the period of his ministry, so far as the records 
show. It was at Bethany, the home of Lazarus and 
Martha and Mary. It was called the house of Simon the 
leper, one supposition being that Simon was the father 
of the family, and another that he was the husband of 
Martha, who at this time was a widow. 

Our Lord and his disciples were en route for Jerusalem, 
and Bethany was on the way, in the suburbs. 
They probably arrived on what would correspond to our 
Friday, or the Jewish sixth day of the week. Expecting 
them, Martha and Mary had provided quite a sumptuous 
feast, and, in harmony with the Jewish rules governing 
in such cases, the dishes were evidently prepared in 
advance, as Sabbath labor was prohibited. No account 
is given us of that Sabbath day at Bethany, but we can 
well imagine the delightful social intercourse between 
the dear members of that family and the Lord and his 
chosen apostles. 

JESUS IN SOCIAL LIFE. 

The Master's words of wisdom and love are not 
recorded, but we know on the best of authority that a 
good man out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth 
forth good things, and out of the abundance of the heart 
the mouth speaketh. Hence we may know that the day 
was not given over to frivolity of word or conduct, but to 
rest, spiritual enjoyment, which minister to the refreshment 
of all in the right attitude of heart. The same 
rule applies to all of the Lord's followers wherever they 
may be, whatever may be their vocation or surroundings. 
Out of the good treasure of their hearts they can 
bring forth nothing else but good things, and if any be 



otherwise minded let him beware, and correct the 
difficulty of the heart and not merely of the head. 

We can imagine better than we can portray the 
loving sentiments of Lazarus and his sisters toward 
Jesus, the one they esteemed so highly, the one who, 
by calling Lazarus forth from the tomb, had demonstrated 
his Messiahship and that in him was the resurrection 
and the life power. This was probably the first 
visit the Lord had made to the Bethany home since that 
great event. 

Apparently our Lord had friends in various walks 
of life; a few were rich, some were poor, some in moderate 
circumstances. The Bethany household was apparently 
of a comfortable class, as was evidenced by the fact that 
they had their own home, that they had their own tomb, 
and that on this occasion Mary was able as well as willing 
to spend a considerable sum of money in doing honor to 
the Lord by anointing him with the very precious 
spikenard. This reminds us of the prayer of one of 
old, "Give me neither poverty nor riches." Riches are 
a great snare to the many, and the Lord's word assures 
us that not many rich will enter the Kingdom. The 
attractions of the present life to them will prove too 
powerful and hinder their fulfilment of their consecration 
vows— to sacrifice their all, to lay all at Jesus' 
feet, to become merely his stewards in the use of their 
temporal opportunities and blessings, and to use these 
wisely in his service and in such a manner as to demonstrate 
the love and loyalty they have professed. 

In many respects to have a moderate competency 
in life is very desirable, permitting a more generous 
treatment of others, greater hospitality, etc.; yet even 
moderate prosperity seems to be more than the majority 
can stand and yet be faithful. Consequently we find 
in fact what our Lord declared, namely, that the heirs 
of the Kingdom are chiefly of the poor of this world— 
chiefly of those who have little and who have little hope 
for getting more, and whose minds consequently are 
more readily turned to the heavenly things which the 
Lord has promised to those who love him supremely. 

To whatever extent, therefore, we have comfortable 
surroundings, such as were possessed by the Bethany 
household— to whatever extent we have the good things 
of this present life— in that same proportion we need to 
be specially on guard against the cares of this life and 
the deceitfulness of riches and the ambitions and hopes 
and aims of the world, lest these should lead our hearts 
away from the loyalty and devotion to the Lord and his 
cause which full faith and trust should inspire and sustain. 
Evidently it is possible to be poor in spirit without 
being actually in poverty, but the more there is of 
earthly prosperity apparently more grace is needed to 
keep us in the narrow way. 

"OINTMENT OF SPIKENARD VERY COSTLY." 



The two sisters evidently had the matter planned 
between them: Martha served at the table and Mary 
served in an especial manner with the ointment. Oriental 
tables were a combination of couch and table, and 
the guests were properly described as reclining at a 
feast. It was customary to rest the forepart of the body 

R3535 : page 103 

upon one elbow while using the other hand to convey 
the food to the mouth, etc. Our Lord thus reclining, 
both his head and his feet were very conveniently accessible 
to Mary, who proceeded to anoint first his head 
and afterward his feet with the ointment. 

The word ointment gives rather a misimpression; 
the word perfume would more nearly describe the liquid 
used. Its value is incidentally mentioned as more than 
three hundred pence (v. 5). These silver pence represent 
about sixteen cents each, and thus estimated the alabaster 
flask of perfume was worth about forty-eight 
dollars; but counting each penny or denarius as a day's 
wages at that time (Matt. 20:2), the three hundred pence 
would be equivalent to a year's wages of a working man, 
or about three hundred dollars to six hundred dollars as 
compared with our day. 

R3535 : page 104 

This was very precious ointment indeed by whichever 
calculation we reckon it, yet that the statement is 
not overdrawn is attested by ancient literature. For 
instance, we are told that Horace offered to give a cask 
of wine for a very small box of spikenard— Odes, Ovid, 
IV, XII, XVII. A perfume even in our day has been 
rated as high as $100.00 per ounce, namely, attar of 
roses. At this price, Mary's "pound" would have been 
worth $1,200.00. 

"SHE HATH DONE WHAT SHE COULD." 

The use of such expensive perfumes was very rare: 
indeed, even the emperors 
used it sparingly, but when 
used it was generally poured 
upon the head. Mary 
followed this custom in 
pouring it upon the Lord's 
head, as Matthew and Mark 
recount; but having done 
this, she proceeded to his 
feet and anointed them with 
the perfume, and then wiped 
his feet with the long tresses 

of her hair. What a picture of loving devotion is here 
given us! The feet, always recognized as the humblest 
and lowest members of the human frame— the hair of 



the head, especially of woman, always recognized as a 
special treasure and glory to her— here thus brought 
together in a way which signified that Mary esteemed 
her Lord and Master as infinitely above and beyond her. 
She had recognized him first as the most wonderful of 
men, speaking as never man spake; she had come afterwards 
to understand that he was a great teacher, especially 
sent at a special time; and finally, through the 
awakening of Lazarus from the sleep of death, she had 
evidence that the power of the Almighty was in him, 
that he was none other than the Son of God, and she 
appropriately did him the reverence due to his exalted 
station. 

She could not put him on the throne of earth, but 
she would show that she was his devoted servant forever; 
she could not glorify him before all the people of 
Israel, but she could glorify and honor him in her own 
home; she could not tell his praises and sing his worth, 
but she could sing and make melody in her own heart, 
and pour upon him a perfume which not only filled her 
home with its sweet savor, but which has yielded a tender 
fragrance to the honor of womankind in general from 
her day to the present time. "She hath done what she 
could," said the Lord— she has shown her devotion to 
the best of her ability. How true the remainder of our 
Lord's prophecy on the subject, "Wherever this Gospel 
is preached, this thing shall be told as a memorial of 
her." A sweet memorial of a sweet character and loving 
heart. Considered in the light of the odor and blessing 
and refreshment which it has shed upon all of the Lord's 
people throughout this Gospel age, Mary's alabaster 
jar of precious perfume, very costly, has proven to be 
extremely cheap. 

"MIGHT HAVE BEEN GIVEN TO THE POOR." 

Our lesson says that Judas protested against such 
a waste of money, and explains that it was not because 
he cared so much for the poor, as that he was a thief and 
regretted that the amount spent for the perfume had 
not been handed to him as the treasurer for the group 
of disciples, so that he might have misappropriated it 
to himself. This thought is more particularly shown in 
the revised version, which renders it, "He was a thief, 
and having the bag took away what was put therein." 
Matthew says "the disciples"— Mark says, "There were 
some"— but John mentions Judas only as doing this 
murmuring against the expense involved in Mary's 
service to her Lord. Quite probably all the accounts are 
correct. Judas, no doubt, was the instigator of the 
murmuring, some more quickly and more thoroughly 
shared his sentiments, and the remainder of the apostles, 
probably influenced by the majority, were inclined to 
yield and to agree that the extravagance was wrong. 
But Jesus set the whole matter at rest in a few words, 
saying, "Let her alone; against the day of my burying 



hath she kept this. The poor ye have always with you, 
but me ye have not always." 

Many of the Lord's disciples to-day need to reconstruct 
their ideas on the subject of economy. True, it 
is necessary for us to be provident not wasteful, and 
economical not extravagant. Our Lord frequently 
inculcated this lesson, as, for instance, when he directed 
the gathering up of the fragments of broken food after 
feeding the multitude. But there is a proper place to 
draw the line. The person who is economical and penurious 
in his dealings with the Lord is sure to be the loser 
thereby, as the Scriptures declare, "The liberal soul 
shall be made fat;" and again, "There is he that scattereth 
yet increaseth, and there is he that withholdeth 
more than is meet [proper] and it tendeth to poverty." 

It is a different matter for us to learn to be economical 
in respect to our own affairs and to be liberal to the 
extent of extravagance in matters which pertain to the 
Lord and his service. We sometimes sing, "Thou art 
coming to a King, large petitions with thee bring," 
but he who brings large petitions to the throne of grace 
should be sure also that he bring with him a large 
alabaster box of perfume for the Lord— not hoping thereby 
to merit the Lord's favor nor to perfume his requests, 
but as a mark of his appreciation of blessings already 
received. Those who bring the alabaster boxes of perfume 
of praise and thankfulness very generally have 
little to ask. Rather they realize that they are already 
debtors to such an extent that they can never show 
properly their appreciation of divine favor. Properly 
they recognize that day by day they are receiving at 
the Lord's hands exceedingly and abundantly more than 
they could ask or wish, and that in the spiritual blessings 
alone they have what satisfies their longings as 
nothing else can do. Such more nearly follow the course 
of Mary and bring alabaster boxes of perfume to the 
Lord— their prayers and thanksgiving of heart; and 
asking nothing, but giving thanks for all things, they 
receive from the Master such an outpour of blessing that 
they are not able to contain it. 

Those who view the matter rightly must certainly 
feel that none of us have anything worthy to present 
to our Lord— that our very best, our most costly gifts 
or sacrifices, are not worthy of him and but feebly express 
the real sentiments of our hearts. How glad we 
are if our humble efforts are accepted of the Lord, and 
how we hope that ultimately we shall hear the same 
sweet voice saying of us, "He hath done what he could," 
"She hath done what she could." 

The poet Tennyson beautifully pictures the scene 
we have been considering in the following lines:— 

R3535 : page 105 

"Her eyes are homes of silent prayer, 
Nor other thought her mind admits 



But, he was dead, and there he sits, 
And He that brought him back is there. 

"Then one deep love doth supersede 

All other, when her ardent gaze 

Roves from the living brother's face, 
And rests upon the Life indeed. 

"All subtle thought, all curious fears, 

Borne down by gladness so complete, 

She bows, she bathes the Saviour's feet 
With costly spikenard and with tears." 

THE POOR EVER WITH US. 

Our Lord's prophecy that poverty would continue 
throughout this Gospel age has been amply fulfilled. 
Looking forward into the future, we rejoice to know that 
then, under the reign of the Kingdom, there will be no 
more poor, no more sorrow, no more want. "Every man 
shall sit under his own vine and fig tree, with none to 
molest or make him afraid." Those changed conditions 
will not be the result of human evolution, human theories, 
co-operative societies, unions, trusts, etc. All these 
various panaceas for making everybody rich and comfortable 
and happy have failed in the past and will 
continue to be failures in the future. Because of sin 
warping and twisting the very fibers of humanity, and 
through selfishness and ambition and desire working 
upon the warped and twisted elements of humanity, 
pain, suffering and want are sure to continue as long as 
sin continues. And sin is sure to continue until the 
great Messiah takes to himself his great power and 
reigns, and subdues sin and all that is contrary to righteousness 
and truth and establishes the latter upon the 
earth. 

Until that glorious day shall come, all through the 
night of weeping, for now more than eighteen hundred 
centuries, the poor have been with us and many of them 
have been the Lord's precious ones. Poverty has proven 
itself a blessing in many ways in many senses of the 
word under present conditions. Not only does the fact 
of poverty and the fear of poverty help to keep many in 
line and make them active in the battle of life, and thus 
develop in them overcoming qualities, but, on the other 
hand, the fact that there is poverty, the fact that we have 
friends and neighbors who need our care and need assistance, 
is a blessing to those who are more comfortably 
situated themselves, in that it develops their sympathy, 
patience, love, their desire to do good, their desire 

R3536 : page 105 

to help. He that giveth to the poor lendeth to the 
Lord and the Lord will repay him. This promise is so 
rich and so plainly stated that the wonder is that there 



are not more willing to make investments in harmony 
with it, and to realize that the Lord not only repays, 
but gives large interest. 

"ME YE HAVE NOT ALWAYS." 

The opportunity for honoring the Lord was limited 
—a little while and his sufferings would be ended and 
he would be glorified, beyond the evil, beyond the power 
of human attention. It was appropriate then, when 
viewed from the right standpoint, that Mary should 
spend a great price upon her Lord— that the head upon 
which fell the slanders and anathemas of the chief priests 
and doctors of divinity of that day, and upon which 
shortly the crown of thorns would be placed, should 
now be honored by one amongst a few of those who 
realized his true worth, his true grandeur, his Kingship, 
that he was indeed the Son of God. It was appropriate, 
too, that those feet which had trodden the valleys and 
hillsides of Palestine, and that were so weary at times, 
and that symbolized the feet of consecration treading 
the narrow, rugged way, and that so soon would be 
pierced with the nails on the cross, should now be highly 
honored by one who appreciated and trusted them, who 
loved them and who was seeking to walk in the Master's 
steps. 

When we get the right view of the matter, we can 
indeed sympathize with our Lord's expression, "Let her 
alone," Trouble her not, Take it not from her— as though 
when the first motion was made to use the spikenard 
the apostles had wished to have it spared that they 
might sell it, and as though our Lord hindered them 
from using persuasion to that end, saying, Let her alone, 
do not hinder her. 

Spikenard Mary represents one of the most beautiful 
elements of Christian character amongst the Lord's 
people from that day until the present. For be it remembered 
that the entire Church of Christ in the largest 
sense is the "body of Christ," as expressed by Jesus and 
also by the apostles. The Mary class, who would rather 
purchase perfume at a great cost whereby to serve the 
anointed Church, the body of Christ, than to spend the 
same upon themselves, is still with us, and has been of 
the Church for these eighteen centuries. Not only was 
the Head of the body anointed, perfumed, honored, comforted, 
cheered, but all of the members since have likewise 
received a blessing from this class, this spikenard 
Mary class. It is composed not always of the orators, 
the wealthy or the wise— its ministry is unostentatious 
and to many, especially of the world, it seems foolishness 
and waste— but the Lord appreciates it, and so do the 
members of his body who are comforted and refreshed 
thereby. Blessing be upon this Mary class! 

HONOR TO MEMBERS-HONOR TO HEAD. 



But if there have been members all the way down 
who have been comforted in this way, should we not 
expect some particular blessing of the kind in the end 
of this age, upon the "feet" members? According to 
our understanding we are now in the closing of this age 
—the Head has been glorified, many of the members of 
the body have passed beyond the veil, and only the feet 
are here. Perhaps this very picture of Mary's anointing 
the feet of our Lord as well as his head constitutes 
a type or picture of what we may expect in this present 
time. And here comes in a beautiful feature of the divine 
arrangement— we may all be of the Mary class as 
well as of the feet class. In other words, each member 
of the body of Christ may to some extent serve the 
fellow-members of the body, the fellow-members of 
the feet, as Mary served the feet of Jesus. 

Let each one of the Lord's true people as he studies 
this matter conclude that by the grace of God he will 
join the Mary class, and purchase spikenard very costly 
and lavish it upon the feet of the body of Christ— the 
Church— the true members. This will mean love, sympathy, 
kindness, gentleness, patience and assistance and 
comfort. It will mean large and growing development 
in all the fruits and graces of the Spirit, whose combined 
name is Love. 

Dear readers, let us each remember that while it 
is impossible for us to do as Mary did in this lesson, it 
is the privilege of each to do still more important things 
for each other, for the brethren of Christ now in the 
world, the feet members of his body. Hers was a literal 

R3536 : page 106 

perfume and in time lost its virtue; but the little 
acts of kindnesses and helpfulness which we may render 
one to another will never lose their merit in the estimation 
of our Lord, and never lose their fragrance to all 
eternity in the estimation of each other. The little 
things of life, the little words, the little tokens, the kind 
looks, the little assistances by the way, these and not 
great things are our possibilities, our perfumes, the one 
for the other. 

"WASH ONE ANOTHER'S FEET." 

The washing of the feet in olden times in oriental 
lands was very necessary to the comfort, and hence to 
wash one another's feet would signify to comfort and 
refresh one another even in the most menial services. 
This is the essence of our Lord's lesson to us, that we 
should be glad for any opportunity for serving one 
another, for comforting and helping one another, 
however menial the service. Apply this now to the 
expression of our lesson. Mary washed our Lord's feet 
with perfume, and the Mary class, the most loving and 
devoted class in the Church, are to help one another, 



to wash one another's feet; and they are to do so not 
in the rudest and clumsiest manner imaginable, but, 
inspired by love and devotion one to another, they are 
to wash one another's feet with the kindness and sympathy 
and love and appreciation symbolized by Mary's 
spikenard; and their comforting of one another is to be 
with that love and solicitation which was represented 
by Mary's using the very locks of her head for her 
Master's feet. 

We see some evidence that this love, this spikenard-Mary 
love and sympathy, is growing amongst the 
members of the Lord's body; that as they perceive the 
animosity of the world and the flesh and the Adversary 
against the Lord's anointed they are all the more devoted 
one to another, and all the more disposed to honor one 
another with care and love and sympathy, and to speak 
and act generously and kindly one toward another. We 
are glad of this— we know of no better evidence of 
growth in grace on the part of the consecrated. Let the 
good work go on until we shall have filled the house 
with the perfume of love, until the whole world shall 
take knowledge of how Christians love one another— 
not in a narrow or partisan sense, but in the broad 
sense that Christ loved all who love the Father and all 
who sought to walk in the Father's ways. 

LET US DO IT NOW. 

If Mary had waited another week she might have 
used the perfume upon herself but not upon the Lord- 
within a week from the time of this incident our Lord 
was buried, the tomb was sealed, the Roman Guard 
stood before it and there would have been no opportunity 
even to have poured it upon his dead body. How 
much better that she improved the opportunity, that 
she showed the Lord her devotion while he was still her 
guest. The parallel is here: it will not be long until all 
the members of the body of Christ will have filled their 
share of the sufferings and have passed beyond the veil 
"changed." 

Wisdom tells us that we should not delay in bringing 
our alabaster boxes of ointment and pouring their 
contents upon our dear ones of the body of Christ, the 
feet of Christ. No matter if they do not notice us, or 
think of us, or pour any upon us as members of the feet; 
let us do our part, let us be of the Mary class, let us pour 
out the sweet perfume upon others, and the house, the 
Church of the Lord, will be filled with the sweet odor, 
even though some disciples might mistakingly charge 
us with being extravagant with our love and with our 
devotion, not understanding that the Master by and by 
will say again, "Let her alone, she hath done what she 
could." Our Lord's estimate of this spikenard and anointing 
is that it is all that we can do— nothing could 
be more or better. It indicates love, great love 
—and "love is the fulfilling of the law." 



"Let us consider one another," said the Apostle- 
consider one another's weaknesses, consider one another's 
trials, consider one another's temptations, consider 
one another's efforts to war a good warfare against 
the world, the flesh and the Adversary— consider one 
another's troubles in the narrow way against opposition 
from within and without, and as we do so it will 
bring to our hearts sympathy, a sympathy which will 
take pleasure in pouring out the spikenard perfume, 
very costly, purest and best, upon all who are fellow-members 
of the one body. 

Some one has spoken of the great "Society of Encouragers" 
who do so much to help encourage and uplift 
the footsore and weary in the pathway of life. It 
is not a great society so far as members are concerned, 
but it is a great society from the Lord's standpoint and 
from the standpoint of all who have been helped and 
encouraged by it. Spikenard Mary might have been 
said to have been a prominent member in this society 
of encouragers. We may well imagine that as our dear 
Redeemer was thinking of the severe trials, including 
the cross, of the week already begun, Mary's manifestation 
of love and devotion would come to him as a 
special encouragement and refreshment of spirit. So 
few seemed to understand him! even his disciples did 
not appreciate the situation. Here was one who at 
least loved him, had confidence in him. No doubt it 
gave him courage for the remaining days of his journey. 

THE TRUTH TERSELY STATED. 

Respecting the propriety of using present opportunities 
for the comfort and encouragement one of 
another, a writer has pointedly said: 

"Don't keep the alabaster boxes of your love and 
tenderness sealed up till your friends are dead. Fill 
their lives with gladness. Speak approving, cheering 
words while they can hear them... If my friends 

R3537 : page 106 

have alabaster boxes full of the fragrant perfume of 
sympathy and affection laid away, which they intend 
to break over my body, I would rather they would 
bring them out in my weary and troubled hours, and 
open them, that I may be refreshed and cheered by 
them while I need them.... I would rather have a 
plain coffin without a flower, a funeral without a eulogy, 
than life without the sweetness of love and sympathy. 
...Flowers on the coffin cast no fragrance backward 
on the weary road." 

Mrs. Preston's poem, "Ante Mortem," expresses 
the same thought thus:— 
..."Had I but heard 
One breath of applause, one cheering word- 
One cry of 'Courage!' amid the strife, 



So weighted for me with death or life- 
How would it have nerved my soul to strain 
Thro 1 the whirl of the coming surge again." 

SACRIFICE OF SWEET ODOR. 

The Apostle, speaking of the ministries of the 

R3537 : page 107 

Church one for another, says that ours is a sacrifice of 
sweet odor unto God, but again he adds that the Gospel 
referred to is of life unto life to some and of death unto 
death to others. That is to say, good deeds, kind words 
and efforts will be appreciated by those who are in the 
right attitude of heart to appreciate them, while on the 
contrary the same good deeds will arouse offence and 
constitute a bad odor to those who are in a wrong condition 
of heart. How often have we seen it so, that 
with our best endeavors to serve the feet of Christ some 
have been comforted and refreshed, others have been 
angered— to one the effort was a sweet odor, to the 
others it was an offensive odor, because of their wrong 
attitude of heart toward the Lord and toward the body 
of Christ— because, perhaps, of their ambitions or whatnot 
that were interfered with. 

It was just so at Bethany: the sweet odors that 
filled the house, and the blessing and refreshment that 
came to Mary in connection with the ministration, had 
a very different effect upon Judas. He was angry; his 
selfishness hindered his appreciation of the honor done 
to the Lord; he could think only of himself and what 
he had hoped to get out of the transaction, and how, 
so far as he was concerned, the whole matter was a 
waste. The sourness that came to his heart because of 
its wrong attitude is indicated by the testimony that 
he straightway went to the chief priests to bargain with 
them for the betrayal of Jesus. Let us, then, dear 
brethren, see to it that our hearts are in a loving attitude 
toward the Lord and not in a selfish attitude— 
that we appreciate everything done in his name and 
for his body, and that we be not self-seeking. Otherwise 
the result will be with us the savor of death unto 
death, as it was with Judas. 

This concludes our lesson. It was the next day 
probably that the Jews began to gather in considerable 
numbers to see Jesus and Lazarus, and to take counsel 
respecting the putting of them to death— "for the good 
of the cause." And, by the way, let us remember that the 
"good of the cause" has nearly always been the basis for 
every mean and despicable act against the Truth from 
first to last. Let us beware of such a sectarian spirit; 
let us see to it that our love for the Lord and all of his 
brethren is sincere, and not a personal and selfish one 
for ourselves or some denomination, otherwise we know 
not into what evils we might be led. 



R3537 : page 107 

HUMILITY AND MEEKNESS. 
--BIBLE STUDY FOR APRIL - 

1 . What importance does God attach to these graces 
of Christian character? 1 Pet. 5:5,6; 3:4; Psa. 147:6; 
149:4; F.90, par. 1; E.277, par. 2; A.83, par. 2; 
Z/96-19 (2nd col. par. 1,2,3); Z.'00-67,68,285 

(1st col. par. 1). 

2. Although the Scriptures use the words interchangeably, 
yet, strictly speaking, what is the distinction 

between humility and meekness? Z. '00-68 

(1st col. par. 1); (2nd col. par. 2); Z. '96-79 (2nd col. 

par. 2). See Webster. 

3. What is the relation between humility and knowledge? 
Psa. 25:9; F.97, par. 2; Z/96-18 (2nd col. 

par. 2,3); 19 (1st and 2nd cols.); Z. '98-25 (2nd col. 
par. 1); Z/01-262 (1st col. par. 1); Z/05-59 (1st col. 
par. 3). 

4. How do we know that humility is the underlying 
principle of the divine government? Matt. 23:12; 
Jas. 4:6,10; Phil. 2:7-10; E.165, par. 2; E.437, par. 1; 
Z/00-196 (2nd col. par. 2,3,4). 

5. What does it mean to be "clothed with humility?" 
1 Pet. 5:5; Z/00-196 (2nd col. par. 1). 

6. Is it possible to have too great humility? E.278, 
par. 3. 

7. What elements of character are in direct opposition 
to humility? 1 Pet. 5:5; Prov. 3:34; 6:16-19; 
Z/97-247 (1st col. par. 4,5); Z/96-263 (2nd col. 

par. 3,4); Z/99-80 (2nd col. par. 4); Z/02-359 
(1st col. par. 1); Z/03-329 (2nd col. par. 1). 

8. What lessons may we learn from Jesus' example of 
humility? Phil. 2:8; E.124,125,437, (par. 1); 
Z/97-242 (2nd col. par. 3); Z/97-296 (2nd col. 

par. 2) to 297, (par. 4); Z/99-80 (2nd col. par. 1,3); 
Z/05-30 (1st col. par. 4). 

9. Was humility characteristic of the apostles? Eph. 3:8; 
Z/95-250 (1st col. par 3); Z/01-187 (1st col. 

par. 3); (2nd col. par. 1,2); F.210, (par. 2) to 212, 
(par. 1). 

10. Why is humility a chief essential in an Elder? 

1 Tim. 3:6; F.246, par. 2; F.251, par. 2; F.278, par. 4; 
F.296, par. 1,2; Z/03-430 (1st col. par. 3). 

1 1. Why should husbands cultivate and exercise 
humility? Eph. 5:25; F.497, par. 1. 

12. How can wives exercise humility? Eph. 5:22-24; 
F.500, par. 2. 

13. Why is it important that we teach our children 
meekness and humility? Zeph. 2:3; F.555, par. 1; 
Z/96-82 (1st and 2nd cols.); Z/96-192 (1st col. 



par. 4,5). 

14. What Scriptural promises are given to the meek and 
humble? 

15. What notable illustrations and examples of meekness 
and humility do we find in the Bible? Matt. 11:28-30; 
Num. 12:3; Matt. 8:8; Jno. 13:1-17; 

Z.'0 1-347 (2nd col. par. 1,2). 

16. Give suggestions as to the best methods for acquiring 
and cultivating these important graces. Z. '96-79 

(2nd col. par. 2,3). 

(a) By prayer. Psa. 19:12-14. 

(b) By studying the divine wisdom, knowledge 
and power, as manifested in the Word and in 
Nature. Psa. 8:3,4; 1 Cor. 4:7. 

(c) By comparing ourselves with our Perfect 
Pattern, the Lord Jesus. Rom. 8:29; 2 Cor. 3:18. 

17. What additional thoughts can be found by consulting 
the Topical Indexes of the "New Bible" 

and "Heavenly Manna"? 



R3537 : page 108 

"HOSANNA, IN THE HIGHEST!" 

-JOHN 12:12-26.-APRIL23.- 

Golden Text:— "Blessed is he that cometh 
in the name of the Lord."— Matt. 21:9. 

THOUSANDS of people were gathering in Jerusalem, 
not only from every quarter of Palestine, but 
from Babylon, Egypt, Greece and Spain. It is 
estimated that at some of these Passover feasts a couple 
of millions assembled within and on the outskirts of 
Jerusalem. This was according to the divine commandment 
respecting the observance of the Passover feast. 
It is but reasonable to suppose that the majority- 
coming from a distance at considerable expense of time, 
etc.,— if not pious, were religiously inclined, although 
some doubtless regarded it merely as an excursion. 
The purely mercenary had little to expect, for there were 
a sufficient number so inclined already residing in Jerusalem, 
who would secure the best opportunities for money-making 
in merchandising, money-changing, etc. 

Our Lord and his disciples, as we noted in our last 
lesson, were amongst these pilgrims to the holy city, 
and these, we saw, took up their abode at Bethany. On 
the morning after the feast at which our Lord was 
anointed with the spikenard, he sent two of the apostles 
for an ass— a donkey. On its arrival garments were 
spread on it as a saddle, and our Lord, riding thereon, 
with the company of his disciples and the friends of the 
family and those who had witnessed the calling forth 
of Lazarus from the tomb, started as a little procession 



for the city. En route they were met by quite a company 
of people coming from Jerusalem to Bethany, because 
they had heard that the Lord was there, and because 
they desired to see the one of whom they had heard as 
the mighty miracle-worker who had even raised Lazarus 
from the tomb. 

BRANCHES OF THE DATE PALM. 

Our Lord's fame had spread abroad, and evidently 
divine providence had much to do with this entire 
arrangement, the meeting of the two companies, etc. 
Many of the people broke off branches of the date-palm 

R3538 : page 108 

trees growing in that vicinity, fernlike in shape and 
sometimes ten feet long. These were symbols of rejoicing 
and honor, symbols representing in this case that 
our Lord was the hero of the hour, whom they delighted 
to distinguish. At the meeting, there was a joyous uproar 
of praise and thankfulness to God; they were carried 
away with the enthusiasm of the moment. They 
spread the palm branches before the beast upon which our 
Lord sat, and those who had no palm branches spread 
their outer garments as an honor to the one who thus 
rode triumphantly, and picking up their palm branches 
and garments after our Lord's beast had walked over 
them they went ahead with these and strewed them 
afresh, thus in every way seeking to do honor to the one 
whom God had so signally recognized. In doing this 
the people were but expressing the pent-up feelings of 
their hearts. 

For over sixteen centuries, since they had come into 
Canaan, they had been waiting for Messiah and the 
glorious fulfilment of the Oath-Bound Covenant made 
to Abraham, confirmed to Isaac and Jacob and their 
posterity. The majestic personality of our Lord fitted 
to their grandest conceptions of Immanuel, and had been 
attested by the wonderful miracles of which they had 
heard, the most prominent of which was evidenced before 
their eyes in the person of Lazarus and those who had 
borne testimony that they had seen him come forth from 
the tomb after he had been dead four days. Their 
hearts were right; they had not yet been spoiled by the 
doubts and fears of human wisdom, which in the worldly 
wise insisted upon seeing the money, and the soldiers, 
and corresponding influence before it could believe in 
or accept any one as the Messiah, the Deliverer from the 
Roman yoke. 

So it sometimes is with the Lord's people to-day. 
In the simplicity of our hearts we see precious promises 
in his Word and are ready to believe them; then the 
Adversary brings along objections, fears and doubts, 
and queries as to how, and the faith becomes diluted and 
loses its power to control our lives and conduct further. 



Our Lord, therefore, urges upon his followers that they 
should have the faith and obedience of little children 
and not be of the worldly wise. His Word assures us that 
the wisdom of the world is foolishness with God, and 
that God's wisdom and God's plan seem to the world to 
be foolishness. We must take our choice as between 
human wisdom and divine wisdom. Blessed are they 
who walk by faith and not by sight, and accept the wisdom 
of the divine Word. The end of the Lord's plan 
will fully justify their confidence, and work out abundantly 
more and better things than they ever dreamed. 

HOSANNA IN THE HIGHEST. 

The word Hosanna is an acclaim of praise and confidence 
and expectancy and very closely resembles in 
thought the word hallelujah. Collecting the different 
exclamations of the people as given in the different 
Gospels we have these: "Hosanna," "Hosanna to the 
Son of David," "Blessed is he that cometh in the name 
of the Lord," "Blessed is the King," "Blessed is the 
King of Israel, that cometh in the name of the 
Lord," "Blessed is the Kingdom of our father 
David, that cometh in the name of the Lord," "Peace 
in heaven and glory in the highest," "Hosanna in the 
highest." Our Lord, of course, understood the whole 
situation— "He knew what was in man." He knew the 
depths of the sincerity behind these exclamations and 
acts of reverence; he knew, too, of the forces of evil and 
their power to make light appear darkness and darkness 
appear light. 

He knew that he was to be the Passover Lamb, and 

R3538 : page 109 

that within five days another multitude, led by religious 

teachers, would be crying "Crucify him! Crucify him!" 

He knew that this shout now around him, gladly hailing 

him as the Messenger of the Covenant, would be disconcerted 

by the wolves— that they would be fearful of 

their own lives and interests as they would realize the 

power of the rulers and the mob under their control. 

He realized that with their little knowledge they would 

not dare to trust their own judgments as against those 

of their religious teachers; he knew that the Shepherd 

was about to be smitten and the sheep to be frightened 

and scattered, yet he said nothing; he allowed the divine 

program to be enacted; he was going as a sheep to the 

slaughter, but he opened not his mouth to appeal for 

aid, to defend himself, to explain the true situation. He 

could, but he would not, deliver himself out of the hands 

of those who sought his life; for this very purpose he 

had come into the world— to die, to be sacrificed for sins. 

"THE VERY STONES WOULD CRY OUT." 



Some of the Pharisees had come along, perhaps 
through curiosity or perhaps to act as spies— perhaps 
some of those with whom Judas was conferring, and who 
were endeavoring to decide when and how the Lord 
should be taken, not realizing that their powers were 
limited until his hour was fully come. These spoke to 
the disciples, requesting them to call to the attention 
of Jesus the language of the multitude, and to suggest 
that it was not appropriate for him to permit them to 
thus proclaim him the Messiah and King. We are to 
remember that Jesus did not sound a trumpet before 
him, prominently announcing himself as the Messiah, 
as impostors were in the habit of doing. For three years 
he had preached the Gospel, gathering his disciples, 
performing his miracles, but had said nothing about his 
being the Messiah. He allowed his disciples to wonder 
and the public to wonder. 

Some said he was a prophet, others that he was one 
of the prophets risen from the dead, others that he was 
Elias, but Jesus himself said nothing until a few months 
before the time of the lesson, when he broached the 
matter to his disciples by asking whom they considered 
him to be, and Simon Peter, speaking under a measure of 
inspiration or guidance, declared him to be the Messiah. 
From that time on Jesus began to explain to them that 
although he was the Messiah he must suffer, and they 
understood not. To them it seemed that, so far from 
his death being near, the very reverse was true. Some 
of the people were just getting awake to his greatness 
and power, others were just finding out that Messiah 
had really come— it could not be, they thought, that 
their Master would be crucified. They considered this 
one of his dark sayings. 

But Jesus would not bid the multitude stop. On 
the contrary, he explained that their shouts were but 
a fulfilment of a prophecy made centuries before by 
Zechariah (9:9)— "Shout, O daughter of Jerusalem: 
behold thy King cometh unto thee: he is just and having 
salvation; lowly and riding upon an ass." Furthermore, 
by way of emphasizing the matter, by way of convincing 
his disciples that he was the very one mentioned by the 
prophet, he declared that if the multitude had not broken 
forth in a shout the very stones of the ground must have 
shouted, because thus God had caused it to be written 
aforetime in the prophecy, and not one jot or tittle of 
the divine declaration could fail. A little later on, when 
our Lord and his followers had reached the Temple, the 
shoutings of "Hosanna" were renewed; and in that connection 
it is particularly mentioned that the children 
joined in the shouting, in accord with the words of the 
Scripture— "Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings 
thou hast ordained praise." 

THE TIME OF THEIR VISITATION. 

How remarkable is this scene!— the people of Israel 



waiting for Messiah for centuries, striving to be ready to be 
his peculiar people, to be associated with him in his Kingdom 
work, in the blessing of all the nations of the earth 
their religious teachers, with broad phylacteries and 
many outward manifestations of piety, zeal for the law 
and for the Sabbath, and claiming to be waiting for the 
Messiah, were all unprepared, not in the heart condition 
which alone would be able to recognize the Messiah— 
"blind," leading the blind multitude who were too 
confidently trusting in them. 

On the other hand the apostles, ignorant and unlearned 
men from Galilee, at a distance from the advantages 
of Judea, were the chief supporters and backers 
of Messiah. The crowd around him and favoring him, 
recognizing him, shouting his praises, were common 
people, many of them strangers to those parts, who had 
fewer advantages religiously than the people of Jerusalem. 
Amongst the number to give him praise were the 
little uninstructed children. How strange the scene 
appears, and yet it is no more strange than at present. 
Again we are in the days of the Son of man— again the 
doctors of the law, doctors of divinity and chief priests 
and scribes and learned professors and prominent 
church people, professing faithfulness to the Lord and 
praying continually, "Thy Kingdom come, thy will be 
done on earth as it is done in heaven," are blind to 
the fact of our Lord's second coming, to the fact that we 
are now living in the days of the Son of man."— 
Matt. 24:37-39. 

Only a few realize the situation and they are chiefly 
of the Nazareth and Galilean type, not highly esteemed 
amongst men and in religious circles— thought to be 
rather peculiar at very best. These alone to-day are 
hailing Emanuel, shouting his praises and laying at his 
feet their garments of praise and the palm branches of 
such victories as they can gain on behalf of the Truth 
in conflict with the world, the flesh and the devil. 

"YOUR HOUSE IS LEFT UNTO YOU DESOLATE." 

The little procession was not long in passing from 
Bethany to the knoll of the Mount of Olives, which overlooks 
Jerusalem. Here the Master stopped and the 
multitude with him, their attention riveted upon the 
city and the King. They knew not the importance of 
the moment, they realized not that the great clock of 
the universe was striking, that a new dispensational 
change was taking place, that the favor which God had 
for centuries bestowed upon Israel as a nation was about 
to pass from them, because they were not as a nation in 
heart readiness to receive the blessings and privileges 
proffered to them. 

And it is not for us to mourn that they were not 
ready— rather it is for us to realize that the plan of God 
was not thwarted nor hindered by their unreadiness; 
and in God's providence, as he had foreknown and foretold, 



the fall of natural Israel from divine favor was about 

to open the way for so many of the Gentiles as were ready 

R3539 :page 110 

for the blessing, to come into divine favor, and become 
with the elect of natural Israel members of spiritual 
Israel. The Master saw all this, and as it was the marked-out 
divine plan he murmured not in any particular, and 
yet he wept as he beheld the city, as he thought of the 
privileges that were about to be removed from Israel 
as a nation, and how instead of blessings there would 
come upon them as a consequence of their rejection of 
their opportunities a "great time of trouble," awful 
trouble. He felt now as he expressed himself a few days 
later as they wept with him on the way to Calvary, 
"Weep not for me, weep for yourselves." 

By way of identifying the transpiring events in the 
minds of his followers, even in this day, our Lord uttered 
audibly the words, "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that 
killest the prophets, and stonest them which are sent 
unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children 
together as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, 
and ye would not! Behold, your house is left unto you 
desolate. For I say unto you, Ye shall not see me 
henceforth, till ye shall say, 'Blessed is he that cometh 
in the name of the Lord. '"--Matt. 23:37-39. 

WHAT THE SENTENCE IMPLIED. 

Our Lord's words emphasize five points: 

(1) The Jews as the natural seed of Abraham had 
the first opportunity under the divine arrangement of 
becoming fully and exclusively the elect of God, the 
Church, the Bride, the Lamb's wife. But only a remnant 
of them were worthy, because only a remnant were in 
the heart condition of Israelites indeed. The majority 
were praying to the Lord with their lips while their 
hearts were far from him, as Jesus declared. 

(2) The time had come for the end of their national 
favor. The "house of Israel" according to the flesh had 
received all the favor God intended for it up to this 
time, and now, being found wanting, it was cast aside— 
"Your house is left unto you desolate." 

(3) When that typical house of servants was left 
desolate it furnished the opportunity for the installation 
of the antitypical house of sons. The Apostle expresses 
this, saying, "Moses, verily, was faithful as a 
servant over his house, but Christ as a Son over his 
house [house of sons]; whose house are we, if we hold 
fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the hope firm 
unto the end."— Heb. 3:5,6. 

(4) Our Lord's absence during the period of the 
selection of spiritual Israel is indicated by his statement 
that natural Israel should see him no more "until that 
day." Spiritual Israel would see him, but only with the 



eye of faith, as our Lord again expressed it— "Yet a 
little while and the world seeth me no more, but ye shall 
see me." 

(5) Our Lord's words indicate further that when 
that day shall come the blindness of natural Israel shall 
be turned away, their eyes of understanding shall open, 
and they also will see out of the obscurity, out of the 
darkness under which they were then laboring and under 
which they have been for more than eighteen centuries 
of this Gospel age. 

The Apostle emphasizes this point, telling us that 
as soon as the spiritual Israel class has been completed 
and glorified, then favor shall return to natural Israel, 
and the blindness which came upon them because of 
the rejection of Messiah and because their house was 
rejected from the Lord's favor will pass away— "All 
Israel shall be saved" from their blindness. The Lord 
through the prophet tells the same thing, assuring us 
that in that day he will pour out his Spirit upon the house 
of David and the house of Judah, and they shall look 
upon him whom they have pierced and shall mourn 
because of him. He assures us that in that day he will 
pour upon them the spirit of prayer and supplication. 

How glad we are for these assurances that God hath 
not cast away perpetually the natural seed of Abraham, 
whom he foreknew and to whom pertained the promises, 
and who are sure to get a share in those promises, although 
they have forfeited their privileges as respects 
the chief part, concerning which the Apostle declares, 
Israel hath not obtained it, but the election hath obtained 
it, and the rest were blinded. So, then, while 
sympathizing with Israel in their loss, we rejoice that 
in God's providence our eyes have seen and our ears 
have heard of the King and his Kingdom, and that we 
have become his spiritual Israel and are to be with him 
the seed of Abraham, through whom all the families of 
the earth will be blessed, natural Israel being the first 
of those who will receive the divine favor. 

"Ride on triumphantly, O Lord, 
Pride and ambition at thy feet we lay. 
Our eyes are opening and we hear thy Word; 
We are thy followers, lead thou the way 
To victory over sin and death and grave." 

SPIRITUAL ISRAEL'S ANTITYPE. 

The Scriptures clearly indicate that spiritual Israel, 
as the antitype of natural Israel, will similarly have a 
great testing in the end of this period or age; that a 
harvest time for the gathering of the wheat is the consummation 
or closing of both the Jewish and the Gospel 
ages; that a terrible time of trouble, symbolized by fire 
upon the chaff of the Jewish age and by fire burning the 
tares in the end of the Gospel age, will prepare the way 
for the grander dispensation to follow the glorious 



reign of Messiah. The Scriptures declare that as our 
Lord proved a stone of stumbling to the great mass of 
nominal Israel after the flesh at his first advent, so he 
will be for a stone of stumbling to spiritual Israel, his 
second house, at his second advent. 

We are, therefore, to expect that now in this harvest 
as in the harvest at the end of the Jewish age, the great 
mass of the Lord's professed people will be unready, and 
stumble, and go into the great time of trouble which will 
wind up this age. While sympathizing with the conditions, 
while weeping as our dear Redeemer wept over 
the natural house, while saying, Babylon is fallen, as he 
then declared, "Your house is left unto you desolate," 
we nevertheless learn to rejoice in the outworkings of 
the divine plan, realizing them to be the very embodiment 
of justice, wisdom, love. And the more deeply we 
inquire into the Word of the Lord, the more do we see 
that his love has still wonderful provisions in the future 
for many who are not found worthy to be of the very 
elect, the house of sons, but who may come into divine 
favor on a lower plan during the Millennial age. 

Those who did receive the Lord at his first advent, 
those who were "Israelites indeed in whom there was 
no guile," not only were kept from stumbling over the 
Lord, but, instead of becoming a stumbling-stone to 
them, by the grace of God he became a stepping-stone 
to the higher and grander things of this Gospel age, to 
the great spiritual blessings which began at Pentecost. 

R3539 :page 111 

And so now, while the mass of nominal spiritual Israel, 
Christendom, are stumbling in the time of the second 
presence, we need have no doubt that all who are now 
spiritual Israelites indeed will be found of the Lord and 
gathered into his garner; and that while the masses of 
professors will stumble, all of this class will find the Lord 
and the present Truth a stepping-stone to the still 
grander and still higher new dispensation to which we 
will be ushered in, not by another Pentecost, but by the 
glorious change of the first resurrection, which shall 
make us like our Lord, spirit beings, partakers of the 
divine nature. 

This class, prepared for this blessing and exaltation, 
will be found— much like the class at the first advent— 
to contain not many great, not many wise, not many 
learned, but Israelites indeed, sincere lovers of the Truth, 
willing at heart at least to lay down their lives for the 
Lord and for the brethren. To them also come the 
Lord's comforting words, "Blessed are your eyes, for 
they see; and your ears, for they hear." Even in the 
present time they have a blessing, before the change. 

THE JEWS SOUGHT SIGNS, THE GREEKS WISDOM. 

John's account does not give all the details respecting 



the entry into the Temple, but, passing over some of 
these, enumerates an incident that occurred probably 
a day or two afterward while our Lord was preaching 
in the Temple. Certain Greeks, realizing that the Lord 
was not appreciated by his hearers, apparently thought 
to invite him to go with them to their homes, not realizing 
the plan of God in respect to his great sacrifice. 
They requested an audience with Jesus, and, naturally 
enough, went to Philip and Andrew, whose names of 
Greek origin implied that they had a knowledge of the 
Greek language. These made known the matter to 
Jesus, who, however, merely used the incident for an 
opportunity to impress still further the lesson of the 
hour, that the time had come for him to be glorified— 
not glorified in the way that his disciples and friends 
had expected and hoped, but glorified in the higher 
sense which our Lord realized. He knew that his hour 
was approaching in which he was to be crucified, and 
that his obedience unto death, even the death of the 
cross, was the condition upon which his high exaltation 
in the divine plan was made to hinge. His heart, fully 
consecrated, was merely waiting for the opportunity 
to finish the work which the Father had given him to 
do. 

"IF A GRAIN OF WHEAT DIE." 

Our Lord answered in a dark saying, in a parable, 
"Except a grain of wheat fall into the ground and die, 
it abideth by itself alone; but if it die it bringeth forth 
much fruit." No wonder that the apostles and the Jews 
were mystified by such statements of the truth. Indeed 
we know from other Scriptures that the majority of our 
Lord's teachings were not expected nor intended to be 
understood until after Pentecost— after the holy Spirit 
of adoption would enlighten their understandings. 
Now, by reason of this enlightenment, we are privileged 
to appreciate the rich depths of our Lord's statement. 

R3540 :page 111 

We see that if Jesus had kept his life, had not sacrificed 
it, he might indeed have maintained it forever, 
but he would not in that event have been privileged to 
bestow life upon the Church and the world. His death, 
the just for the unjust, applied to his believing disciples, 
justified them to life, "through faith in his blood." 
His death thus brings forth choice fruit in his Church, 
his Bride, his Members. And, indirectly, the fruitage 
will be still larger, for his disciples, justified through 
faith in his blood, are invited and privileged to lay down 
their lives with his, to become dead with him. The 
results or fruitage in their case as members of his body 
means a still larger crop in the age to come. Otherwise 
stated, our Lord as the one grain brings forth much 
fruit, an hundred and forty and four thousand, besides 



the "great company" whose number is known to no 
man. And through the hundred and forty and four 
thousand, his representatives, his members, the result 
will ultimately be a still larger fruitage, when all the 
families of the earth shall have the fullest opportunity 
of reconciliation to the Father and of life everlasting upon 
the divine conditions. 

TERMS OFDISCIPLESHIP. 

Stating matters far beyond the comprehension of 
his hearers, our Lord proceeded to mark out the course 
of his immediate followers in language which they would 
understand after the begetting of the Spirit, after Pentecost, 
saying, "He that loveth his life shall lose it; 
and he that hateth his life in this world shall keep it 
unto life eternal." That is to say, if we esteem highly 
our present existence, under present imperfect conditions, 
we will not be willing to lay down our lives in 
the Lord's service in the hope of future life, seen only 
by the eye of faith. 

We must love less the present life under present 
imperfect conditions in order to appreciate more the 
eternal life under better conditions. Whoever is satisfied 
with the sinful and imperfect condition in the present 
life is in no state of mind to become the Lord's disciple. 
Being satisfied with present conditions, he will be unwilling 
to sacrifice them for the really better ones which 
the Lord commends. We have no reason to think that 
the Lord's words apply beyond this Gospel age— in the 
Millennial age things will be greatly transformed, reorganized. 
The Lord's language limits the matter saying, 
"in this world,"— that is, this kosmos or order of things. 

Still continuing to explain the requirements of 
present discipleship, our Lord declares, If any man will 
be my servant let him follow me; where I am there 
will also my servant be. By this language our Lord 
shows that his faithful followers shall ultimately share 
his divine nature in the spirit realm. Again he states 
the same matter in different language, saying, "If any 
man will serve me, him will the Father honor." The 
Father honored the Son because of his faithfulness even 
unto death; the Father accepts as sons the followers of 
the Son, justified through his blood; and those who are 
faithful in walking in his steps the Father will surely 
honor as he honored Jesus, the first-born, whom he raised 
from the dead to glory, honor and immortality, far above 
angels, principalities and powers and every name that 
is named. Let us all be faithful followers. 



page 113 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVI. APRIL 15, 1905. No. 8 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 115 

The Welsh Revival 115 

Several American Revivals 116 

An Editor Who Sees Something 116 

Spirit Phenomena Increasing 117 

Washing One Another's Feet 118 

A Favorable Opportunity Lost 119 

The Meaning of the Lord's Action 120 

The True Vine and Its Fruit 121 

The Vine of the Earth 121 

Many Illustrations of our Oneness 122 

The Object of Pruning 122 

"Now Ye are Clean" 123 

Withered Branches Burned 124 

Interesting Letters from the Antipodes 125 

page 114 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



CHRISTIAN SCIENCE. 



If you have friends who are Christian Scientists to whom 
you would like to give reading matter to help them into the 
light, we recommend that you give or loan them the TOWER 
of May 1, 1903, which contained an article on that subject. 
We have a quantity of that issue which we will be pleased to 
supply free for said purpose. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



Order all the sample copies of ZION'S WATCH TOWER and 
of OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS that you can use judiciously. We 
supply them in any quantity free. 

We trust that all friends of Present Truth do what they 
can to secure DAWN and TOWER readers, and these samples 
will prepare the way. 

VOLUNTEERING BY MAIL. 



Our output of tracts free as Sample Copies is limited. This 
year please follow this plan: Procure wrapping paper of the 
size in which your tracts go to you, write on these the addresses 
of all of your friends and acquaintances of the godly 
sort and mail the bundle to us. Do not this year send us "all 
sorts" of addresses. Do "sharp shooting" rather. You may 
repeat the lists every quarter if you desire, indicating other 
tracts for same, as we would not remember which were previously 
sent. 



R3540 :page 115 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
THE WELSH REVIVAL. 



CONFLICTING views of the significance of the 
Welsh revival abound. The movement is novel 
in that it seems to be outside the labors of "ministers," 
carried on by men and women hitherto without 
reputation and still manifesting "little ability." Indeed, 
the meetings are described as "go-as-you-please," in 
many respects. We rejoice that it seems well established 
that better morals and much less drunkenness 
mark the region affected. 

Lady Henry Somerset writes to friends respecting 
this spontaneous revival, contrasting it favorably with 



the less successful efforts being put forth in London by 
the ministers and others, in cooperation with Dr. Torrey 
and Mr. Alexander, "American Evangelists." The latter 
movement has had all kinds of advertising, and every 
assistance that $57,000 could command. An extract 
from Lady Somerset's letter follows: 

"Dr. Torrey spoke simple, straightforward words 
without any great magnetic force, although you could 
not but feel the earnestness of the man and the strength 
of his belief, and yet his words to me were a disappointment. 
Ten thousand men and women were there, who, 
speaking generally, professed Christianity. They were 
gathering in a city where sadness and sin abound, 
where the indifferent crowd the pavements, and the 
hopeless fill our slums and mean streets. The revivalist 
took for his text, 'Rejoice in the Lord alway, and again 
I say, Rejoice.' Joy, he said, was the characteristic of 
the Christian, joy overflowing filled his heart, illumined 
his features, welled out in his words. Does it? I thought, 
as I looked round the audience. Ought it to do so? was 
the question that rose in my heart. 

"The cries of the oppressed in Russia are ringing in our 
ears, the cruel grasp of poverty holds our people in the 
iron grip of hunger, the steps of the man who is seeking 
work in vain beat upon our streets, the sin which mars, 
blights and destroys is stalking abroad at this very hour, 
the drink poison is inflaming men's brains and cursing 
their lives. Can our attitude as Christians be one of 

joy? 

"Ought we not rather to weep with Christ over 
sorrowful, wayward Humanity, and humbly face the 
dread responsibility which rests upon us? Calm, self-satisfied 
we all sat there, and never a word did the 
revivalist say to those listening thousands to arouse them 
to the fact that the state of London, nay of the world, 
lies at the door of the lethargic church itself. We sang 
songs over and over again about heaven, about joining 
our loved ones yonder. 

"A young man with a beautiful voice in the top 
gallery sang a solo about "Telling Mother I'll Be There," 
but to me the note of a real revival was missing, which 
should sound the call to be about the business of our 
Master, to be in dead earnest that God's will be done on 
earth, and to understand that it is the business of His 
Church to get it done. And as I went away after the 
meeting, to the slums of the East End, I felt more 
strongly than ever that to define our understanding of 
what heaven will be is an impossibility. One thing we 
know, however— that it must mean an eternal harmony 
between our will and God's, and that our present peace lies 
in doing His will now. 

"But it is still more difficult to understand how joy 
can be the keynote of our Christianity if the revivalists 
really believe that for some an eternity of torment 
awaits them, without even the escape through the purifying 
fire which the tenderer spirit of the medieval 



church granted as a recognition of the mercy of God; for 
them it surely seems to me joy is impossible. 

"It is as though one individual, with a cry of exultation 
and a shout of Alleluia, found the fire escape, while the rest 
of the household perished in the flames. But the impression 
produced on my mind may have been possibly 
heightened by the contrast presented by the wonderfully 
vivid realization of the simple work of the Spirit 
which has been blowing like the divine breath through the 
valleys of South Wales. 

"There organization has been unknown, money has 
been unsought, newspaper puffs nonexistent; indeed, 
the revivalist has still to be found. True it is that the 
figure of Evan Roberts stands out strongly, and yet the 
revival is independent of him. 

"There is no order of service, no set choir, only bursts 
of wonderful Welsh melody, no hymn books— the words 
are written in the hearts of the worshipers. The little 
whitewashed chapels resound with song, song exquisite 
in its harmony, solemn as death, and yet jubilant as a 
choir of angels. Then stillness, prayers, soft sobbing 

R3540 :page 116 

from broken hearts, confession, profession, all the wonderful 
gamut of the soul's experience, but all spontaneous, 
with no settled effect, only the greatest effect of all, the 
reality of human need and divine power. 

"What wonder Wales has been shaken as never 
before since the great religious revival a century and a 
half ago! What wonder the drink shops are empty, that 
at the assizes there has been no crime! 

"Everywhere as you move about you feel a great 
hush as though Christ walked over the mountains and 
into the mining towns and out through the valleys among 
the sons and daughters of toil, whose eyes have been 
opened to see Him as He came to them by the way." 



This dear writer seems to be "ripe" for the message 
of Present Truth as are all the best hearts the world over. 
We trust that somehow she and all such will be reached 
within the next ten years. It is said to be remarkable, 
too, that the eternal torment idea is but seldom referred 
to in the Welsh movement. 

The editor of Review of Reviews, Mr. Stead, has 
given considerable attention to the Welsh movement 
and predicts that the blaze there started will sweep over 
the world. He declares that he sees evidences of clairvoyance 
in connection with Mr. Evan Roberts, the leader 
of the revival. Mr. Stead is himself an avowed Spiritualist 

R3541 :page 116 

and ought to be good authority on the subject. 



The "lights" which follow one of the women 
leaders of the revival, Mrs. Jones, we have referred to on 
the next page. A reader sends us the following, which 
purports to be an extract from a work, Luminous 
Phenomena, by no less a celebrity than 

SIR WILLIAM CROOKS 

"Under the strictest test conditions, I have seen 
a solid self-luminous body, the size and nearly the 
shape of a turkey's egg, float noiselessly about the room, 
at one time higher than anyone present could reach 
standing on tiptoe, and then gently descend to the floor. 
It was visible for more than ten minutes, and before it 
faded away it struck the table three times with a sound 
like that of a hard solid body.... I have seen luminous 
points of light darting about and settling on the 
heads of different persons; I have had questions answered 
by the flashing of a bright light a desired number of 
times in front of my face. I have seen sparks of light 
rising from the table to the ceiling, and again falling 
upon the table, striking it with an audible sound. I 
have had an alphabetic communication given by luminous 
flashes occurring before me in the air, whilst my 
hand was moving about amongst them. I have seen a 
luminous cloud floating upwards to a picture. Under 
the strictest test conditions I have more than once had 
a solid, self-luminous, crystalline body placed in my 
hand by a hand which did not belong to any person in 
the room. In the light I have seen a luminous cloud 
hover over a heliotrope on a side table, break a sprig off, and 
carry the sprig to a lady; and on some occasions I have 
seen a similar luminous cloud visibly condense to the 
form of a hand and carry small objects about." 



When we remember how Satanic influence operated 
toward the work of Paul and Silas (Acts 16:16-19) and when 
we remember, too, the repeated declarations of the Bible, 
that Satan is to have great power and signs and lying 
wonders in the end of this age, which, "if it were possible, 
would deceive the very elect," we are not yet sure that 
Spiritism (demonism) has not something to do with 
these signs. We are to expect that as a last resort to 
gain power, Satan will in effect cast out Satan— thereby 
to gain and hold a greater influence against the Truth. 
In the temptations to our Lord, Satan practically offered 
everything if he might but retain his power; and doubtless 
he would be no less willing now to do good, that evil 
might follow. Without judging until more fruits are 
ripe, and surely without opposing good moral results, 
let us beware lest we fall into any of Satan's traps, for 
we are not ignorant of his devices. 

For a week Evan Roberts would not speak one word 
nor attend a meeting. The latest word is that on the 



eighth day he broke silence and said: "I have wrestled, 
not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, 
against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of 
this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places, 
but power has been given to me, and I have obtained the 
victory." 

SEVERAL AMERICAN REVIVALS 

The newspapers tell of a remarkable revival in New 
York state, of one in New Jersey, which converted 
almost the entire population, closed the saloons, etc.; 
of another in Southern Illinois, where the principal 
minister seems to have been a professional base ball 
player, whose efforts for righteousness are turning many 
from sinful ways to sobriety and religion of a sort; and 
of a similar movement in a Dakota town, which has 
apparently awakened some to a changed course of life, 
"turning over a new leaf," etc. 

Let us rejoice with those who rejoice! Let us be 
glad to note every evidence of reform in heart or conduct! 
But let us remember that conversion is the 
beginning and not the end of the Christian life. If 
these converts are now of "the household of faith," 
let us greet them as such and congratulate them and hope 
for their growth in grace and knowledge to the point 
where they will be ready for the next step,— full 
consecration. 

The privilege and responsibility for the instruction 
of these lies at our door; for alas! most other Christians 
through lack of development are unable to assist these 
into right paths of faith and hope, not having found these 
for themselves,— being still bewildered by the fog and 
smoke of the "dark ages." Let us be as wise and kind 
and helpful as possible along these lines; and let us pray 
for the wisdom from above promised in our year-text. 

Meantime let us stand fast in our uncompromising 
but kindly opposition to Churchianity, "Babylon," and 
our loyalty to the One Church of many members of 
which Christ is the Head. While repudiating sectarian 
systems as of the Adversary, let us fellowship as brethren 
all who trust in the precious blood and are consecrated 
to his service— no matter how imperfectly they discern 

R3541 :page 117 

the truth— hoping for the fuller opening of the eyes of 
their understanding soon. 

AN EDITOR WHO SEES SOMETHING 

The Methodist Advocate, of Richmond, Va., 
editorially notes the need of a revival of religion, but 
fears that the prosperity of our times is unfavorable for 
its development. He concludes thus: 

"The South, in 1865, was the land of woe. No words 



have been coined to rightly represent its anguish. God 
in mercy gave them a divine solace. For years a revival 
continued. There was a million of accessions to our 
Church, unparalleled. But 'prosperity' spread to 
the cotton, cane and tobacco fields. We erected temples, 
hired men singers and women singers, set up sackbut, 
dulcimer, cornet, flute and harp, as never was seen or 
sought after by our fathers. We admired ourselves. 
And so likewise did our brethren of the "Twin Methodism," 
[Methodists of the North]. Such superb fanes, 
each with its baritone, alto, soprano and imported 
music master. 

"There has been a dry-rot. The evolution is the 
'boll weavil' of the pulpit. It has sapped the faith of 
the prophet. Commercialism raving in a delirium is 
the cut-worm of the piety of the pew. If ever this 
Republic had need of 'old-time religion,' it is in this 
era. The Trust is hatching the cockatrice eggs of Socialism. 
There are men living who saw 'Black Republicanism,' 
as then called, hooted. And presently that 
genius, a dwarf corked in a bottle, grew into a giant. 
He turned into the Demon of Civil War. Socialism 
yesterday cast but a handful of ballots. At last election 
it was a head taller than the 'Black Republicanism' 
of its early days. The contest, now on, is one of political 
economy. The Strike and the Trust are 'foot to foot, 
beard to beard,' at the ballot-box. And to-morrow, 
it will be the cartridge-box. 

"America needs the inflow of the divine influence. 
The rainbow must arch the sky or the Deluge of Death 
will overwhelm this fair land." 

SPIRIT PHENOMENA INCREASING. 



It should not surprise us that spirit-manifestations 
are on the increase. In Pittsburg recently a Miss Fay 
gave public exhibitions of her power to read questions 
in the pockets of her audience, others held tightly in 
their own hands, etc. Her answers to the questions were 
said to have been remarkable everyway. True, it was 
claimed by some that her work was fraudulent; but others 
as positively declared that stolen goods were recovered 
by her advice and matters explained as no human being 
could have done without supernatural aid. 

A SCHOOL GIRL'S POWER 

A newspaper report tells of a school girl in the West 
who has just discovered that she possesses similar 
powers. She first found that she could "see the answers 
in her books" when they were closed, just as accurately 
as when they were open before her, etc. 

"STRANGE SIGHTS" IN WALES 



From London come cablegrams telling of peculiar 
manifestations of "supernatural lights" in the vicinity 
of the Revival scenes, and are regarded as signs from 
heaven. These follow one of the women preachers and 
are seen near one of the chapels. We quote further:— 

"Suddenly I saw what appeared to be a ball of 
fire above the roof of the chapel. It had a steady, 
intense, yellow brilliance and did not move. Later two 
lights flashed out, one on each side of the chapel; they 
seemed about 100 feet apart and considerably higher in 
the air than the first one. In the distance they looked 
like large, brilliant motorcar lights. Just after 10:30 I 
was startled by a flash on the dark hillside. It looked 
like a solid ball of light, six inches in diameter, and was 
tiring to look at." 

SPIRITS IN A TREE 

The public press reports that a tree on the farm of 
W. Albert, near Paducah, Ky., called the "talking tree" 
has attracted much attention lately— crowds going to 
see and hear it. Strange noises emanate from the tree, 
including a crash, as though it were being crushed, and 
then a voice can be distinctly heard, saying, "There are 
treasures buried at my roots." One journal says:— 

"A party consisting of the most reliable citizens of 
the county visited the tree to make a thorough investigation 
for themselves as to the noises being heard. They 
listened patiently for several hours, when there was a 
sudden crash, which has been given many times before, 
and the marvelous reproduction of human voice came 
out. 

"The mystery remains unsolved, and so great has 
the number of people been who have gone there in the 
last several months that the tree is now dead, caused by 
the continuous tramping on the earth surrounding the 
tree. 

R3542:page 117 

"The only theory that has been suggested is that a 
man was killed under the tree in 1862, and while many do 
not believe in "spirits," the facts are so plain and the 
voice can be so distinctly heard that they cannot dispute 
the fact." 

THE OBJECT INTENDED 

Evidently the time is nearing when the Lord will 
permit this "strong delusion" to mislead many; and we 
may be sure that the fallen spirits will be ready to use 
whatever liberty is granted them. We may expect their 
manifestations to increase and to deceive many more, 
and be one of the important influences leading up to the 
persecution of the followers of the Truth, and ultimately 



to the great world-trouble. There have been so many 
applications for extra copies of our issue of January 15 
that we have concluded to issue its article on Spiritism 
in tract form at once. Order samples for your friends as 
you can use them to advantage. 

TO FOUND AN INSTITUTE OF PSYCHICAL RESEARCH 

Professor Hyslop and others recently held a meeting 
in New York City to take steps to found a Research 
institute. It was decided that it would require one 
hundred thousand dollars to found it properly, and fifty 
thousand dollars a year to maintain it. Speaking on the 
subject, Rev. M. J. Savage said:— 

DESIRES KNOWLEDGE OF NEXT WORLD 

"If the life we are leading here is all there is to it, 
every sensible man would wish to know it, and yet there 
is no use in hiding from us the fact that such a knowledge 
would be sad to most of us and that it would change the 
entire meaning and outlook of existence. 

R3542:page 118 

"I have been immensely interested in these investigations 
because I believe that if we could make 
people sure of continued existence and could couple with 
this in popular appreciation a recognition of the universal 
law of cause and effect, we should be able to lift 
the level of the moral life of the world. That is, if people 
could know that they must keep right on and if they 
could couple with this the further knowledge that as 
the past has made the present, so the present must make 
the future; that there is no magic in the fact of death to 
change our nature, but that we keep right on what we 
have made ourselves— this knowledge would seem to me 
the mightiest moral lever that the human mind can possibly 
conceive. 

SOLUTION OF THE LABOR PROBLEMS 

"It would become a practical motive bearing on 
every thought, every feeling, every action of the daily 
life. Right here I believe we should find the best possible 
solution of our industrial problems. 

"If the mass of men come to believe that this life 
is all, it is the most natural thing in the world that people 
should struggle for their share of whatever good things 
life may seem to have for them as they go along. If we 
are only dogs in a world kennel whose roof is the sky, 
why should one smarter and fiercer than the rest be 
allowed to monopolize a pile of bones a thousand times 
larger than he can personally use while the rest simply 
snarl and starve? 

"There is no use in my saying that this is not a 



practical question. It seems to me the most practical 
and vital of all of which we can possibly conceive. What 
kind of being am I? What is the rational way for me to 
live? On what scale shall I lay out my life? What is to 
be the possible outcome and what shall I try to attain? 
If these questions are not practical and important, 
then I do not know of any which are more than trifles." 



R3542:page 118 

WASHING ONE ANOTHER'S FEET. 

JOHN 13:1-14. -APRIL 30. 

Golden Text:— "By love serve one another."— Gal. 5:13. 

OUR lessons can only be properly understood by taking 
note of the surroundings. The feast at Bethany, 
followed by our Lord's triumphal entry on the 
ass amid the shoutings of the multitude, his several days' 
preaching in the Temple to large crowds, and the coming 
of the Greeks to inquire for him, all seemed to indicate a 
growing popularity; and the disciples, thoroughly unable 
to comprehend the Master's declaration that he was shortly 
to be put to death by the chief priests, were full of ambitious 
thoughts respecting the future— respecting their 
identity with the Lord, and how his exaltation as a king 
would bring them into prominence and honor with him, 
as well as confer upon them the coveted opportunity of 
accomplishing a large amount of good, blessing a larger 
number of people, etc. 

The thirteenth of Nisan apparently was spent by our 
Lord in quiet retirement, and the evening following, beginning 
the fourteenth, was the time appointed for the 
celebration of the Passover Supper in the upper room. 
Some of the apostles had, by the Lord's instruction, made 
ready beforehand; and now, as they assembled without a 
host to appoint them their places at the Supper, a discussion 
as to their prominence and their rights to the most 
honorable places, nearest to the Master, is not surprising. 
Our Lord twice before had rebuked them on this 
very line, assuring them that unless they cultivated and 
attained a spirit of meekness like little children they 
could have no part in the Kingdom. And only a week 
before, while en route to Jerusalem, James and John had 
made the request that in the Kingdom, when established, 
they might sit the one on the right hand and the other 
on the left hand of the Master, in closest proximity to 
his person. It was this spirit that controlled on this 
occasion, and led up to our Lord's washing of the disciples' 
feet as a lesson of humility and willingness to serve 
one another even in the humblest capacity. 

SELFISHNESS EVEN IN LOVE 



Nor are we to think of the apostles as each striving 
for the highest position merely from a selfish standpoint. 
Rather we should suppose that Peter, James and John, 
whom the Lord had in various ways specially favored 
in times past and who seemed to be specially close to 
him, loved the positions nearest his person, not merely 
because of the honor thus implied, but largely because 
of their love and esteem for the Master himself, and 
perhaps with the feeling that they appreciated this 
privilege more than some others could appreciate the 
same. Indeed we may suppose that a considerable 
number of the other apostles strove on their behalf, 
insisting that they should have the most honorable 
position. But however we view the matter, it is evident 
that a wrong spirit had been engendered, one very 
inappropriate to the occasion, especially inappropriate 
to the Memorial Supper which our Lord intended to 
institute after the Passover Supper. 

It is difficult for us to gage our own hearts thoroughly 
and hence we should use great charity in measuring the 
hearts and intentions of others, and should err rather on 
the side of too great sympathy and leniency than on the 
side of too strong condemnation. Doubtless had the 
apostles been inquired of respecting the matter they 
would have denied any elements of selfishness in their 
motives and conduct, and would have thought and 
spoken only of their zeal for the Lord and desire to be 
near him. This illustrates to us, what the Scriptures 
declare, that the human heart is exceedingly deceitful— 
that it needs scrutinizing carefully lest, under the cloak 
of something good, it might harbor qualities which without 
that cloak we would despise or spurn. 

As further illustrating this subject, and as helping 
us each and all to apply the lesson personally, we relate 
a dream told by a Scotch minister, Horatius Bonar, shortly 

R3542:page 119 

before his death. He dreamed that his zeal was represented 
in a package of considerable size and weight, and 
that some angels came to it and weighed it and assured 
him that it was full weight, an hundred pounds— all that 
was possible. In his dream he was greatly pleased with 
this report. They next determined to analyze it. They 
put it into a crucible and tested it in various ways and 
then reported the result thus: "Fourteen parts selfishness; 
fifteen parts sectarianism; twenty-two parts ambition; 
twenty-three parts love to man; twenty-six 
parts love to God." Awakening he realized that it was 
but a dream, yet felt greatly humbled, and doubtless was 
profited by it throughout the remainder of life. That 
dream may be equally profitable to each of us in leading 
us to a close inspection of the motives which lie beyond 
our words and thoughts and doings— especially beyond 
our service for the Lord and for the brethren. 



The first verse of our lesson calls attention to our 
Lord's love as the basis of all his dealings with "his 
own." Because of his love he laid aside his glory and 
became a man; because of his love he devoted himself 
as the man Christ Jesus; because of his love he was now 
anxious to help his dear disciples over a difficulty which, 
if not conquered, would hinder their usefulness as his 
followers both in the present and future. This love not 
only led our Lord to administer the reproof necessary, 
but led him to do it in the wisest and best and kindest 
manner. His example in this respect should be observed 
and copied by all his followers, especially those who in 
any public capacity or service are his representatives 
in the Church. 

Had our Lord and his disciples been the guests of 
some host on this occasion, it would have been considered 
the duty of the host to have sent some menial 

R3543 :page 119 

to wash their feet. This was the custom of the country, 
and very necessary to comfort. The open sandals or 
imperfectly sewed shoes allowed the dust of the highway 
to soil the feet, and really made washing a necessity 
after every journey, but particularly on a festal occasion 
of this kind. As the Lord's company were not guests, 
but merely had the use of the room, no servant appeared 
to wash their feet, and it would have been properly the 
duty and custom for one of the number to have performed 
the menial service for the others. As we have 
just seen, however, the spirit of rivalry was warm in 
their hearts, and no one volunteered to render the service, 
nor had any one the right to demand it in a company 
in which the Lord had made no special rank and 
appointed none as menials. This, however, rightly 
understood and appreciated, would have left the greater 
opportunity for some of them to have volunteered this 
service to the others. What an opportunity they all 
lost! 

A FAVORABLE OPPORTUNITY LOST 

Our Lord apparently let the matter go to the full 
limit to see whether or not any of them would improve 
the opportunity and make himself servant of all: he 
waited until the supper was being served (not ended, 
as in our common version;) then arising from the table 
he laid aside his outer garment or mantle and took a 
towel and girded himself— that is to say, tightened the 
girdle worn around the waist, which would hold up the 
flowing under-garments and keep them out of the way 
of his activity. We can well imagine the consternation 
of the apostles as they watched this procedure, and then 
saw the Lord go from the 
feet of one and another as 
they protruded from the 



couches on which they reclined 

(as illustrated in a previous 

lesson). The method 

of washing feet was different 

from ours: the basin was 

merely a receptacle for holding 

the soiled water, the 

water being poured from 

the pitcher in a small stream while the foot was being 

washed, rubbed, rinsed. 

Apparently the apostles were so astonished at our 
Lord's procedure, and so felt the condemnation which 
his course implied, that they knew not what to say, and 
so silence reigned until it came Peter's turn. Peter had 
a peculiar combination of character, part of which was 
extremely good. He objected to having his feet washed 
by the Lord, saying, "Dost thou wash my feet?— It 
is not appropriate, Lord, that one so great as you should 
serve a person of my standing, a poor fisherman." But 
our Lord answered that although Peter did not discern 
the full meaning of the matter, he would explain to him 
later when he had finished the washing of all. Peter's 
second remark was less praiseworthy than his first. 
He said, "Thou shalt never wash my feet." 

It was hard for Peter to realize that he was the 
disciple and the Lord was the Teacher,— that it was for 
him to obey and not to dictate; but Jesus' answer, "If 
I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me," at once 
brought out the better side of Peter's impulsive nature. 
If his washing had anything to do with his nearness to 
the Master and his relationship to him, then he wanted 
it. Going even to the other extreme again, fearing to 
leave matters in the Lord's care, he cried, "Lord, not 
my feet only, but also my hands and my head." There 
is a lesson for us in this matter: We are not to dictate 
to the Lord, not to attempt to be wise or good or obedient 
in ways that he has not directed. This is a hard 
lesson for some dispositions to learn,— continually they 
want to do more than is written in the Scriptures. Such 
a course indicates either a lack of reverence for the Lord 
and his Word and the wisdom thereof, or else a too 
great self-confidence, too much self-esteem. A humble 
and trustful heart should learn to say, Thy will, O, 
Lord, thy way and in thy time— "Thy will, not mine be 
done." 

WASHING THE FEET OF THE BATHED 

Our Lord's answer in our common version is somewhat 
obscure; the revised version is better— he that is 
bathed needeth not save to wash his feet to be clean 
every whit. Properly they had all bathed in accordance 
with the Jewish requirement of the putting away of all 
filth at the beginning of the Passover season. Our Lord's 

R3543 : page 120 



intimation, then, signified that having bathed they 
merely now needed the rinsing of their feet, the cleansing of 
the members that had come in contact with the earth. 
Our Lord added, referring to Judas, "Ye are clean, but 
not all." This expression shows us clearly that he had 
in mind a higher cleansing, of which this washing of their 
feet and their previous bath were but figures. 

The Lord knew that the hearts of his disciples were 
loyal. He had accepted them as his disciples and had 
reckonedly imputed to them the merit of his sacrifice 
as a covering of their blemishes, the full testimony of 
which would be given them by and by at Pentecost, 
the holy Spirit testifying that the Father had accepted 
the Lord's atoning sacrifice on their behalf. But there 
was one in the number whose heart was not clean. Our 
Lord did not pass him by, but washed the feet of Judas 
with the rest, knowing the while of his perfidy, and that 
he had already bargained with the chief priests, and was 
merely awaiting the opportune moment for the carrying 
out of his malevolent scheme. 

Our Lord's words, although not understood by the 
rest, must have been appreciated by Judas, as were 
also his subsequent words recorded in verses 18,26,27,28. 
Our Lord went so far as to quote the very prophecy 
which marked Judas and his disloyalty, his violation of 
even the common hospitality. None of these things 
moved Judas; none of these things appealed to his heart 
in such a manner as to change his course. We have thus 
strong evidence of the willful intention which marked 
his crime and enforced the meaning of our Lord's words 
when he called him the "son of perdition," and declared 
that it would have been better for him that he had never 
been born. The quotation from the Psalm was, "He 
that eateth bread with me hath lifted up his heel against 
me." 

PATIENCE TO ITS LIMIT 

We may be sure that our Lord's conduct in dealing 
with Judas is not only a proper outline of what our conduct 
should be to any of a similar class, but additionally 
we should note the lesson that the Lord is long suffering 
toward all who become his disciples, not willing that any 
should perish, but disposed to do for them until the very 
last, and to bring to their attention the error of their 
ways repeatedly, in hope that thus they may be turned 
therefrom. The latter lesson has associated with it 
the thought that those who have received the Truth, 
and who in spite of all the favors connected therewith 
encourage and develop in themselves the spirit of selfishness, 
are apt to become so hardened, so calloused, that 
not even the Master's reproofs and the words of the 
Scriptures will influence them. This reminds us of the 
Apostle's words, "It is impossible to renew them again 
unto repentance"— to a proper course— if once the 



Spirit of the Lord has been fully subjected to the spirit 
of selfishness in their hearts. 

In harmony with what he told Peter— that he should 
know later on the significance of the washing— our Lord 
explained the matter after he had gone the rounds of 
all the apostles. He said, "Know [understand] ye what 
I have done to you? Ye call me Master and Lord, and 
ye say well; for so I am. If I then, your Lord and Master, 
have washed your feet, ye ought also to wash one another's 
feet." 

THE MEANING OF THE LORD'S ACTION 

Here we have the entire lesson explained. In their 
fear to be the least, all the disciples had shunned the 
opportunity of service for the Master and for each other. 
Our Lord, their acknowledged Head and Master, the 
Messiah, had humbled himself to serve them all, and 
had thus rebuked their inhumility, and at the same time 
set them an example that would apply to every affair 
of life, namely, that they should be glad to serve one 
another on every proper occasion, in the high things or 
in the common affairs of life. This washing of one 
another's feet we may readily see applies to any and 
every humble service of life, any and every kindness, 
though specially to those services and kindnesses which 
would be along the lines of spiritual assistances and 
comfort. 

From this standpoint it will be seen that we do not 
understand that our Master here enjoined a form or 
ceremony as our Dunkard friends and others believe. 
We do not even see in the matter the groundwork for 
the custom of the pope of Rome, who once every year, 
at this season washes the feet of twelve poor men, perhaps 
beggars, who are first prepared by a general washing 
and then brought in while the pope performs the 
special public service in the washing of their feet. We 
see no such formality in our Lord's intention. Indeed so 
far from it being a comfort or necessity to literally wash 
feet in our day and under our conditions, the reverse 
would be true. On the contrary, the Apostle points out, 
to wash the saints' feet in olden times was a mark of 
special hospitality, and entitled the performer to a loving 
respect in the Church.— 1 Tim. 5:10. 

How many blessed opportunities we have for comforting, 
refreshing, consoling one another and assisting 
one another in some of the humblest affairs of life, or in 
respect to some of the unpleasant duties, experiences 
or trials of life. As our Golden Text expresses it, we are 
in love to serve one another and not through formality. 
Any service done or attempted to be done in love, with 
the desire to do good to one of the Lord's people, we may 
be sure has the divine approval and blessing. Let us 
lose no opportunities of this kind; let us remember the 
Master's example; let us, like our Master, not merely 
assume humility or pretend it, but actually have that 



humility which will permit us to do kindness and services 
to all with whom we come in contact, and proportionately 
enjoy this privilege as we find the needy ones 
to be members of the Lord's body— the Church. 
As our Lord said to the disciples, "He that is 
bathed need not save to wash his feet," even so we may 
realize that all who are justified and consecrated members 
of his body have already had the bath, the washing of 
regeneration, and are already clean through the word 
spoken unto them. (John 15:3.) Nevertheless, although 
thus cleansed and sanctified, so long as we are in contact 
with the world we are liable to a certain degree of earthly 
defilement, and it especially behooves each one not only 

R3544 : page 121 

to look out for himself but to help one another to get 
rid of earthly defilements, thus serving his brethren, 
helping them in the weaknesses, trials and imperfections 
of the flesh, assisting them to become overcomers. 
In these respects he is cooperating in the great work of 
washing the saints' feet, cleansing from all filthiness of 
the flesh and spirit, and perfecting holiness in the reverence 
of the Lord.-2 Cor. 7:1. 



R3544 : page 121 

THE TRUE VINE AND ITS FRUIT. 

JOHN 15:1-12.-MAY7. 

Golden Text:— "Herein is my Father glorified, 
that ye bear much fruit."— v. 8. 

FOLLOWING the institution of the Memorial Supper, 

the Lord and his disciples, excepting Judas, 

who had gone to betray him, went forth from the 

upper room toward the Garden of Gethsemane. It was 

while the disciples were troubled in heart in respect to various 

things the Lord had said unto them and his declarations 

respecting his coming death, and while the Lord, 

too, had in mind the parting from his disciples and their 

future experiences, that he gave them the parable of 

the Vine. Some have inferred that this, like other of 

the Lord's parables, was an object lesson— that something 

seen by them all suggested it. Some surmise that 

the vineyards on the route offered the suggestion, and 

others that their journey probably led past the golden 

gate of the Temple, on which there was a large golden 

vine, which Josephus describes as having had clusters 

as large as a man: another Jewish writer declares that 

its "leaves and buds were wrought in gleaming, reddish 

gold, but its clusters of yellow gold and its grapestones 

of precious stones." According to Jewish authorities, 



this vine kept growing by means of offerings of a leaf 
or a cluster or a branch by the wealthy, just as some 
to-day present memorial windows to churches. In any 
event the Lord and the apostles must frequently have 
seen this golden vine. 

The Lord announced himself as the true Vine and 
his Father as the true Husbandman who planted the 
true vine, and his followers as the true branches of that 
vine. The expression "true vine" suggests a false vine, 
and this thought is accentuated and elaborated in our 
Lord's last message to his people in the symbols of 
Revelation. There he speaks of the gathering of the 
fruitage of the "vine of the earth," and the casting of 
the same into the wine-press of the wrath of God at 
the end of this age. (Rev. 14:19.) There was, therefore, 
a deeper meaning in our Lord's words, "true vine," 
than the apostles could have possibly gathered from 
them. We who are living at a time when both the true 
vine of the Father's planting and the false vine of the 
earth, earthly, have developed, have opportunity for 
noticing the difference between the two vines, and of 
noticing also that the vine of the earth is a counterfeit 
of the heavenly vine. In proportion as we see this 
matter clearly it will assist us not only in the understanding 
of the Lord's parable, but also in our application 
of it in our daily lives. We will be in less danger 
of misunderstanding, misconstruing and being deceived 
by the false vine, or by the false branches and the false 
principles represented in connection with its development, 
for it is not under the divine Husbandman's care. 

THE TRUE VINE 

The vine of the earth is the nominal Christian system 
organized along the lines of earthly wisdom. Its 
branches are the various sects and parties of Christendom. 
Its fruitage is cathedrals, temples, tabernacles, 
chapels, orphanages, hospitals, etc., political power, honor 
of men, wealth and social standing. It is great and 
influential in the world, and has the spirit of the world 
running through its branches and governing all of its 
affairs, and brings forth a fruitage which is not entirely 
bad, but which is entirely earthly, and which is relished 
and appreciated because it is earthly and practical rather 
than heavenly. This vine has grown wonderfully, 
has some three hundred branches and claims four hundred 
million adherents, and through its untold wealth 
of property and in its adherents it may be said to practically 
control the wealth of the world. 

Great is the vine of the earth, wonderful in the 
eyes of men. But the harvesting time will show that 
these nominal systems are not the vine of Jehovah's 
right-hand planting (Isa. 60:21), and it is, therefore, 
the system which the Lord declares he will utterly uproot 
and destroy, and whose destruction is so graphically 
described in Revelation. In the wine-press of the 



wrath of God, in the great time of trouble which is 
nearing— which we believe the Scriptures to teach will 
be fully upon the world ten years from now— the blood 
of Babylon's grapes will mean a flood of trouble and 
anguish to the world. By that time, however, the true 
vine and its branches will all have been glorified, and 
the results of their proper fruit-bearing will mean blessings 
to all the families of the earth. 

Let us consider carefully the "true Vine" and our 
relationship as branches of it, and the character of the 
fruit which the great Husbandman expects, that this 
last of our Lord's parables may greatly profit us, strengthen 
us, encourage us, assist us as it was intended that 
it should. 

THE VINE OF THE EARTH 

In the true Vine the branches are not sects, parties, 
and it is only by delusions of the Adversary that any 
who are his people recognize these systems of men. As 
the apostles were not Presbyterians, Methodists, Lutherans, 
etc., neither should any of the Lord's followers 
be such, and it is only because we have been blinded 
by the Adversary's misteachings that any of the true 
children of God are in such error, and so we understand 
this parable and other teachings of the Word. The 
apostles did not join each other, but each Apostle was 
united in heart, in faith, in hope, in love, in devotion 
to the Lord himself. And so we should not join the 
apostles, nor say, I am of Paul, I am of Peter, etc., 
but each should individually join the Lord as a member, 
as a branch; each must have the sap of the vine 
if it would bear fruit. Sectarian sap is of no value in 
producing the real fruitage which the Lord desires— it 
is only a hindrance. By this we do not mean that none 
of the branches of the true Vine are by mistake associated 
with the nominal Church system, the vine of the 
earth. We recognize that this is so, and we also recognize 

R3544 : page 122 

the Lord's voice calling— "Come out of her, my 
people, that ye be not partakers of her sins and receive 
not of her plagues"— the great troubles coming upon 
her, mother and daughters. 

As the branches do not represent denominations 
and sects, but the individuals who are united to the 
Lord, so the teaching of the parable is that our Lord 
does not prune sects and denominations but the individual 
Christians, whoever and wherever they may be— 
"The Lord knoweth them that are his." Our Lord's 
word on the subject is, "Every branch in me that 
beareth not fruit he taketh away, and every branch 
that beareth fruit he purgeth [pruneth] it, that it may 
bear more fruit." Everything in the Scriptures teaches 
us that our salvation and our relationship to the Lord 



are individual, personal matters; that we are not saved 
by congregations and sects and parties and families, 
but that individually and personally we must be united 
to the vine if we would have the sap, if we would have the 
life, if we would be counted members of the Church, 
which is his body. 

MANY ILLUSTRATIONS OF OUR ONENESS 

It is remarkable how fully the Lord has covered 
the whole range of illustration in describing the oneness 
subsisting between himself and his consecrated followers. 
He gives us an illustration from the mineral kingdom, 
saying that we are living stones built together upon 
him as the foundation and capstone, to be the Temple 
of our God. From the animal kingdom our Lord drew 
illustrations of this oneness, likening himself to the good 
Shepherd and his true followers to the sheep under 
his care, one with him in fellowship. From the 
vegetable kingdom he drew the illustration of this lesson 
—I am the Vine, of which my true disciples are the 
branches. From the family relationship he drew an 
illustration of the true husband and true wife, and their 
complete, thorough union of heart and of every interest. 
From the family again he drew another illustration representing 
the Creator as the Father, himself as the elder Son 
and all of his followers as brethren. From the human 
body we have another illustration, Jesus himself being 
the Head over the Church, which is his body, for, as the 
Apostle declares, we are members in particular of the 
body of Christ. In proportion as our faith can grasp 

R3545 : page 122 

these declarations, in proportion as we can realize their 
truthfulness, in that same proportion we may have 
strong faith and confidence that he who has begun the 
good work in us is both able and willing to complete 
it. Whoever of a loyal, obedient heart can exercise 
faith has thus provided for himself strength and grace 
for every time of need, for every hour of trial, for every 
difficulty and perplexity and for all the affairs of life — 
the ballast which will give equilibrium and enable us 
to profit by all of life's experiences, the bitter as well 
as the sweet. 

Our Lord's declaration that where two or three of 
his disciples are met together in his name they constitute 
a Church or body of Christ, and he as the head 
is with them for their blessing in proportion as their 
hearts are loyal to him and seeking his guidance, leads 
us to conclude likewise that wherever two or three of 
his members are there we have a representation of the 
vine, and they may have all the blessings of branches 
and all the privileges of fruit bearing. Very evidently, however, 
the Lord did not wish us to understand that in every 
little company of those who have named the name of 



Christ there would be so thorough a purging, so thorough 
a burning, that only the true branches would remain. 
His intimation is that he deals with us individually, as 
well as collectively, and that if we would maintain our 
personal relationship to him it must be by the receiving 
of the sap from the vine, the receiving of the holy 
Spirit, as one of the results of the union and fellowship 
with him. 

So surely as we receive the holy Spirit into good 
and honest hearts the result will be a tendency to fruit-bearing 
but the illustration our Lord gives teaches that 
some may become true branches in the vine and yet 
overlook and not possess the fruit-bearing disposition. 
Sometimes a healthy, strong branch develops from a 
good stock and root but has no fruit-bearing qualities. 
The husbandman with a trained eye discerns between 
buds which would bring forth grape clusters and the 
buds which would have only leaves. Those which do not 
have the fruit buds are known as "suckers"— because 
they merely suck the juices of the vine and bring forth 
no fruitage such as the husbandman seeks. These are 
pruned or cut off, so that the strength of the vine may 
not be wasted in such merely outward splendor, but 
may be conserved for its purposes of fruit bearing. 
Evidently a class of true professors resemble these suckers, 
who selfishly would draw to themselves as much of 
the righteousness of the Vine as possible, and would 
make a fair outward show in the world with leaves or 
professions, but would have no thought of bringing forth 
the fruitage which the Lord requires and which can only 
be brought forth through sacrifice. 

THE OBJECT OF PRUNING 

Aside from the suckers there are branches which, 
while having fruit buds, would never bring the fruit to 
a good ripe development if allowed to take their own 
course and to develop themselves as branches merely, 
and hence the wise husbandman, noting the bud, is 
pleased with it, and pinches off the sprout of the vine 
beyond the bud, not to injure the branch but to make 
it more fruitful. So with us who have not only joined 
the Lord by faith and consecration and been accepted 
as branches, but who as branches desire to bring forth 
good fruitage, which the Lord seeks in us— we need the 
Husbandman's care so that we may bring forth the 
much fruit, so that the fruit that we bear may be more 
to his pleasement, large fruit, luscious fruit, good fruit, 
valuable fruit. The methods of the Lord's prunings 
should be understood by all the branches, otherwise 
they may be discouraged and droop and fail to bring 
forth the proper fruitage. 

It would appear that the great Husbandman prunes 
the branches of the Christ sometimes by taking away 
earthly wealth or property, or sometimes by hindering 
cherished schemes and plans. Sometimes he prunes us 



by permitting persecutions and the loss of name and 
fame, and sometimes he prunes by permitting the loss 
of earthly friendships toward which the tendrils of our 
hearts extended too strongly, and which would have 
hindered us from bearing the much fruit which he desires. 
Sometimes he may permit sickness to afflict us 
as one of these prunings, as the prophet declared, 
"Before I was afflicted I went astray." Many others 
of the Lord's dear people have found some of 
their most valuable lessons on the bed of affliction. 

R3545 : page 123 

Some have written us how they were too busy, too 
much absorbed in earthly matters and interests that 
seemed to press for attention, so that they had not the 
proper time to give to the study of the Divine Plan 
of the Ages and the cultivation of their own hearts and 
the bearing of the fruits of the Spirit, and how the Lord 
in much mercy had laid them aside for a season, and 
given them the opportunities which they needed for 
thought and for Christian development, for growth in 
knowledge that they might have growth in grace. So 
far, then, from the true branches esteeming the prunings 
of the Husbandman to be injuries and wounds, 
they should conclude that according to the good promises 
of the Word all things are working together for good 
to them that love him— to the true fruit-bearing branches 
of the true Vine. Such prunings, instead of causing discouragements, 
should be to us, rightly understood, sources 
of encouragement. We realize that the world is left to 
itself; that the vine of the earth has not special prunings 
of the Lord, and that when we have these special 
prunings it is an evidence that the Father himself loveth 
us and is caring for our best interests. 

"NOW YE ARE CLEAN" 

Applying this lesson to his disciples our Lord intimated 
that the proper pruning work had already been 
done on them up to date, and in the Lord's providences 
they had been purged of an unfruitful branch, Judas. 
He therefore said to them, "Now ye are clean through 
the word I have spoken unto you"— you are justified 
and accepted because of your faith, obedience and loyalty. 
What a joy the eleven must have felt when they 
heard those words, and what a joy we may properly 
feel as we realize the truth of the same words applied 
to ourselves. Praise the Lord for this great gift of his 
favor through Christ— that we have in him not only the 
forgiveness of sins and the covering of his robe of righteousness, 
but that through him we are accepted of the 
Father as branches of the true Vine, clean through the 
acceptance of the message or word sent to us. But this 
is not all, this is merely the beginning. The thing necessary 
to be remembered is that our ultimate blessing and 



acceptance of the Father will depend upon our abiding 
continually in this blessed close relationship of branches 
in the Vine. 

If we will not bear the fruitage we may not remain 
in this relationship; if we do bear the fruits, if we have 
that spirit and disposition, and desire the Lord's grace 
and strength and assistance, his grace will be sufficient 
for every time of need and we will come off conquerors 
and more than conquerors through him who loved us 
and bought us with his precious blood. The bearing of 
the fruit which the Father desires cannot be accomplished, 
we cannot be pleasing to him, except as we are 
related to Christ and as his fruit is born in us by our 
relationship to him and the power of his Spirit and his 
Word working in us to will and to do of his good pleasure. 
The assurance is that if we abide in him we will 
bear much fruit and that without him we can do nothing, 
have no fruit that the Father will accept. 

What is the nature of this fruit-bearing? How may 
we know the fruitage which the Father seeks? We answer 
that many, under the misguidance and wrong 
example of the vine of the earth, incline to think of grand 
earthly temples, orphanages, etc., as being the fruits 
which the Lord desires to see well developed. We 
answer, No. If these were the fruits, then Jesus and the 
apostles bore no fruits: they built no churches or cathedrals 
or temples, they neither built nor founded orphanages 
or asylums or hospitals. If these were the fruitage which 
the Father seeks, then the Lord and the apostles erred 
totally. But we hold that they did not err, that the 
error rather has come from another quarter; that the 
vine of the earth guided by the spirit of the world has 
taken a utilitarian direction, and is bringing forth the 
fruitage of the kind which the world approves. 

THE WORLD MAKES PROVISION 

We are not saying a word against hospitals, asylums, 
etc.,— we believe them to be very good, very desirable, 
very proper adjuncts of society and civilization,— but 
we believe that the world is thoroughly capable of 
providing for all those things, and that the world is 
quite ready to provide for them; indeed we find that the 
world really does make provision as it is. For instance, 
the various St. Francis, St. James, and St. Agnes hospitals, 
asylums, etc., Protestant and Catholic, all seek 
support from the donations of the State for their maintenance 
and all get them, and the State might just as 
well, and better in some respects, have full charge of 
these. And indeed we are not sure but that it does have 
full charge of them now as fully as possible. Not that 
we wish to intimate that there are none of the true 
branches of the true Vine connected with any of these 
earthly institutions; but we hold that these are not their 
fruitage according to the Lord's parable, and that if 
they are members of the body as well as members of 



Babylon, they must bear the fruit of the Vine of the 
Father's planting as well as be identified with other 
good fruits. 

The fruits of the Spirit are sometimes taken to be 
activities in the service of the Truth, as, for instance, 
the scattering of the Truth, the talking of the Truth, the 
bringing of some out of darkness into the light and 

R3546 : page 123 

knowledge of the Truth, the expenditure of money for 
the publishing of the Truth,— all these are sometimes 
considered the fruits which the Lord expects of the 
branches. Not so! The fruits are something still 
nobler and grander than these things, and are described 
by the Apostle as the fruits of the Spirit. The Spirit 
of the Vine must permeate all the branches, and the 
fruit of the Vine must be in every branch. These fruits 
of the Spirit are enumerated— meekness, gentleness, 
patience, long suffering, brotherly kindness, love; if 
these things be in us and abound, says the Apostle, they 
make us to be neither barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge 
of our Lord and Savior. 

These fruits are all one in some particulars: that is 
to say, the essence of proper Christian patience is love; 
the essence of hope and faith and joy is love for our 
Father, and our confidence in his love, as expressed in 
his promises to us. So the name of all these fruits and 
graces of the Spirit is expressed in the one word, Love. 
These are the fruits which must be found in every branch 
if it would retain its place as a branch and be of the 
glorified Vine by and by. Let us not deceive ourselves 
into thinking that other things will do, and that we may 
pass the divine inspection without these. The other 
things, the good works, the seeking of the Truth, the 
distribution of the literature, etc., are only to be acceptable 
to the Father in proportion as they are the results 
of this fruitage in our hearts. The Apostle expresses 

R3546 : page 124 

this forcefully when he says, If I should give my body 
to be burned and all my goods to feed the poor, and 
have not love, it would profit me nothing. 

The same thought is true in regard to service to 
the Lord: if we should spend every day and every hour 
in harvest work, if we should give all our money to printing 
tracts and books, or use ourselves in any other way 
for the service of the Lord's cause, it would profit 
nothing unless it were the result of love in our hearts. 
We see, then, that the thought is that we must cultivate 
in our hearts the graces of the holy Spirit, meekness, 
gentleness, patience, etc., love, and that we must have 
these in abounding measure to be pleasing to the Lord, 
to bear "much fruit." The expression of these fruits, 
therefore, undoubtedly will be through various channels, 



perhaps of giving goods to the poor, perhaps of such 
faithfulness in the presentation of the Truth as might 
lead us to martyrdom, that our bodies might be burned. 
If the burning of the body or the loss of all our goods 
comes in such a course through our faithfulness to the 
principles of righteousness, through our love and loyalty 
to the Lord, then happy are we indeed. 

WITHERED BRANCHES BURNED 

The declaration that those who will not bear the 
fruit of the Vine will be cut off from being branches and 
will wither and ultimately be burned, seems to imply 
the second death, utter destruction of the class indicated. 
This is not the worldly class, for they were never united 
to Christ, never were branches in the Vine and hence 
never were on trial in this respect. It refers only to 
those who have gone the lengths of making a full consecration 
to the Lord, a full union with him, a thorough 
consecration and begetting of the holy Spirit. These 
words, then, seem to correspond with the Apostle's 
declaration, "It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands 
of the living God." 

The world is not in the hands of the living God, 
but is at the present time reckoned as dead in Adam, 
under the Adamic sentence, not being judged by the 
Lord. The Church only is reckoned as free from Adamic 
condemnation and placed on trial or judgment, and 
these only, therefore, could fall out of the hands of 
Christ, the Mediator, and into the hands of the Father 
in the sense here indicated. Being cut off from Christ 
their case is hopeless; for such we can look forward to 
nothing better than the second death. Even then we 
are glad that the theory of eternal torment is not true; 
that when they die the death of utter extinction they 
have suffered all that God has pronounced, terrible as 
that loss will be to those who appreciate everlasting life. 

This statement about the branches cut off, withered 
and burned does not seem to take cognizance at all of 
the household of faith class, which, though believing in 
Jesus, never comes to the point of becoming branches 
or members in the Christ. Nor does it seem to take 
into consideration the great company. Indeed this 
class is mentioned in but few Scriptures and then obscurely, 
the Lord thus indicating, we believe, that none 
were called to such a company. The Apostle speaks 
of some as being "saved so as by fire," and a little 
suggestion in this same line might be taken from the 
Master's words that, being cut off as branches, they 
wither and are burned— burned as branches, destroyed 
as members of the company to which they originally 
were by covenant attached, but not necessarily destroyed 
individually to all eternity. The Apostle speaks of this 
class saying that themselves shall be saved so as by fire, 
but their works shall suffer loss. Perhaps we should 
consider these as being included in this manner in the 



Lord's statement. 

FRUITS OF MEMBERSHIP IN THE VINE 

Our Lord proceeds to tell us what some of the 
fruits of this union with him will be:— 

First, such may ask whatsoever they will and it 
shall be done unto them. There is only one condition or 
limitation, namely, that before they are thus prepared 
to ask they must see to it that they give attention to the 
Lord's word that they may ascertain what is his will and 
what they may ask according to his will. Those who 
abide in Christ must have no will of their own, theirs 
must be the will of their Head, and their Head has 
already declared that his will is the Father's will. These, 
then, are the limitations, that we have the Father's 
will in our hearts and the Father's promises in our 
hearts; then our requests will be in conformity to these 
and the Lord will be pleased to grant all such. 

The second fruitage or result will be that the Father 
will be glorified the more in proportion as our fruit 
increases, and on these terms our discipleship shall 
continue, namely, that we shall habitually seek to 
know and to do the Father's will and to glorify and 
honor him by lives obedient to his will. Anything short 
of this would forfeit our discipleship. Not that it would 
be forfeited instantly, as though the Lord would take 
occasion to cast us off lightly; but that it is a part of our 
covenant relationship that we will grow in grace, grow 
in knowledge, grow in harmony with God, grow in the 
fruits of the Spirit, and if we turn from this engagement or 
contract we cannot be considered as retaining our 
relationship as disciples, members. 

The third fruit or evidence of this membership in 
the Vine and of our continued growth as branches is 
stated in verse nine, namely, that as the Father loved 
the Lord Jesus, the Vine, so our Redeemer loves us, 
his branches or members. What a wonderful thought 
this is, that our Master has toward us the same kind of 
love that the Father has toward him! Could our faith 
always grasp this thought and maintain this hold, we 
should indeed have nothing to wish or to fear— our 
summer would last all the year. The next thought 
suggested is that having reached, having attained this 
high position in the Lord's favor, if we are his disciples 
and truly appreciate what he has done for us in this 
respect, we will desire to continue in his love. Next in 
order come the terms and conditions upon which we 
may continue in that love, namely, that we keep his 
commandments . 

By way of showing us that this is not an unreasonable 
proposition, our Lord declared that these are the 
same terms on which the Father deals with him, namely, 
"Even as I have kept my Father's commandments and 
abide in his love." We cannot expect to abide in the 
Lord's love and be careless of his injunctions. The 



measure of our faithfulness to him will be indicated by 
our obedience to him, as the measure of his love for the 
Father was indicated by his obedience to the Father. 
The Apostle intimates this same thought and adds a 
little to it, saying, "For this is the love of God that we 
keep his commandments, and his commandments are 
not grievous." (1 John 5:3). It is not enough that we 

R3546 : page 125 

keep the commandments, but that we keep them lovingly 
and loyally, of good pleasure, that we do not consider 
them grievous but rather are to be glad to be in 
line, in harmony, with all the Lord's righteous provisions 
and arrangements. Let us all more and more seek this 
spirit of full heart-harmony with all the principles of 
righteousness laid down by our Lord Jesus— his 
commandments. 

Our Lord's commandments are not the ten commandments 
of Moses, but more or less according to the 
standpoint of expression. They are less in the sense of 
requirements on our flesh; they are more as respects 
the requirements on our hearts. Briefly summed up he 
tells us that his law is love with all our heart, mind, 
soul, and strength to the Father and for our neighbor 
as for ourselves. This is possible to our regenerated 
hearts though not possible to our imperfect flesh. The 
Lord's requirement, therefore, is that with our hearts 
we serve this law of God and with our flesh we shall do 
to the best of our ability, and we have the assurance that 
in the resurrection we shall have the new bodies in which 
we shall be able to serve the Lord thoroughly, completely, 
satisfactorily. 

MY JOY REMAIN, YOUR JOY BE FULL 

Our Lord concluded this little lesson, so short and 
yet so full of meaning and depth, by an illustration of 
why he gave it, saying, "These things have I spoken unto 
you that my joy may be in you and that your joy may 
be filled full." This is my commandment that ye love 

R3547 : page 125 

one another even as I have loved you." Wonderful 
words of life are these that have come down to us through 
the centuries, that have helped to cheer and encourage 
so many of the Lord's followers in the narrow way. 

Many are the objections that are raised to pure and 
undefiled religion: Some complain that it is gloomy, 
joyless, a fetter upon heart and brain; that it drives men 
from every temple of pleasure with a whip of small 
cords; that it posts notice, "No trespassing here," in 
every field of enjoyment. Our answer must be that this 
is a mistake: that these are the words of those who know 
not, neither do they understand the things whereof they 



speak. Those who have truly made a covenant with the 
Lord, who have truly accepted him, who have truly 
laid down their lives at his feet and become his followers 
in sincerity, are filled with his joy, as he promised; and 
it is an increasing joy, which day by day and year by year 
becomes more nearly complete— a joy which will not 
be complete, however, until that which is perfect shall 
come and that which is in part shall be done away, until 
in the resurrected condition we shall see as we are seen 
and know as we are known and appreciate to the full 
the joys of our Lord, hearing his welcome invitation, "Enter 
thou into the joys of thy Lord." 

We enter now into those joys through faith, through 
anticipation, through rest of heart, but by and by we 
shall enter upon them in the actual sense. Meantime it 
is the world, that has not submitted itself to the Lord, 
that has not appreciation of the joys of the Lord, that 
is full of selfishness and ambition and strife and envy; 
it knoweth us not even as it knew him not; it knows not 
of our joys in the Master's service even as it never appreciated 
the joys of our Lord in doing the Father's will, 
even at the sacrifice of his life. 

"AS I HAVE LOVED YOU" 

It does not astonish us that the Lord directs that 
we love one another, but we stand amazed with the 
thought contained in these words, "As I have loved you." 
How can we love one another with the same love which 
the Lord has for each of us? is our first inquiry. We reply 
that this is impossible at first, but as we become more and 
more filled with the Spirit of the Lord, we approximate 
more nearly to this standard of perfect love to all that 
are his, a love that not only would refuse to do injury 
to another, but a love which would delight to do good to 
a brother, yea, to do good at the expense of one's own 
time and convenience. Thus Jesus loved us all and 
redeemed us with his precious blood, and to whatever 
extent we grow in grace, knowledge and love of him, in 
that same proportion we are Christlike and have a 
Christlike love. This love is the fulfilling of the Law, 
and whoever has such a love for the brethren will have 
undoubtedly a full, sympathetic love for the whole 
groaning creation, and will be glad to do now the little 
that is possible to be done on their behalf, and doubly 
glad that the Lord in his own good time and pleasure 
has a great and wonderful blessing for every member of 
Adam's race. 

Some one has said, "Do not imagine that you have 
got these things because you know how to get them. 
As well try to feed upon a cook book." There is a good 
and an important thought here: it is very important 
that we should know these things and understand the 
Lord's plans and appreciate the principles laid down in 
his Word, but though we had all knowledge it would not 
benefit us unless we used it. Let us not think of getting 



the benefit of the Lord's gracious provisions by merely 
learning how to get them, but let us take the necessary 
steps— see that we are fully his, see that we live close to 
him, see that we are fruit bearers, see that we abide in 
his love, in the Father's love, in the love for one another, 
which he has enjoined. 



R3547 : page 125 
INTERESTING LETTERS FROM THE ANTIPODES. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have the pleasure herewith 
to hand you extracts from interesting letters received 
at the Society's Melbourne office. Accompanying 
are extracts from two Reviews of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN Vol. I., which recently appeared in Australian 
newspapers. 

We have been made very glad by the safe arrival 
at Auckland of Colporteurs Brother and Sister Richardson. 
They had a very successful three weeks at Honolulu 
arriving at Auckland without a volume of DAWN in 
their possession. The arrival of Colporteurs Brother 
and Sister Nicholson and Brother Zink is expected early 
in March, D.V. Brother Anderson, who is laboring in 
Southern New Zealand, reports some interest in and 
opposition to the Present Truth. 

Pray for us, and also that the Lord may send more 
laborers into the vineyard. 

Faithfully yours, in the Anointed, 

E. C. HENNINGES. 



DEAR FRIEND:— I am enclosing 4s. for a year's 
subscription to ZION'S WATCH TOWER. I feel I cannot 

R3547 : page 126 

do without the reading. We never read such beautiful 
explanations of the Bible; my daughter and I think it 
wonderful, almost too good to be true, only that we know 
God is Love, and he doeth all things well. 

My daughter said when I was reading to her a bit 
about the Millennial Age, "Why, mother, you might get 
your desire after all!" I always desired to be a missionary; 
since childhood I have wished to tell the heathen 
about the Love of Jesus. What a privilege that would be; 
may the Lord help me to be ready for His work. 

If I can't keep on paying for the paper, I shall send 
a card at Christmas. Do not think I don't want to pay 
for the paper; if I had money, I should pay the people to 
read it. 

Yours in the love of God, 

, VICTORIA. 



DEAR FRIEND: --Please accept thanks for the liberal 
supply of tracts for distribution, which I shall do my 
best to place judiciously. 

It is about seven months since I first heard of these 
publications. The first volume of MILLENNIAL DAWN 
was handed to me by a friend. He said, "Now, George, 
here's something that will just about suit you, and when 
you've read it, you can tell me what it means, for I have 
no time. And here is some lighter reading; you ought to 
read something lively, for you need a change, but it 
seems nothing goes down with you but something religious; 
and if you don't alter you'll become quite 
mopish." In a few days I returned the light books unread, 
but I read the DAWN four times, carefully referring 
to every text quoted therein. 

During the last few years I have always denied the 
doctrine of Eternal Torment, also the teaching that the 
heathen would all be lost to the Jesus who died for them; 
but I was quite unable to confute these matters. By 
some means, my reason disdained to receive such a 
portrait of God as the various sectarians presented to 
me; but I could merely affirm that I was unable, nay, 
that I dare not, believe these doctrines. I was not trusting 
in any but God, and he caused me to get that volume 
put into my hands, I am assured. 

I have since read volumes 2 and 3, and now have a 
fuller comprehension of God's Plan, and feel very earnestly 
that it is my bounden duty to talk of God's Love; to tell 
of his Kingdom; to lovingly exhort people to brush aside 
all shadows that would intervene between themselves and 
the Truth, to verify for themselves all the doctrines advanced 
in the DAWN series, and the portion of life remaining 
to me I consecrate to his service, for the enlightenment 
of any and all such brothers and sisters as 
I may be thrown into contact with. I am now fully His, 
and in fellowship with all who believe in His Kingdom. 
I am, dear Brother, 

Yours in the Glad Tidings, 

, South Australia. 



DEAR FRIEND:— I received your welcome letter and 
the paper some time ago, and should have written before 
this, only I wished to read the "Plan" first, so as to tell 
you what I thought of it. I am indeed very glad that it 
has dropped into my hands, and believe it has come in 
answer to prayer. I have been studying the Bible deeply 
for the last three years, and I thank God for the day that 
I determined to "search the Scriptures." He has blessed 
me wonderfully. Although I failed in business, and am 
now totally deaf, God has given me something in this 
last three years that I would not exchange for the best 



business in New Zealand, or the best pair of ears in 
Australia. There are several things in the paper you sent 
me that are very different from what is generally held 
in the churches, but which I fully agree with, and I want 
some more. With kind regards, 
Yours and His, 
, New Zealand. 



DEAR FRIEND:— I have much pleasure in sending 
payment for the valuable and interesting pamphlet you 
loaned me, and my most sincere thanks added, as well. 
I must say it not only afforded me much pleasure to 
read, but opened up new avenues for thought, never 
before dreamt of. The masterly way in which every subject 
is handled, one after another, and the proofs 
brought forward to substantiate the argument, leave 
the whole matter beyond contradiction. 

It grieves me to think that so many to-day ignore 
the inspiration of the Bible. Most of our colonial youths 
know nothing at all about it, and the theology that is 
preached from many of our pulpits does not improve 
matters much. But I am certain that anyone reading 
carefully The Divine Plan of the Ages cannot but be impressed 
by the doctrine contained therein. Please send 
me the next volume. 

Yours faithfully, 
, New Zealand. 



R3556 : page 126 

DEAR FRIEND:— I tender you special thanks for 
the volume, MILLENNIAL DAWN, which I have already 
read, and re-read with intense interest, as it has thrown 
an entirely new light upon many passages of Scripture 
which previously were a puzzle and worry to me. I 
would be very glad to see any subsequent volumes by 
the same author, and shall be only too happy at any 
time to give a friendly notice of same through the columns 
of our paper. 

Trusting that the book may be instrumental in removing 
many of the misconceptions regarding the 
attributes and plans of our Heavenly Father, I remain, 
Yours fraternally, 

, Editor, New South Wales. 



DEAR FRIEND:— I thank you very much for sending 
me The Divine Plan of the Ages, which I have been 
studying at intervals ever since it reached me— as I 
have been endeavoring to read and study my Bible all 
my thinking years. The work is inestimable; it has 



opened the eyes of my understanding, and lifted a harrowing 
weight from my mind. This grand opposite 
arrangement, and application of the Scriptures texts is 
far and away before anything of the kind I have ever 
been privileged to see. The study of them all in their 
respective and most reasonable connections as now 
presented dispels the gloom of the stern ascetic Calvinism, 
in the atmosphere of which I was brought up in 
Scotland. 

Our so-called spiritual advisers in these parts would 
perhaps be benefitted by the study of this book; for, 
alas! they don't seem to know too much about the Bible 
Truths they profess to preach and explain. I have resided 
here many years, and there seems to be far less 
fear and love of God in men's hearts now than even in 
what were termed the wild old times. We are fallen 

R3556 : page 127 

upon evil days; the age is throbbing with mercenary 
passion, and grows mad with the lust of gold; men's 
hearts are failing them for fear. Truly I believe and have 
believed for years past, that we are fast approaching the 
close of this dispensation. 

And so, may the Lord Jesus come quickly; for with 
the advent of his chariot wheels and the brightness of 
his coming, such a rose-light will flush over the world 
that the tired nations will up-leap with joy. 
Yours faithfully, 

Editor, New South Wales. 

page 127 

[The reviews will appear in our next issue.— EDITOR.] 



R3548 : page 127 

THE MEMORIAL CELEBRATION 

THE annual celebration of our Lord's death, rather 

than a more frequent one, commends itself to the 

Lord's people more generally every year. At Allegheny 

the number participating this year was much larger 

than ever before. Anticipating this, Carnegie Hall was secured 

for the afternoon discourse on Baptism, as well as 

for the Memorial Service of the evening of April 16th. 

The death-baptism was symbolized in water at Bible House 

baptistry by 10 brethren and 31 sisters, after their public 

confession of faith in the redemption accomplished by the 

precious sacrifice of Christ, of their renunciation of sin, 

and of their full consecration to walk in Jesus' footsteps 

in self sacrifice, even unto death. 

THE EVENT AND THE DAY 



At the Memorial service explanation was made of 
why we celebrate the greatest event of history annually— 
not weekly, monthly, quarterly, etc. Not that the very day 
or hour or moment is of special consequence, but that it was 
meant to be a yearly celebration, and that so observed it is 
more than proportionately impressive. In fact, as all are 
aware, it could not be celebrated throughout the world at 
the same moment or hour or even on the same day, so 
great is the difference of time. For instance, the brethren 
in London had celebrated, and it was past midnight and 
they were asleep while we at Allegheny were celebrating. 
And for us to have partaken at the same hour with them 
would have been a day too early. A similar difficulty is 
met with by the Jews in their celebration of the Passover. 
History tells us that the early Church met with the same 
difficulty and that it was partly to correct this that it was decided 
to always commemorate our Lord's death on the 
day of the week nearest to the Passover date— "Good 
Friday." This arrangement has three advantages:— 

(1) It groups the events of that momentous week 
more accurately before the mind's eye: Palm Sunday, 
when our Lord rode on the ass as King of the Jews; Monday, 
Tuesday and Wednesday at the Temple teaching; 
Thursday preparing for the Passover Supper eaten 

that night and followed by the institution of our 
Memorial Supper, the lessons and prayer of John 14-17, 
the experiences of Gethsemane, of Caiaphas' 
court, and on Friday morning before the Sanhedrin, and at 
Pilate's and Herod's palaces. Then the scenes of Calvary 
and Joseph's new tomb. Saturday our Lord lay dead, 
hope being buried with him. Sunday, the resurrection 
day, with its new hopes, then comes in most appropriately 
—an Easter-day of new hopes and impulses. 

(2) It would bring us into closer fellowship and sympathy 
with those who celebrate Good Friday and Easter 
Sunday, and our celebration of the Memorial on Thursday 
night would suggest the appropriateness of that date and 
cause them the more to question the authority for and 

the wisdom of more frequent celebrations. 

(3) In civilized lands Good Friday is quite generally 

a legal holiday, and all the associations and precious memories 
of our Lord's death-day would find the better opportunity 
for exercising our minds. 

Since it is impossible for all to celebrate on the same 
night and hour anyway, the congregation was asked to consider 
these arguments for hereafter having the celebration 
on the Thursday night before Easter Sunday. And now 
the same thought is offered to all the dear friends scattered 
abroad. 

THIS DO, REMEMBERING ME 

The occasion was, as usual, a very solemn one as we 
communed respecting our Lord, the "Bread from heaven" 
broken for us. Nevertheless we rejoiced as we recognized 



in it a token of the "Love divine all love excelling." We 
rejoiced afresh as we assured our hearts that if God so 
loved us while we were yet sinners, much more does he 
love us now as he sees us daily striving to walk in the footsteps 
of Jesus,— "not after the flesh but after the spirit." 

The bread spoke to us of the human rights of Jesus 
sacrificed for us and of which we who believe may eat— 
appropriate by faith to ourselves, reckoning ourselves justified 
to all the rights originally possessed by Adam. Then 
we took the further lesson suggested by the Apostle's 
words,— "The loaf which we break, does it not signify 
the communion [fellowship] of the body of Christ? For 
we being many are one body: for we are all partakers of 
that one loaf. "-1 Cor. 10:17. 

The "cup" we recognized as symbolic of our Lord's 
blood— his life poured out during the three and a half 
years of his ministry and the dregs at Calvary. It was 
shed for us, yes, "shed for many for the remission of sins." 
Not the blood which flowed from our Redeemer's side 
when pierced by the soldier's spear. No, he was already 
dead then. Blood is used symbolically to represent life, 
and our Lord's life or being or soul was poured out unto 
death before the spear was thrust. We saw the necessity 
for this under God's law, that "without the shedding of 
blood there is no remission of sins." While we sorrowed 
we again rejoiced, singing in our hearts unto the Lord— 

"His blood can make the foulest clean. 
His blood availed for me." 

Then we got the still deeper meaning of the "cup" 
from the Spirit's teaching through the Apostle's words,— 
"The cup of blessing for which we bless God, is it not 
a participating [sharing] of the blood of the Anointed 
One?" (1 Cor. 10:16.) Viewing it thus our Lord's words 
would have a deep meaning to our hearts, "Drink ye all 
of it;"— partake of my shame and death, walk in my 
steps; so shall ye be my disciples indeed and where I am 
there shall my disciples be. 

We thanked God then for the privilege of being 
broken with him as part of the great loaf; and for the 
privilege of drinking of his cup and so filling up that which 
is behind of the afflictions of Christ; assured that "if we 
suffer with him we shall reign with him." 

About 550 were present and probably 525 partook of 
the emblems of the broken body and shed blood. Then 
we sang a hymn and went out to remember the scenes 
of the night of the betrayal, and of the day of suffering 
which followed it. 



page 129 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVI. MAY 1, 1905. No. 9 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 131 

Socialism Spreading in the West 131 

The German "Dome" or Cathedral 131 

Will Church and State be Reconciled in Italy?. 132 

The Memorial Celebration General 133 

Do You Desire "Pilgrim" Visits? 134 

Knowledge— Bible Study for May 135 

"I Pray for Them" 136 

God's Power in God's Time 138 

"That They all May be One" 139 

As a Deceiver, Yet True 140 

"What is Truth?" 141 

"I Find No Fault in Him" 142 

Favorable Press Comments from Australia 143 

Chattanooga Convention 130 

page 130 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



GENERAL CONVENTION, CHATTANOOGA, TENN, JUNE 3-6 



THE RAILROADS of the Southern, Central and South-western 
Associations will sell tickets to this Convention 
at one fare and one-third, plus 25 cents, on the 
"Certificate Plan." You purchase a regular ticket to 
Chattanooga, telling your ticket-agent at the time that 
you desire a Certificate, that you are going to the WATCH 
TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY'S CONVENTION, and 
which will entitle you to purchase a return ticket at 
one-third a regular fare. Hold on to that certificate, as 
without it you would be charged full fare when buying 
your return ticket. The Certificates will need to be 
signed, but we will publicly announce at the Convention 
the name of the brother who will attend to the matter 
for you and save you all trouble. 

ACCOMMODATIONS should be secured in advance to 
avoid confusion and trouble to yourself and the Entertainment 
Committee. Therefore, if you will attend, 
write at once, saying briefly (a) how many will be of 
your party; (b) how many of each sex; (c) if colored, so 
state; (d) married couples desirous of rooming together 
should so state. AS TO RATES. -It will be safe to count 
that a room for one person will cost $1.00 per night in 
a good, respectable house, or a room for two $1.25. Unless 
you specify to the contrary, arrangements will be 
made for two in a bed and two beds in a large room at 
the cost of 50 cents each person. MEALS can be secured 
from 15 cents up, according to quantity, kind and service. 

Do not write on this subject at length. Tell us 
about things at the Convention. Give the information 
briefly and to the point. A postal card will do. Address 
the WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 612 
Arch St., Allegheny, Pa. 

GET READY PROPERLY 

Prepare your heart for a blessing. Come to the Convention 
in the proper spirit— as a disciple, a learner. 
Come intent also on doing good as well as getting good, 
of consoling and encouraging others, as well as to be 
yourself comforted. Above all, come realizing that the 
Lord himself is the fountain of blessings, and remembering 
his word— not by might, nor by power, but by the 
Lord's Spirit are we to expect the blessings we hope for. 
In making ready and en route do not forget this important 
item, for on it your share in the Convention's blessing 
greatly depends. 



R3550 : page 130 
1905--VOLUNTEER MATTER SOON READY--1905 



Send in your orders for Volunteer Matter at once, please. 
The "ammunition" is not yet ready, but will be soon. The 
house to house distribution is planned for this year. It 
worked well last year, except in districts where the population 
is largely foreign and Catholic. In those parts it is still 
advisable to serve the Protestant English churches. Let us 
know how many you can use all told and how you prefer to 
have them addressed. We will not send all the tracts at once, 
except where quantity is small. We hope that we may have 
fresh "Volunteers" this year to join in the work of the free 
circulation of the Society's literature. Those who participate 
most freely seem to receive the greater blessing. We do 
not urge. It is a volunteer service. The Master says, "He 
that reapeth receiveth wages and gathereth fruit unto life 
everlasting." 



R3548 :page 131 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
SOCIALISM SPREADING IN THE WEST. 



REV. CHARLES STELZEL recently appointed by 

the Home Missionary Society of the Presbyterian 

Church, was a machinist until recently, and is 

now appointed to look out for the welfare of wage earners 

and devise means for interesting them in Presbyterian 

Christianity on the basis of its new Statement of 

Faith, which quite covers and hides the doctrine of foreordained 

damnation of all except the "very elect," 

stated in the Westminster Confession still retained— sub 

rosa. 

Rev. Stelzel visited the region of the Colorado 
miners' strike recently, and his report of what he found is 
set forth in the Boston Transcript as follows: 

"In an interview Mr. Stelzel, after his return from 
Colorado, where he had been studying the labor situation, 
said that Socialism is increasing among the workingmen 
of the West faster than Easterners realize. In Colorado, 
for instance, the issue, as he discovers it, is not unionism 
but Socialism; and the strike has entered many churches, 
officials differing fundamentally on the issues involved. 
For thousands of workingmen Socialism has become a 
substitute for the Church, the idealism of the earthly propaganda 
taking the place of the visions and ideals of the 
religious faith. This Mr. Stelzel has tested not only by 



word-of-mouth conversations and by hearing the speeches 
of orators, but by a careful poll— through correspondence 
of the leaders among the Western labor leaders. He 
finds that they are sending about the country as organizers 
and agitators, men who were formerly ministers in 
Protestant churches or who were Roman Catholic priests, 
who will use the religious terminology and appeal to the 
religious motives, but to the end that an earthly 
Utopia may be set up, and without any reference to the 
life beyond the grave. He believes that the Church must 
begin a propaganda which must be carried on out of doors 
wherever wage-earners congregate; that literature, inexpensive 
and attractive, written in the language of the 
people among whom it must circulate and written to 
their level, must be printed and circulated lavishly." 

This is significant, and points exactly in the direction 
and to the events portrayed in God's Word,— in its pictures 
of the "day of wrath" coming on Christendom. 

THE GERMAN "DOME," OR CATHEDRAL. 



The completion and dedication of a great Cathedral 
at Berlin, Germany, is an event of world-wide note. It 
is to be to central Europe what St. Paul's Cathedral, 
London, is to Great Britain and what St. Peter's is to 
Rome. Newspaperdom concludes that it marks the 
closest possible approach of the German Emperor to the 
position of Pontifex Maximus to Germans. The N.Y. 
Times considers that "under the direct and personal 
care of the Emperor" it as closely marks "the establishment 
of a State Church as the exertions of the monarch 
could bring it." It adds:— 

"That would be the conclusion to be drawn from 
the establishment of the cathedral, even without more 
explicit explanation. But the pains that have been 

R3549 :page 131 

taken to secure at the opening the attendance of conspicuous 

representatives of other Protestantism than 

that of Germany shows that the intention goes much 

further than the establishment of a Prussian state 

church, in the sense, at least, of a Prussian Court 

church. It is almost avowedly to make Berlin the Rome 

of the Protestant world, in so far as the idea of an 

ecclesiastical center may consist with the right 

of private judgment as opposed to ecclesiastical 

control, which is at the very basis of Protestantism. 

And the establishment of a Protestant cathedral 

which aims to transcend the limits of any one communion 

or of any one country seems to involve the establishment, 

in a manner of speaking, of a Protestant 

Pope. Dr. Dryander, the Prussian court preacher who 

preached the opening discourse, did not shrink from this 



conclusion. On the contrary, he dotted his i's with great 
explicitness in setting forth 'the Emperor's desire that 
this building should be the center of Protestantism, and 
that the German Emperor should in a general sense be 
the protector of the faith.' 

"Without doubt, if there is to be a Protestant Pope, 
or in so far as there is to be one, the Kaiser fills the bill 

R3549 : page 132 

more nearly than any other earthly potentate. He has 

more Protestant subjects than any other, excepting the 

King of England. And the Anglican variety of Protestantism 

has always been recognized, both by its admirers 

and its detractors, as a variety suited only for 

home consumption, or at least for consumption by English-speaking 

persons imbued with British traditions, 

and not for exportation. King Edward would hardly 

be moved to compete with his royal nephew for the 

headship of the Reformed churches throughout the 

world. The headship of Continental European Protestantism, 

at least, naturally devolves upon the German 

Kaiser, in so far as it devolves upon anybody. We may 

now see that the necessity under which the Kaiser 

has felt himself to be, of forming and expressing opinions 

upon such subjects, for example, as biblical criticism, 

had a special root, in addition to his general necessity 

of forming and expressing opinions upon all 

matters of human concern or interest... 

"It is very impressive to find such a demonstration 
of the essential Christian unity of Protestantism as 
was afforded by the ceremonies of the consecration. It 
is not fantastic to expect that such a demonstration may 
have its effect upon the religious evolution of the world." 

A Catholic daily comments on the "Dome," etc., 
as follows:— 

"The German Kaiser is a good man and certainly 
he has so far treated his Catholic subjects with fairness, 
the Catholic Poles of Posen excepted, but really can not 
a melancholy note be caught in the midst of this Berlin 
hallelujah? The Kaiser's own statisticians prove that 
Protestantism is perishing in Germany. The professors 
in his great universities so assert and even some of his 
own preachers so admit. Between the advance of materialism 
on one side and Catholicism on the other, Lutheranism 
is being ground to powder. If it were not for 
the support of the German Catholic party it is questionable 
if the crown would be on his head to-day. Socialism 
would be singularly dominant. 

"Without a supporting Catholicism what would be 
the fate of the Kaiser's Protestant St. Peter's? It could 
not remain. It is environed by a perishing Protestantism, 
and when the latter dies the great structure must 
pass to other hands. Whose? It may be those of Socialists 
temporarily, but eventually the Catholic Church 
will come into possession. As a far-sighted statesman 



the Kaiser must foresee this. As to the English and 

American clergymen who lauded his purpose, why, compliments 

are easy to give. They knew better while they 

spoke." 

"BOTH GOOD AND RIGHT" 

The German Emperor supplements his views regarding 
the purpose of the great Protestant Cathedral to 
be built in Berlin: 

BERLIN, March 8th.— Upon the Emperor's recent remark 
that his "Dome" should be a new place of pilgrimage, 
a new St. Peter's Church, a cry of indignation sounded 
throughout the entire [Roman] catholic world. At 
an after-celebration to the dedication of the Cathedral 
the Emperor declared: 

"The theological controversies between the two 
churches have nothing whatever to do with its [the Cathedral's] 
value. The Roman Catholic Church has ever been 
the strongest organization and is so to this day. How 
the conflict will yet end rests with God. If Catholicism 
is the true religion, then no one can destroy it. It will 
become a greater power in the world than it already is. 
My conviction is, that both religions are good and right, 
and only misunderstandings do separate them. 

"If in the course of developments Catholicism shall 
finally come off victorious, well and good. But until one 
or the other side has reached a clearer light, and until the 
overhanging cloud has been dispelled, a space of 500 years 
will probably have passed, and until then let us live in 
peace."— Translated from the German. 

WILL CHURCH AND STATE BE RECONCILED IN ITALY? 



Pope Pius X, and his Secretary of State, Cardinal 
Merry del Val, have determined to introduce a radical 
change in the policy of the Vatican toward the civil 
power in Italy. If this assurance be well founded, and 
many recent incidents confirm it, the upholders of the 
established social order in the peninsula will be immensely 
strengthened, and we may be sure that the royal Government 
will do everything in its power to satisfy the just 
claims of the Papacy. 

On the occupation of the Holy City by Italian 
troops in the winter of 1870-1, the Government of Victor 
Emanuel strove to conciliate the head of the Church by 
offering to give him every assurance of independence, 
except the recognition of his temporal authority over 
any considerable section of Italian territory. It promised 
that he should be treated as a sovereign within the 
precincts of the Vatican, and to compensate him for the 
loss of revenues previously enjoyed the Italian Parliament 
voted him an annual grant of more than $600,000. 



REFUSED GOVERNMENT ALLOWANCES 

The Papacy has hitherto refused to touch a penny 
of the money, but that statute has never been repealed, 
and in the eyes of many Italian jurists it is a nice question 
of law whether the Pope might not at any moment 
demand the arrears of the subsidy, which now would 
amount to a vast sum, that, however, could easily be 
raised by a loan. 

Simultaneously with his stern refusal of what he 
termed a bribe for connivance in the spoliation of Peter's 
patrimony, Pius IX. issued to faithful Catholics the 
famous injunction non expedit, to the effect that it was 
not expedient for them to seem to condone the wrong 
done to the Church by taking part in any parliamentary 
election held under the regime of the usurper. 

RADICALS AND SOCIALISTS THE POWER TO CHANGE 

That injunction was solemnly reaffirmed by Pope 
Leo XIII. For more than thirty years it has been obeyed, 
with the result that the friends of the existing social 
system have been deplorably weakened by the refusal 
of nearly one-half of the registered electors to exercise 
the franchise. The control of the Italian Parliament 
had, up to the recent general election, passed virtually 
into the hands of advanced Radicals and Socialists. 
Nowhere else in Europe have the doctrines of Karl 
Marx exerted so much influence on legislation, or constituted 
so grave a menace to existing social and political 

R3549 : page 133 

institutions, as they lately have in the kingdom of Italy. 

We pointed out not long before the late general 
election in Italy that it had become a question of vital 
moment to the Papacy to decide whether a continued 
enforcement of the injunction non expedit would be consistent 
with a due regard for its own safety. Little 
cause as has the Vatican to regard the Quirinal with 
sympathy, it must recognize that the ominous drift of 
events has exposed them both to a common danger, 
for it has been taught that there is something worse 
even than a usurping monarchy by the deadly assaults 
to which the Catholic religion has been and is being 
subjected in France at the hands of the Radical-Socialist 
party now dominant in that country. 

PAPACY LEARNING A LESSON 

Pope Pius X would have shown himself but an 
incompetent pilot had he shut his eyes to the warning 
given by the resolve of Premier Combes to abolish the 
Concordat between the French Republic and the Papacy, 
the warning, namely, that the aloofness which formerly 
seemed expedient had become so no longer, and that 



the law of self-preservation required the Church and the 
monarchy to co-operate for defence in Italy, lest both 
go down in a common shipwreck. 

That the warning had been heeded to a considerable 
extent was evident from the outcome of the recent 
general election, at which the party of order was 
rescued from possible defeat and materially strengthened 
by the support of many faithful Catholics at the 
ballot box. The full significance, however, of the part 
then played by a considerable section of the registered 
Catholic electors is brought out for the first time by 
our correspondent in Rome. He tells us that the injunction 
non expedit, though not formally lifted, will 
henceforth be suffered to become a dead letter. 

CATHOLICS MAY NOW PARTICIPATE IN ITALIAN ELECTIONS 

The proof offered for this assertion is that at the 
Parliamentary as well as the municipal elections that 
have taken place during the last year the instruction 
or permission given to Catholics to participate in the 
voting emanated directly from Cardinal Merry del Val, 
the Papal Secretary of State. We are further informed 

R3550 : page 133 

that in order to facilitate co-operation with the civil 
power in behalf of the established order of society, and 
with a view of minimizing the chances of jealousy and 
discord, the Vatican has decided to discourage the creation 
of a specifically clerical party in Parliament, and 
consequently will recommend Catholic electors to vote 
either for Government nominees or for non-militant 
clericals. 

By this judicious course it should be possible to 
avoid raising in the Chamber of Deputies the inflammatory 
question of a partial restoration of the Papacy's 
temporal power, a question which plainly can best be 
dealt with in friendly negotiations between the Vatican 
and the Quirinal.— Literary Digest. 



R3550 : page 133 

THE MEMORIAL CELEBRATION GENERAL. 

FROM every quarter reports show that the numbers 
who celebrated our Lord's Supper on April 16th 
were much larger than on any previous occasion. 
It would appear, too, that it was a more solemn occasion 
and observed more reverentially than ever before. 
This is right. God forbid that any of us should lose any 
of our respect or reverence in connection with the great 
sacrifice or its memorial. In our last we suggested some 
reasons for celebrating on the anniversary day nearest 



to the year date, and thus keeping the more closely in 
touch with the days of our Lord's last week of earthly 
life and their great events. We hope that all of our 
readers will weigh the matter, that between now and 
the next Memorial we may be of one heart and one 
mind on this matter. A few years ago the Jewish mode 
of reckoning brought the Memorial Supper on Thursday 
evening. We recall that the harmony of the days of 
the week with those of the first celebration added special 
zest as well as peculiar solemnity to the days of 
that week. 

Reports show very many small gatherings. The 
number celebrating at some of the principal cities 
follows:— 

Boston, Mass., 186; Philadelphia, Pa., 99; Cleveland, 
O., 73; St. Louis, Mo., 75; Washington, D.C., 94; 
Richmond, Va., 30; Altoona, Pa., 36; Indianapolis, Ind., 
67; Toronto, Ont., 58; Columbus, O., 47; Binghamton, 
N.Y., 37; Chicago, 111., 170; Providence, R.I., 42; Cincinnati, 
O., 54; Youngstown, O., 35; Dayton, O., 40; 
Scranton, Pa., 42; Buffalo, N.Y., 40; Houston, Tex., 
45; New York City, 109; Los Angeles, Cal, 142; Allegheny, 
Pa., 525; London, Eng., 190; Glasgow, 142; 
Liverpool, 66+; Manchester, 37+; Bristol, 29; Edinburgh, 
21; Sheffield, 25; Sevenoaks, 21; Dublin, 20; 
Elberfeld, 64. 



page 133 

DEAR BROTHER:-Last evening the little company 
here met to celebrate the Memorial. There were sixteen 
present, twelve sisters and four brethren. 

It was an hour of blessed privilege, into which we 
all heartily entered. We remembered the other companies 
who would be gathered together to likewise "do 
this" in our Lord's remembrance, not forgetting the isolated 
ones. 

We feel assured that we, too, were remembered by 
the other ones who were joining in this Memorial, and 
that our prayers for blessing on the Body were being 
repeated by all its members. 

May the Lord's blessing continue with you as you 
are still spared to serve him. 

., Atlantic City, N.J. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Last Sunday evening a 
few earnest, fervent Truth-seekers, twenty-four in number, 

assembled at the home of Bro. D to partake of 

the Memorial Supper, and thus commemorate the death 
of our dear Lord and Master. After appropriate hymns, 

page 134 



reading a few extracts from the sermon in March 15 
Tower, and prayers, the emblems were partaken of and 
we dispersed, "silent, like men in solemn haste," to our 
homes, there to "think on these things," and renew 
within our hearts our covenant to die with him, to have 
no mind or will but his. The thought underlying all is, 
if we would share with him in his Kingdom we must be 
a part of the broken loaf— that as his blood-life was 
poured out for the world, so our blood-life must be 
poured out, even to death, for only in this way can we 
be worthy to drink with him of the new wine (immortal 
life) in his Kingdom. 

Dear brother, we all share in the prayer that God 
may bless and strengthen you and your co-laborers for 
the contest ever before us, and grant that we may all 
drink the new wine with him in his Kingdom and share 
with him in blessing all the families of earth, in that 
glorious day which shall have no end. 

With much love to all the brethren, we are, sincerely 
in the one hope, 

THE CHURCH AT DETROIT, MICH. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Ten brothers and sisters 
partook last evening of the emblems of the broken 
body and shed blood of our dear Redeemer. We considered 
the meaning of eating the sinless flesh and drinking 
the precious blood, as by faith appropriating its virtues 
and merits each for himself. We also had our attention 
called to the deeper significance of the loaf and 
the cup to us as representing our communion and fellowship 
in his sufferings and with those of the fellow-members 
which we have been so graciously permitted to 
have. The propriety of observing the memorial on the 
anniversary of its institution was entirely new to one 
sister, who became quite interested. It was truly a 
blessed hour of spiritual refreshment. Praise God, from 
whom all blessings flow. 

With much Christian love from us all, yours in our 
dear Redeemer, 

, Racine, Wis. 



R3550 : page 134 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Last evening a few of 
us, seven in number, met and together celebrated the 
memorial of our dear Redeemer's death. One brother 
and sister came 25 miles to join with us in this most 
solemn feast. We realized our dear Lord's presence and 
felt drawn closer to him in our sincere desire to serve 
him better. As this was our first celebration since entering 
into the light of Present Truth, the partaking of 



the emblems was, as to their true meaning and import, 
keenly felt and much appreciated by each one as a great 
favor. We remembered at the throne of grace all who 
similarly met together, praying that our heavenly Father 
would keep each and all from falling and help us to be 
faithful until death. 
Yours in love and fellowship, 

, Port Jervis, N.Y. 



page 134 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I am very glad to be 
able to tell you that five of us were permitted to assemble 
together to celebrate the Memorial. I feel that the 
Lord was with us. One of our number said it was his 
first participation in the observance and that he thought 
its influence would last him through all eternity. We 
all seemed to be like-minded in the desire to know the 
full significance of a "full consecration" and to conform 
our lives thereto. We were rejoiced to know that all 
over the world were like companies enjoying a similar 
blessing. 

Praying the Lord's blessing upon your labors, in 
his name, , Tallapoosa, Ga. 



R3550 : page 134 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Bro. H and I met last 

evening at my house and partook of the Memorial Supper, 
showing forth the breaking of his body and the 
pouring forth of his blood, our passover sacrificed for us, 
at the same time renewing our pledge of consecration to 
him and to his service. 

Our hearts assured us of his presence, though the 
eyes of our flesh saw him not. We realized somewhat of 
the infinite love of our Father in giving his only begotten 
Son, "a ransom for all," but especially of them that 
believe; and more, that the Son willingly, joyfully, made 
the great sacrifice. Shall we not then patiently endure 
our light afflictions in the hope of sharing with our Head 
an "eternal weight of glory"? 

In our present state we can but faintly estimate the 
infinite wisdom and love that conceived the plan and 
bestowed this gift upon mankind, and we can only measure 
our love for him by the love we bear to the brethren. 
This is commonly called "Holy Week," and is not 
this season indeed holy to us? We pray its solemnizing 
and humbling influence may continue and grow till we 
drink of the new wine with our Head in the Kingdom. 
May his blessing continue with you and your helpers, 
and may your work prosper as our Head deems best. 

Always yours, in the greater love begotten of the 



greatest of all events, that we have just been 
commemorating. , Winnipeg, Man. 



page 134 

DO YOU DESIRE "PILGRIM" VISITS? 

HEREAFTER we will invite requests for "Pilgrim" 

visits not at the first of the year, but about 

this time, when moving will be mostly past. 

We now inquire for the year beginning May 1, Who desire 

Pilgrim visits? We do not promise to grant all requests 

but we will surely do our best to serve the interests 

of the general field as the Lord shall grant us to 

see his good pleasure in the matter. 

These "Pilgrim" visits are free— no charges are 
made for time or traveling expenses, and no collections 
of any kind are taken up by them. All of their expenses 
are met out of our general Tract Fund, to which many 
of you contribute, but for which no solicitations of any 
kind are authorized. The "Pilgrims" make but brief 
stays at each point of interest. It is presumed that 
those requesting their services will be glad to provide 
them with food and shelter. They are quite content to 
share with the "brethren" the blessings of the Lord's 
bounty as he grants them to you. They seek not your's 
but you. -2 Cor. 12:14. 

For our assistance please answer the following questions 
if you desire these Pilgrim visits— as many of 

page 135 

them as you can— on a postal card, at once. Indicate 
your answers as below, (a), (b), etc.: 

(a) How many DAWN readers in your vicinity? 

(b) Are weekly meetings held now by these? 

(c) How many are usually in attendance? 

(d) Where do they meet now? 

(e) Was a vote taken on this "Pilgrim" invitation? 

(f) How many voted for the invitation to be sent? 

(g) Did any vote against the invitation? How many? 
(h) Give full address of the one who has volunteered 

to care for the Pilgrim. 

(i) If your town is off the railroad, state proper railroad 
station to stop at, and how the "Pilgrim" 
could get from station. Would he be met? 

(j) Could a suitable place be found for one or two 
public meetings? 

(k) Could a suitable place be found for semi-private 
meetings for the interested? 

(1) What attendance do you think could be secured 
for the public session by such notifications and 
advertising as you could give? 

(m) Have the DAWN readers chosen leaders or elders 



in accord with DAWN, Vol. VI., chapters v. and 
vi.? If so, give addresses of the two to whom 
notification of a Pilgrim's coming to you should 
be sent. 

(n) Give writer's name and all addresses in full. 

If you are the only TOWER reader answer such of 
the questions as you can. 

Write very plainly, and should conditions so change 
during the year as to make the withdrawal of this invitation 
advisable, please drop us a postal card to that 
effect at once. 

Sample of how your reply card to us may be written: 
(a) About 14. (b) Yes. (c) 8. (d) In Bro. 
Smith's home, (e) Yes. (f) 7. (g) 1. (h) Bro. and 
Sister Jones, (i) Clifton on P. & Ft.W.R.R. Bro. 
Jones will meet with "rig," if notified the hour of arrival, 
(j) Yes. (k) Yes. (1) 100 to 200. (m) Yes. J. 
Smith and W. Jones, (n) W. Jones, 804 Some St., Ourtown, 
N.H. 

Attend to this at once, please. It may be too late 
after you see in the TOWER the announcement of a 
"Pilgrim" headed your way. The routes are made out 
and timed from start to finish in advance. 



R3550 : page 135 

A BIBLE STUDY ON KNOWLEDGE. 

--FOR MAY- 

(For method of using these Studies and meaning 
of abbreviations, see our issue of March 1.) 

1. What is the importance of knowledge? Matt. 4:4; 
Z/02-245-248; Z/03-166 (2nd col. par. 3) to 167. 

2. In what four ways may knowledge be obtained? 
A.121,par. 3. 

3. In which of these ways did Adam possess a knowledge 
of evil before he sinned? A. 122, par. 2. 

4. Where is the source of all true knowledge? Jno. 17:17; 
Prov. 2:6; Jno. 6:45; E.54, par. 1,2,3. 

5. How is knowledge "God's first gift to man"? 
Z/03-435. 

6. What is the relation between knowledge and faith? 
A.13, par. 1; A.20, par. 2; A.21, par. 1; Z. '94-329 

(1st col. par. 2); Z.'99-3 (2nd col. par. 1). 

7. Who only are counted "worthy" to know "the deep 
things of God"? Psa. 25:9,12,14; Matt. 1 1:25; 
Z/00-136 (1st col. par. 3); Z/02-332 (1st col. par. 3,4) 
and (2nd col. par. 1); Z/97-255-257. 

8. Is knowledge necessary to salvation? Rom. 10:17; 
A.102 (par. 1) to 106; Acts 10:22; Z/02-108 (2nd). 

9. What is the difference between knowing about God 
and knowing God? Jno. 17:3; Z. '97-1 15 (1st col. 



par. 1,2,3); Z.'97-l 17 (2nd col. par. 1;)Z.'00-136 
(2nd col. par. 1). 

10. Does knowledge increase responsibility? Luke 12:47,48; 
F.719, par. 1; A.349, par. 1. 

1 1 . What is our duty toward building up each other in 
knowledge? F.263, 264; Z.'03-207 (2nd col. par. 1). 

12. How do we know we are accepted as probationary 
members of the body of Christ? 1 Thess. 1:4,5; 
E.249, 250;F.191,par. 1. 

13. What is our present inheritance through obedience 
to our knowledge of God's will? Eph. 1:7,18; 
Z.'01-55 (2nd col. par. 1) to 56. 

14. What effect does the knowledge of the Truth have 
upon superstitious fears? Jno. 8:32; Z. '03-62 

(1st col. par. 2) and (2nd col). 

15. How do we "grow in knowledge"? Prov. 2:3-6; 
2 Pet. 3:18; Z/03-61 (2nd col. par. 1 to 4) and 62 
par. 1; Z/03-70 (1st col. par. 1). 

16. What is the significance of "the helmet of salvation," 
and is it more important now than in the 

past? Eph. 6:17; F.658, par. 1; Z/01-286 ("Philosophy 
of the Ransom.") Z. '03-69 (2nd col. par. 1). 

17. Can we give too much attention to acquiring knowledge? 
F.319,par. 1; Z/99-156 (1st col. par. 1). 

18. What is the relation between knowledge and love? 
1 Cor. 13:2; Z/03-56 (1st col. par. 1,2); 2 Pet. 1:8; 
E.259 (par. 1 to 3); Z/00-184 (1st col. par. 2,3); 
Z/03-200 (1st col. par. 1 to 3); Z/97-234 (1st col. 

par. 1). 

R3551 :page 135 

19. What is the difference between the knowledge 
which precedes justifying faith, and the knowledge 
which we should "add to" our faith? 2 Pet. 1:5; 

Z. '96-221 ("Questions of Interest"). 

20. How are "grace and peace multiplied" unto us 
through knowledge? 2 Pet. 1:2,3; Z. '97-1 14 

(1st and 2nd cols.); A.346. 

21. What is the relation between knowledge and 
prayer? Jno. 15:7; F.679,680; F.688, par. 1; 
Z/03-204 (1st and 2nd cols). 

22. Do all kinds of knowledge profit us? Jno. 17:17; 
F.137, par. 2. 

23. How can we explain the Apostle's statement, 

R3551 :page 136 

"Ye know all things," and "need not that any 
man teach you." 1 Jno. 2:20,27; E.304 to 311; 
F.260,261. 

24. Explain Isaiah 53:11. E.100, par. 1,2; Z/95-156 (2nd 
col. par. 1). 

25. Should we expect to have any knowledge of the 
future? Amos 3:7; Jno. 16:13; B.15, par. 3; Z/02-86 
(2nd col. par. 1). 



26. What evidences have we that Dan. 12:4 is being 
fulfilled? A.337, par. 1; D.414, par. 1; Z/02-86 

(1st col. par. 1 to 3). 

27. When will "the knowledge of the Lord fill the 
earth as the waters cover the sea," and "all men 
come unto the knowledge of the truth"? Isa. 1 1:9; 

1 Tim. 2:4; A.74, par. 3; E.20, par. 2; A.105, par. 2. 

28. What will be the relation between knowledge and 
faith in the Millennial Age? Z.'00-238 (2nd col. 

par. 1,2) to 239; F.106 (par. 3) to 107. 



R3551 :page 136 

"I PRAY FOR THEM." 

--JOHN 17:15-26.-MAY 14.- 

ON the night of the institution of the memorial 

of his death, our Lord, so far from being concerned 

wholly with himself and his approaching crucifixion, 

was specially thinking of and praying for his 

disciples. The closing verse of John 16 records his 

words of admonition, "These things have I spoken unto 

you that in me ye may have peace. In the world ye 

shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer; I have overcome 

the world." These words spake Jesus and lifted 

up his eyes to heaven in prayer for his disciples, saying, 

"I pray for them: I pray not for the world, but for those 

whom thou hast given me; for they are thine, and thine 

are mine; and I am glorified in them. And now I am 

no more in the world, but these are in the world, and I 

come to thee. Holy Father, keep through thy own name 

those whom thou hast given me." 

Our Lord's entire life furnishes an illustration of 
what the Apostle commends to all the Church in the 
words, "Pray without ceasing." Our Lord evidently 
was always in that prayerful attitude of heart, which 
was filled with thankfulness to the Father in respect to 
all of life's affairs, which recognized his guardian care, 
which trusted him, confided in him and in every distressing 
circumstance looked to him to overrule and to 
cause all experiences to work for good. But our Lord's 
constant attitude of prayer without ceasing did not 
hinder his more particular devotions when he turned 
aside from the affairs of life to speak to the Father in 
secret— sometimes briefly and sometimes spending a 
whole night in prayer in the mountain solitude. Though 
he loved his disciples they were not yet begotten of the 
Holy Spirit and could not fully comprehend matters 
from his standpoint. The Father alone was able to 
comprehend the full situation, and hence the very 
isolation of our Lord from all human help drew him the 
nearer and the oftener to the Father in prayer. 

So it is or should be with the Lord's followers. 



Proportionately as we grow in his character likeness we 
will similarly pray without ceasing and in everything 
give thanks, singing and making melody in our hearts 
to the Lord, realizing him as the center of all our hopes 
and ambitions and joys. And similarly we will avail 
ourselves of the privilege of more formal approaches to 
the throne of grace, to obtain mercy and find grace to 
help in time of need. Similarly also, in proportion as at 
times we may find that our dear ones either of earthly 
or spiritual relationship are unable to sympathize with 
our experiences, we may be profited by such a lack of 
earthly sympathy in that the experiences will send us 
the more frequently to the heavenly Comforter from 
whom we will derive the greater blessing and joy. 

THE CHURCH NOT THE WORLD 

In this prayer, as elsewhere throughout the inspired 
Word, a sharp line of distinction is drawn as between the 
Church and the world. A great loss is sustained by 
those who do not see this, for it wonderfully assists in 
the "rightly dividing of the Word of Truth." "God so 
loved the world," Jesus "by the grace of God tasted 
death for every man," and was a propitiation for the 
sins of the whole world, yet he is not of the world, and 
those who become his disciples are not of the world. 
"Ye are not of the world even as I am not of the world." 
The losing of the clear line of distinction between the 
Church and the world has been a serious injury to true 
Christianity. 

The world has appropriated some of the promises 
and customs and ceremonies which more or less resemble 
or counterfeit the graces of the Church, and this is called 
civilization, and thus a large proportion of the world 
are to-day mistakenly recognized as part of the Church. 
This is to their disadvantage, for not discerning that 
those who are of the Church must be begotten again, 
that in the resurrection they may be born again, they 
are merely deceiving themselves. It is a disadvantage 
also to the true Church, the true followers of the Lord, 
whose new natures must contend with the weaknesses 
of the flesh, and whose flesh seeks to justify itself by 
common custom, and to claim that to go much beyond 
the common standard is to be fanatical, extremists. The 
Lord's people need to remember that, judged from the 
standpoint of the world and the nominal Church, they 
must be extremists if they would come up to the standards 
set for them by the Lord and the apostles— standards 
illustrated in the lives of Jesus and the apostles, 
in their self-denials even unto death. 

Our Lord prayed not for the world, because the 
Lord's time for dealing with the world had not yet come 
—would not come until after the selection of the Church, 
the body of Christ. He prayed for the apostles especially, 
because they would be his special representatives 
in the world, and his prayer included also all of the five 



hundred brethren who up to that time had believed on 
him with sincere hearts. Not only so, but (v. 20) he 
extended the petition so as to cover all of a similar class 
even to the end of the age— all who should believe on 
him so thoroughly, so sincerely, that their faith would 
separate them from the world to be his disciples, his 
followers in the narrow way in very truth. 

WHAT HE DID NOT PRAY FOR 

As we look out over the world to-day and take a 
view of the nominal Christian Church, and attempt to 
put ourselves in the place of the nominal Christian believer 

R3551 :page 137 

and his professed view of matters, and if, then, we 
suppose that the Lord prayed for the present condition 
of things, his prayer would be something like this: 

I pray that my followers may become very numerous, 
very wealthy and very learned, that they may be 
the notables of the world. I pray that they may be 
divided up into great denominations, some holding one 
fragment of truth and some another, blending the same 
with much of inconsistency and error. I pray that there 
may be a dignified class, self-satisfied and reverential 
in form, who may be known as Episcopalians. I pray 
for another dignified class who will hold the Westminster 
Confession of Faith, and subsequently in 1902 
supplement it with a briefer statement which, in effect, 
will contradict it. I pray for another great schism under 
the leadership of Wesley, which shall mingle with its 
devotions many worldly customs and attractions, and 
shall prosper greatly and be able to boast the building 
of one church every day in the year. I pray for another 
great sect or party of my followers, to name my name and 
be the followers of Luther. I pray for the great Roman 
Catholic Church, which will claim to be my kingdom, 
claim to reign in power and great dignity and honor over 
the kingdoms of the earth, claim that its head and 
representative is my vicegerent, the spiritual emperor 
of the world. I pray that its cunning policy may keep 
my Word from reaching the public, and that it may 
represent my great sacrifice for sins in its innumerable 
sacrifices of the mass, and that it may prosper and 
"wear out the saints of the most high God." 

I pray also for all the little sects and parties and 
splits, that they may prosper, that each may think that 
they have the truth and be satisfied with their creeds, 
and be hindered from searching the Scriptures to know 
therefrom the way, the truth and the life. I pray for 
all these that they may be thus scattered and separated 
and have fences between each other. I pray further that 
they may not only have denominational lines to separate 
them, but, additionally, political lines and lines of 
national prejudice, so that millions of them of one party 



or nationality may threaten and make war upon and 
slaughter those of another nationality or party. I 
pray that these national distinctions amongst them shall 
run so high that it will require hundreds of millions of 
dollars every year for armies and weapons and battleships 

R3552 : page 137 

to fight each other or to threaten each other or to 
intimidate each other. I pray all this that the heathen 
world may be charmed with the glorious effect of my 
teachings upon Christendom, and that all the heathen 
may say with one voice, Let us also become partisan and 
sectarian. Let us also arm and fight. Let us also learn 
of the practices of these Christian nations that they do 
not have the entire monopoly of profanity and drunkenness 
and debauchery, that we may share in these. 

WHAT OUR LORD DID PRAY FOR 

Very different was our Lord's petition. His prayer 
represents his disciples as being a small minority in the 
world, hated of the world, opposed by the world, misunderstood 
by the world, not many great, not many 
wise, not many learned, not many rich, not many noble— 
chiefly the poor and altogether a "little flock." The 
characteristics of the disciples whom Jesus personally 
gathered were to be expected in all who should afterward 
be gathered to him as his true followers. 

Notwithstanding the great array of Christian 
nations and Christian sects, the Lord "knoweth them 
that are his;" and in harmony with this prayer he has 
not during the age separated his people from the world, 
but left them in the world, merely separating them so 
far as the heart is concerned— "I pray not that thou 
shouldst take them out of the world, but that thou 
shouldst keep them from the evil." We are not to say 
that the evil is good, we are not to say that the world 
has become saintly; it is still evil. Christendom is 
practically in the same condition to-day that Judaism 
was in when it crucified the Lord and persecuted his 
followers. 

Then the chief sect of the Jews called themselves 
God's holy people (the meaning of the word Pharisee), 
and the whole nation stood on a plane of outward 
morality which the Lord declared was in his sight a 
farce. He called the leaders whited sepulchers, inwardly 
full of corruption. He told them that while they washed 
the outside of the cup they left it filthy within; that 
while they made broad their phylacteries and prayed in 
public, in their hearts they were far from a condition of 
holiness or love— so far that they would be willing to 
wrongfully take a home from a poor widow if the outward 
forms of the law permitted and if the transaction 
would not bring too much reproach. (Matt. 23:14,23-28.) 
It is much the same to-day; there is an outward gloss or 



veneer that in many cases is hypocritical, an outward 
form of worship, a drawing near with the lips while the 
heart is far from him, busy with fashion and dress and 
pleasure and money-making idolatries, if not with 
grosser sins. 

Our Lord prayed that his true followers might be 
kept by heavenly power free from such conditions— out 
of sympathy with them, not of them. And we believe 
this has been true all down throughout this Gospel 
age. We believe that the Lord's prayer has been fulfilled, 
and that his scattered little flock, the branches of 
the true vine, have flourished in heart, spiritually, keeping 
up a separate life entirely from the nominal system, 
which is only a part of the world. We believe that the 
same is true to-day, and that these in the world but not 
of it are now, in the harvest time, being called out of 
Babylon, "Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers 
of her sins and receive not of her plagues." But 
as the entire number of Israelites who returned from 
Babylon when the opportunity offered was only about 
50,000, so we may expect here that the Lord has so 
arranged matters respecting the popularity of error and 
the unpopularity of the Truth, that the number ready 
and glad to forsake all to follow the Truth and the right 
will be few. 

"SANCTIFY THEM THROUGH THY TRUTH" 

The prayer, continuing, points out two things- 
first, how the Lord's followers will be kept, and, secondly, 
why they will be kept. (1) They will be kept because 
they are not of the world, because they have taken a 
positive stand on the Lord's side, because they have 
reckonedly died to the world and sin and been begotten 
again of the holy Spirit to newness of life. (2) They will 
be kept in the world, but not of it, by the power of the 
Truth in their hearts. The Truth will sanctify or separate 
them. Not any truth, not all truth, but the Truth 
—the Truth of the divine revelation respecting the divine 
character and the divine plan, and their relationship 
to these. Summing this all up the Lord declares, "My 

R3552 : page 138 

Word is Truth"— the Truth which only sanctifies and 
separates my disciples from the world. 

We are aware that "doctrine" has become very 
unpopular in every quarter of the world and in the 
nominal Church. No wonder! The doctrines, the 
creeds, of the various sects and parties of Christendom 
are so mingled with error, so offensive to the spiritual 
senses of the spiritual mind, that they could have no 
pleasure in partaking of such things from their tables. 
The prophet describes the matter, saying, "All tables 
are full of vomit"— every creed formulated in the Dark 
Ages is necessarily repulsive to-day. But the Truth, 



"Thy Word is Truth," never becomes stale, never 
becomes rancid or offensive; it is still the Bread from 
Heaven, it is still the Word of Life; and all who are of 
the Truth, all who have progressed from being merely 
babes in Christ and by partaking of the meat of his 
Word have come to an appreciation of it, all who have 
been weaned from the milk and drawn from the breasts, 
can say with the poet respecting the wonderful story 
of the divine plan, 

"IT SATISFIES MY LONGINGS AS NOTHING ELSE CAN DO" 

The Truth has a sanctifying power in the heart 
because it fills the longings of the heart. Every heart has 
talents and appeals which demand operation, activity. 
Something must be supplied to meet the hungerings 
and thirstings of these various talents and qualities of 
the mind. If the exceeding great and precious promises 
of the divine Word be not received into the heart to 
satisfy its cravings or longings, it will feed upon other 
things; and the world, the flesh and the devil are all 
crowding upon it, offering various attractions, some of 
which will be received if the heart be not filled and kept 
filled. Thus our Lord's parable represents a heart swept 
and garnished, with the devil cast out, and then that 
heart, still empty, is represented as being re-entered 
by seven devils. Our hearts need not only to be cleansed 
from sin through justification of life, through faith in 
Christ, but they need also to be filled with the Lord himself; 
and our Lord, who calls himself the Truth, furnishes 
to our hearts various truths as food, as nourishment, 
as filling our hearts and satisfying our cravings, and by 
thus filling he sanctifies those who hunger and thirst 
after righteousness, and thus separates them completely 
and keeps them separate from the world, its spirit, its 
hopes, its aims, its ambitions. 

GOD'S POWER IN GOD'S TIME 

Have we love for righteousness? We cannot hope 
to find it in the world, nor hope to establish it here 
under present conditions. We are obliged to admit 
that nothing short of God's promised Kingdom can 
establish righteousness; hence our hearts, as Noah's 
dove, return to the Lord as the center and fountain 
of righteousness. Have we a desire for peace and joy? 
Our past experience in the world convinces us that, 
while the whole world is seeking for happiness, it has 
not found it. We who have found the Lord have found 
the secret of happiness, the Christian's secret of having 
every day a happy one. Do we long for power and 
influence that we may exercise them for good? The Word 
of Truth assures us that it is impossible to find them in 
present conditions, but that we shall, if faithful, attain 
to the power and glory, honor and immortality, in the 
First Resurrection, and that then our grandest hopes 



and ideals will be realized in the Kingdom blessings 
that will come to all the families of the earth. Do 
riches seem attractive to us? The Scriptures hold out 
the true riches, and assure us that in following the Lord 
all things are ours by faith now, and shall be actually 
ours by and by, when we become our Master's associates 
in the heavenly Kingdom. 

Our Lord declares, "As thou hast sent me into the 
world, even so have I also sent them into the world." 
It is evident enough how the Father sent the Son, who 
left the glory which he had with the Father before the 
world was made flesh and dwelt amongst us; but in 
what sense are we sent into the world, we who are born 
of the world? Of course the apostles were specially 
sent once, but all the Lord's followers are sent in a 
sense or degree. We are not sent until we are separated 
from the world to be his in heart and in truth. Then 
he gave us a commission or a message, a work to do in 
the world in his name and for the cause which he represents, 
namely, the cause of righteousness. So, then, 
the true followers of the Lord are ambassadors for God, 
representatives for Jesus. As he was in the world, 
so are we in the world; hence he calls upon us to walk 
as children of the light, to oppose sin in ourselves, and 
to use our influence in all proper ways in opposition 
to sin and in favor of righteousness and truth and 
right. 

GLORY SHARED WITH CHURCH 

Continuing our Lord declares, "For their sakes I 
sanctify myself, that they also might be sanctified 
through the truth." This seems to carry with it the 
thought, elsewhere suggested in this prayer, that our 
Lord had by this time come to a full realization of the 
Father's plan, namely, that his disciples were to be 
developed for the purpose of becoming his joint-heirs in 
the Kingdom, sharers in his glory. At first thought 
such a sharing of the great glory of the Kingdom might 
appear to be a lessening of the great glory of Jesus, just 
as the appointment of the seventy elders of Israel to 
be associates with Moses in judging Israel seemed at 
first to be a contraction or diminution of the dignity 
or authority of Moses. 

But as Moses in the type was very meek, and gladly 
welcomed all the elders to joint-service, saying, 

R3553 : page 138 

"Would God that all the Lord's people were prophets, 
and that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them!" 
(Num. 1 1:29), so the Lord Jesus, so far from feeling 
that the gathering out of the Church to be his joint-heirs 
in the Kingdom would diminish his glory, joined 
heartily in the divine plan, and declares here that he 
set himself apart, he separated himself from that feature 



of the glory and dignity of the Father's reward 
that his followers might have a share in it, that they 
might become his joint-heirs, being set apart and brought 
to this honor through the Truth, through the great 
and precious promises bestowed upon them. This same 
thought seems to be presented in the words (vs. 22,23) 
—"The glory which thou gavest me I have given them, 
that they may be one even as we are one: I in them 
and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one; 
and that the world may know that thou hast sent me, 
and hast loved them, as thou hast loved me." 

The love of God pervades our hearts so that selfishness 
has no room there, and thus it was that our dear 
Redeemer, instead of feeling jealous that any others 

R3553 : page 139 

should be exalted to the divine nature, participators in 
the Kingdom, in this prayer to the Father declares his 
full acquiescence in the plan, his hearty cooperation, 
his joy to have it so. What a thought this gives to us 
as the prospective Bride, already espoused to the heavenly 
Bridegroom. He is pleased to exalt us from our 
lowly estate to be one with himself in his Kingdom, in 
his throne, in his Father's love. 

Wonder of wonders! Where will the divine compassion 
cease! While we were yet sinners, under divine 
condemnation of death, we were loved and redeemed 
at a great price; and now, having been redeemed, we 
hear the voice celestial saying, "Come up higher," yea, 
even to the throne, to joint-heirship with the King of 
kings, the Lord of lords, the only begotten of the 
Father, full of grace and truth. Could we keep ever 
before our minds this grand display of love and unselfishness 
how thoroughly it would scatter from the minds 
of all who are seeking to be copies of God's dear Son 
every thought of rivalry one with another. How it 
would cause us to rejoice in the growing usefulness and 
advancement in the Lord's service of every member of 
the body. How we should more and more feel what 
the Scriptures describe as "in honor preferring one 
another," and which rejoices in the prosperity of a 
brother, in his growing usefulness in the Church, in the 
growing evidences of his favor with God and man. 
Those who can thus rejoice in the prosperity of the 
fellow-members of the body have another evidence of 
their growth in the likeness of our great and glorious 
Head. Those who are without this sentiment should 
strive for it and be very discontented until it is attained. 

"THAT THEY ALL MAY BE ONE" 

The spirit of trusts and combinations which is 
abroad in the world and which is permeating everything 
has the effect of combining congregations, combining 
denominations, and in general is leading on 



rapidly to the formation of great religious trusts, whose 
development will be a serious menace to the liberties 
of the Lord's truly consecrated people, but not an injury 
to their spiritual interests. On the contrary, it 
will prove a blessing to the Lord's little flock in that it 
will more particularly differentiate them and confirm 
to them the teachings of the Scriptures, separating them 
the more completely from the nominal systems and the 
binding in bundles of the tares, giving them the while 
the confirmations of the Scriptures, which clearly predict 
this condition in the end of this age as preceding 
the collapse of great Babylon.— Rev. 18:21. 

Our Lord's prayer, "That they all may be one," 
has been fulfilled throughout the age. All who have 
been truly his have had a oneness of heart, a oneness 
of purpose, a oneness of spirit, with the Father and 
with the Son— a fellowship divine which cannot be produced 
by earthly creeds and fetters. So it is to-day, 
and so it is always between those who are truly the 
Lord's. They know each other not by outward passwords 
or grips or signs, but by the touch of faith and 
love which it gives and which each recognizes. "By 
this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, in that 
ye have love one for another." "We know we have 
passed from death unto life because we love the brethren." 
True, we love all men and seek to serve all as 
we have opportunity, but, as the Apostle explains, 
"especially the household of faith," especially those who 
love the Lord and are trusting in the precious blood, 
and are fully consecrated to him and, so far as they are 
able, doing his will and seeking to further know that 
will day by day. 

This union between those who are the Lord's people 
is evidently not the union of person. The Lord's followers 
are not one in person but in spirit. And this is 
the illustration which the Lord gives of the oneness 
which exists between himself and the Father— they are 
not one in person but one in spirit, purpose, will; for our 
Lord declares that he always does the Father's will, 
those things which are pleasing in the Father's sight. 
And thus we abide in his love and abide in him by doing 
his will, which is the Father's will, and thus Father and 
Son and the Church, the Bride, are all one— in spirit 
and in truth. 

WITH CHRIST, SHARING HIS GLORY 

Our Lord's words (v. 24), "Father, I will that they 
also whom thou hast given me go with me where I am, 
that they may behold my glory which thou hast given 
me." This is not a petition, but a declaration of the 
Lord's will, as though he were saying, Father, I understand 
that this is thy will in respect to these my followers, 
and I will it also, acquiescing in this great and 
liberal arrangement which thou hast made. I will be 
glad to have my followers ultimately on the same plane 



of glory with me, and that they may there be blessed 

by seeing and sharing the glories thou hast conferred upon 

me whom thou hast loved always even before the foundations 

of the world— even before the arrangements were 

made for these my disciples. 

The closing words of the prayer are beautiful and 
give us an insight into the Lord's confidence in the Father 
and fellowship with him. He knew the Father, and so 
he has declared respecting us that this is the highest 
evidence that could be granted us of our acceptance with 
the Father and of our participation in the life eternal 
which he has provided, namely, "This is life eternal, 
that they might know thee, the only true God, and Jesus 
Christ whom thou hast sent." Our Lord declares, 
"O righteous Father, the world hath not known thee: 
but I have known thee, and these have known that thou 
hast sent me." And I have made known unto them thy 
name, thy character, thy greatness, thy goodness, thy 
love, thy benefactions, and will make known still 
further as they are able to bear it, as they grow in knowledge 
of the Truth, that the love wherewith thou hast 
loved me may be in them and I in them. 

How wonderful is this love of God and love of 
Christ! How impossible it seems for us to measure its 
lengths and breadths and heights and depths! Those 
who have accepted the Lord as their Redeemer and have 
entered into covenant relationship with him, giving him 
their little all and accepting from him a participation in 
all these blessings of his provision, if ever cast down 
because of weakness or opposition or what not, should 
call to mind this great love which the Father has for us 
and which the Son shares, the love which not only 
redeemed us while we were yet sinners, but which since 
then has called us to such wonderful blessings and 
privileges, making us joint-heirs with Christ our Lord, 
if so be we suffer with him;— this love will not be lightly 
turned away, this love would chasten us rather than permit 
us to fall away into the second death; this love will 

R3553 : page 140 

finally deliver, either in the little flock or in the great 
company, all who continue to trust in Jesus and continue 
to hold the faithful Word. But in proportion as 
this love of God dwells in us richly, in proportion as 
Christ is enthroned in our hearts, in that same proportion 
we will have a responsive love which will delight 
to do those things which are pleasing in our Father's 
sight and acceptable to our Lord, and in the same proportion 
we will be loth to do anything which would bring 
a cloud between the Lord and our souls. Let us, then, 
have fresh courage because of what we discern of the 
lengths and breadths and heights and depths of love 
divine, and let this love of God constrain us to greater 
zeal and devotion to him and to his cause. 



R3553 : page 140 

AS A DECEIVER, YET TRUE. 

--JOHN 18:28-40.-MAY 21.- 

Golden Text:— "Everyone that is of the Truth 
heareth his voice." 

OUR LESSON relates to the trial of Jesus in the 
judgment hall of Pilate's palace. He stood 
before the representative of the greatest empire 
in the world, greatly disadvantaged yet remarkably 
calm and self-possessed. It was still early in the morning, 
probably eight o'clock or earlier. There had been 
no intermission of the strain upon Jesus' nerves from 
the time that he ate the Passover with his disciples, then 
washed their feet, then instituted the Memorial Supper 
as a symbol of his own death, the breaking of the bread 
of life to his followers. Then he bade Judas do whatever 
he intended to do, knowing full well the results. Then 
he talked to his disciples en route to Gethsemane about 
the vine and the branches, and prayed for them as in 

R3554 : page 140 

John 17, and, reaching Gethsemane, was in an agony 
of prayer on his own account, anxious to be shown that 
his work had all been thoroughly and satisfactorily 
done to the Father's approval. 

From the moment that he got that approval through 
the angel who ministered unto him, all was peace and 
calm. His arrest, the scattering of his disciples, the 
hearing before the High-priest's court, the raillery, the 
smiting, the pulling of the hair of his face, the spitting 
upon him, his being blindfolded and asked to prophesy 
who had struck him, all this ignominy he endured 
patiently, and then, it being contrary to Jewish law to 
condemn a man in the night, his further trial was postponed 
until the members of the Sanhedrin could be 
called at daybreak to formally condemn him. Meantime 
his dear followers had all scattered like sheep, and 
the beloved Peter had denied him even with cursing 
before the cock crew. After passing through all these 
experiences, and probably without having been furnished 
with refreshments, it is remarkable that our Lord- 
weakened through his ministries and the giving out of 
his vitality in the healing of others— should have been 
so calm and strong as he stood before Pilate. 

His enemies, the members of the Sanhedrin, and 
the High-priests, who had before determined that he 
should be put to death, with murder in their hearts had 
still a form of godliness, and would not enter the judgment 
hall because, according to their tradition, this 



would have constituted a defilement of their holiness. 
Alas, how deceitful the human heart can be! How much 
of murder and meanness can be covered with a garment 
of light, with a claim of religious purity, professing to be 
seeking to know and to do God's will. This which is so 
conspicuously illustrated in this lesson is observable in 
our day as well in many of the affairs of life. Hypocrisy 
seems to be a very general failing, and sometimes the 
falsity is hidden from the heart of the deceiver as it probably 
was in this case. We remember Peter's words subsequently 
respecting these very men: "I wot that in ignorance 
ye did it, as did also your rulers." The fact that 
great crimes may be committed in ignorance, and even 
with the thought of doing God service, should make all 
who are children of the light, all who are lovers of the 
truth and righteousness, to be very careful indeed to 
search their own hearts and motives earnestly lest they 
also should be of this class— self-deceived. 

THAT THEY MIGHT EAT THE PASSOVER 

This expression has caused some confusion of 
thought. Jesus and his disciples ate the Passover Supper 
the evening before. Why, then, it is asked, should 
these fear to be contaminated lest they should thus be 
prevented from eating the Passover Supper, if it were in 
the past? We reply that their solicitation was in respect 
to the Passover Feast which would last the entire week, 
beginning that very day. We must bear in mind when 
using this word Passover that it is applicable both to the 
Supper and to the Feast week which followed it, and that 
the Jews thought more of the Feast week, while we as 
Christians center our interests specially in the Passover 
Supper, or rather in the Memorial Supper instituted that 
evening to take the place of the Passover Supper for the 
Lord's followers throughout this Gospel age. 

Our Lord frequently reproved the Jews along this 
very line of making clean the outside of the cup while inwardly 
it was filthy— of presenting a clean outward 
appearance as individuals and as a nation while at heart 
far from pure. On one occasion he reminded them that 
they would fast with great solemnity and outward show 
of restraint of appetite, whereas in their hearts they had 
that lack of love, that selfishness which would permit 
them to appropriate anything and to figuratively devour 
widows' houses. The Lord said nothing against outward 
ceremonies of cleanliness, purity and holiness, but declared 
that these would never take the place of the heart 
purity which in God's sight is all important. 

When Pilate discerned that they would not enter the 
judgment hall he remembered their customs, and went 
to an outer court and had his official chair placed there. 
Much to their surprise he asked them to name their 
charges against the prisoner. 

Evidently from his previous custom they had expected 
that Pilate would receive any culprit that they 



would bring to him, and be satisfied that if they had condemned 

one of their own nation he must be indeed a bad 

man and worthy of condemnation and execution at the 

hands of the Romans. Their surprise is indicated in their 

reply: "If he were not an evil-doer we would not have 

delivered him up to thee"— Do you suppose, Pilate, that 

we would be willing to place in your hands as the representative 

of Roman authority any of our citizens of good 

repute? 

R3554 : page 141 

TAKE YE HIM AND JUDGE HIM 

Pilate's thrusting back the responsibility upon the 
Sanhedrin was very proper. The context shows us that 
he discerned that it was because of malice and envy that 
they were thus dealing with Jesus— that he was not an 
ordinary criminal, one whose liberty would in any wise 
be calculated to disturb the peace of the Roman empire. 

The reply of the disappointed Jewish rulers was to 
the effect that they would have been willing, indeed, to 
attend to the whole matter, only that authority to put 
any man to death had been taken from them. The Jewish 
Talmud contains this statement: "Forty years before 
the destruction of the Temple the judgment of capital 
crimes was taken away from Israel." Supposing 
this to be a correct statement, it follows that in divine 
providence the power of the Jews to punish an offender 
with death had been taken away that very year in which 
our Lord was arraigned. This is the more remarkable 
when we remember that the Jews never crucified any one, 
and that crucifixion was the legal and official method of 
putting to death under Roman law, and that prophecy 
long before had declared, "Cursed is every one that hangeth 
on a tree," and that our Lord himself prophesied his 
crucifixion, saying, "And I, if I be lifted up, will draw all 
men unto me." This he said signifying what death he 
should die. (John 12:32,33.) Only by that taking 
of the authority away from the Jews that very year was 
the matter put in such a form that Jesus was not stoned 
to death, but was crucified. 

The real charge against Jesus according to the Jewish 
trial was that he was a blasphemer, that he had declared 
himself to be the Son of God. The Jews never claimed 
to be sons of God; the highest station known amongst 
them was that occupied by Abraham, namely, a friend 
of God, and that occupied by Moses, namely, a 
servant of God, the prophets also being servants. Not 
until Christ came as the Head of the new house of sons 
were any recognized as sons. To this agree the words of 
the Apostle, "Moses verily was faithful as a servant over 
his house, but Christ as a son over his house, whose house 
are we if we hold fast the confidence of our faith and rejoicing 
firm unto the end." This charge of blasphemy 
under which our Lord was convicted before the Sanhedrin 



was punishable with stoning to death, but the power of 

putting to death being out of the hands of the Jews and 

in the hands of the Romans altered the whole matter, 

and our Lord was crucified, was made a curse for us according 

to the forestatement of prophecy. 

THE KING OF THE JEWS 

Luke gives us other particulars respecting the trial 
(23:2), informing us that the Jews brought their charges 
under three counts— all of them signifying treason 
against the Roman government. (1) Sedition. (2) 
Forbidding to give tribute to Caesar. (3) That he claimed 
himself to be an anointed king. Doubtless witnesses 
were produced to substantiate these charges. 

No man could occupy the position which Pilate held 
without possessing some degree of mental acumen and 
thought. And though but a heathen and a sinful man, 
Pilate quickly discerned the true status of the case before 
him, that it was a case of religious persecution, that the 
accusers were not interested in upholding the Roman 
government, and that the accused was not a menace to 
that government in any particular. After hearing the 
testimony Pilate entered again into the judgment hall to 
personally speak with the prisoner and to consider what 
he should do in the matter. Here all four of the evangelists 
agree that his first words to Jesus were, "Art thou 
the King of the Jews?" 

This was a question which our Lord could not properly 
evade. He was the King of the Jews; he had left the 
heavenly glory to assume this very position; his coming 
had been heralded for centuries before and had constituted 
the basis of the divine promises and prophecies. 
He could not deny the fact now before Pilate; to have 
done so would have been to counteract and overthrow 
his own teachings and the very faith which he wished to 
establish according to the divine plan. At the same 
time it was due to Pilate and to us all that he should 
plainly show by his answer that he was not seeking to 
wrest the government from Pilate and the Romans at this 
time. The answer was along this line— "Sayest thou 
this thing of thyself, or did others tell it thee of me?" or 
perhaps we might paraphrase the answer thus: "Are you 
asking this question from your own standpoint as a Roman, 
or are you asking from the standpoint of the hopes 
of the Jews as religionists?" 

Pilate's retort was, "You are aware that I am not a 
Jew and do not enter sympathetically into the hopes of 
your nation. It is your own nation and the chief religious 
rulers of the same, over whom you might be esteemed 
to be a prince or king— it is these very men who have 

R3555 : page 141 

delivered you to me, who have put you in my power, who 
want me to put you to death. What have you done to 



them? In what way have you so displeased them and 
angered them and aroused their fierce jealousy?" 

Our Lord was calm and moderate, yet just to the 
point: "My Kingdom is not of this world," not a kingdom 
of the present order or arrangement. This was as 
much as was necessary to be told under the circumstances, 
as much as Pilate could have understood— more 
probably would have confused him. How brief and how 
wise was this answer! Our Lord proceeded to call 
Pilate's attention to the fact that his followers were not 
fighting for him, not seeking to establish his sway, his 
Kingdom authority by force; that if his Kingdom were 
thus to be established he would never have permitted 
himself to thus have been left at the mercy of his enemies; 
that his Kingdom was not from hence, was not yet due 
to come into power. In one of our Lord's parables he 
pointed out this very same lesson, saying, "When the 
Son of man shall come in his glory and all the holy angels 
with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory: 
and before him shall be gathered all nations." He marks 
his Kingdom as beginning at his second advent. 

Pilate evidently caught the thought, as is implied in 
his answer, "Art thou not a King, then?"— Do I understand 
you to mean that you are to be a King, but have 
not yet become a King, that your reign is in the distant 
future? Our Lord replied, Yes, you were right in your 
original assumption that I am a King. I was born a 
King, I came into the world for this very purpose of 
being a King, all my testimony is in line with this great 
truth; every one who is honest, everyone who is of the 
truth heareth my voice and is thus drawn to be my disciple 
or follower and to appreciate me as King. Others, 
however, are in the majority and do not recognize me 
now, and will not until the time shall come when I shall 
set up my Kingdom. Thus we paraphrase the record. 

"WHAT IS TRUTH?" 

Our Lord's reference to truth, sincerity, honesty, 
seemed to touch a tender spot in Pilate's conscience. 
Few worldly people respect insincerity. Many would not 

R3555 : page 142 

wish to lie or deceive egregiously or injuriously, but nevertheless 

deception is considered a part of the life and 

character and practice of every successful person in business 

and in society. So, catching at our Lord's last 

statement, Pilate, as he turned on his heel to go back to 

the Jews, said, Yes, but who will tell us how closely that 

word truth or sincerity should be or could be applied in 

life's affairs? 

It is well for the Lord's people to have clearly in 
mind that as the Master designated himself the Way, the 
Truth, the Life, so all who are truly his disciples must be 
of the Truth, must be sincere. It would appear that the 



Lord is during this Gospel age especially calling this 
class, the truth-hungry, the sincere, the honest-hearted, 
and that others are not apt to be much influenced by any 
of the hopes and promises now extended; but that even 
if such persons should now get a clue of the Truth they 
do not hold it long, not being at heart children of the 
Truth, children of the Light. How important, then, that 
we should be honest-hearted to begin with, sincere in all 
our words and thoughts and conduct; and while this honesty 
of word and deed should guide all of our relationships 
with the world, we should be doubly careful to have 
them measure our relationship to the Lord and to his 
people and to his Word! Only the sincere will ever be 
truly overcomers. 

Poor Pilate, as he thought of his own disregard for 
sincerity in many of the prominent affairs of his life, and 
as he looked at the leaders and rulers of the Jewish nation, 
which claimed to be the most holy people in the world, 
feared that question of What is truth? What is it to be 
sincere? How true and how sincere should we be? 
These were questions beyond his depth, beyond his power 
to properly weigh, and apparently equally beyond the 
power of appreciation of the chiefest of the Jews. Jesus 
himself apparently was the only representative and exponent 
of the Truth— he was preaching a doctrine which 
evidently was too high above the heads of his own nation. 
We may see, however, that in the Lord's plan this preaching 
of the Truth is the means whereby the Lord would 
gather together a people for himself, his jewels during 
this Gospel age. 

No wonder the Scriptures tell us that those whom 
the Lord is thus choosing along the lines of truth and sincerity 
are peculiar people, different from the majority, 
and no wonder either that they tell us that in all they will 
be but a little flock. Let us, dear readers, make every 
effort that by the grace of God we may be amongst these 
very elect ones. Let us prize the Truth above riches or 
honor of men— yea, above life itself; so shall we be true 
disciples, followers of him who is the truth, and who 
prayed for us saying, "Sanctify them through thy Truth, 
Thy Word is Truth." 

"I FIND NO FAULT IN HIM." 

In these words we have Pilate's verdict— not guilty. 
According to Roman law this was the proper ending of 
the case. But the Jews, realizing now that after all their 
efforts their prey was about to escape from them, were 
angered and threatened Pilate, not too openly so as to 
taunt him, but in a very effective manner. Not long 
before they had accused him to the emperor, and now in 
covert language they threatened a further accusation, 
hinting that this time their charges would probably be 
very powerful in the estimation of the emperor. They 
intimated that their charge would be that Pilate was fostering 
sedition, that he was no friend of the emperor, 



Caesar, that they themselves were more loyal than he; 
that when they found a seditious person of their own 
nation raising a disturbance they freely brought him to 
Pilate, merely asking for his execution, and that the emperor's 
representative was guilty of treason in refusing to 
execute one who claimed that he was the King of the Jews 
and was gathering to his standard many of the people all 
through the length and breadth of Palestine. 

Pilate at once discerned that such a charge brought 
by such influential persons would be a serious matter in 
the eyes of the emperor; but, hearing of Galilee, he inquired 
if Jesus were by birth a Galilean, and receiving 
an affirmative answer he found a loophole and said, Then 
he belongs to Herod's jurisdiction and I transfer the 
whole matter to Herod's court; let him deal with him.— 
Luke 23:5-12. 

We remember how the Lord was maltreated by 
Herod and his soldiers, crowned with thorns, invested 
with a purple robe and returned to Pilate. It was in the 
meantime, probably, that Pilate's wife told him of her 
dream respecting Jesus, and no doubt the governor was 
doubly perplexed when the prisoner was returned to his 
court in the gorgeous robe which made more prominent 
his real claims, and yet made even more ridiculous the 
pretensions of the Jewish priests and rulers that he was 
a dangerous person, a menace to the government. 

It occurred to Pilate that one way to appease the 
Jews— to let them feel that they had not been utterly 
defeated— would be to allow the supposition that he was 
justly condemned and then to let him be the prisoner 
usually respited at this season every year. He proposed 
this, but the rabble cried out for Barabbas, who was really 
a seditious person and a murderer, and probably the real 
ideal of many of those who were hounding Jesus at the 
instigation of the priests. It was then that Pilate asked, 
"What, then, shall I do with Jesus?" and, instigated by 
the priests and Pharisees, the answer came, "Crucify him! 
Crucify him ! " 

"VOX POPULI, VOX DEI." 

Alas, poor fallen human nature! How little it is to 
be relied upon! How untruthful is the proverb, "Vox 
populi, vox Dei"— The voice of the people is the voice of 
God. If we could suppose the world filled with perfect 
men and women, in the image and likeness of God and 
actuated by the spirit of holiness, then, indeed, we could 
suppose that the voice of the multitude would be the 
voice of God. But the very reverse is not infrequently 
the case; the voice of the people is often the voice of the 
demons who are deluding them, as the Apostle intimates, 
saying, "The god of this world hath blinded the minds 
of them that believe not." 

In accord with this thought, that the judgment of 
the world is not to be depended upon under present conditions, 
is our Lord's suggestion to all of us, "Marvel not 



if the world hate you; ye know that it hated me before it 
hated you. If ye were of the world, [blind, still servants 
of sin in fellowship instead of opposition to the principles 
of selfishness now prevailing] the world would love its 
own. But now ye are not of the world, for I have chosen 
you out of the world, that you should go and bring forth 
fruit and that your fruitage should be perpetual." To 
us, then, the voice of Jesus is the voice of God, and only 
his sheep hear his voice and follow him. We are glad, 
however, to remember the assurances of the divine promise 
that ultimately all the families of the earth shall be 
blessed and brought to a knowledge of the Truth, released 
from the bondage of sin and Satan, who then will be 

R3555 : page 143 

placed under restraint. Meantime those who stand for 
the right must be content to be of the minority, but their 
faith will be strengthened by the assurance that he that 
is for us is more than all that be against us. By and by, 
when the clouds of darkness of this present time shall 
have rolled away and the new Kingdom shall be in power, 
the Sun of Righteousness shall shine forth, and the righteous 
shall be in the majority, and whosoever will not obey 
the laws of that empire shall be destroyed from amongst 
the people.— Acts 3:23. 



R3556 : page 143 
FAVORABLE PRESS COMMENTS FROM AUSTRALIA. 

"MILLENNIAL DAWN is the title of a book of 350 
pages dealing with the future age of peace and content 
to which the Scriptures point and to which the whole 
creation moves. The preface indicates that six other 
volumes are to follow, so that on the completion of the 
seventh volume there will be a whole library on a very 
absorbing and interesting study. Much in the book commends 
itself to us, and while some current theologies 
would almost reject it in to to, it is a sound exposition 
of Scripture along the line of pre-millennialism, a theory 
which, based on Scripture, advocates the view that the 
Millennium must be preceded by the second advent of 
Christ. 

"We believe the positions taken up by Mr. Charles 
T. Russell, the author, to be in the main true, and in 
accordance with the Bible teaching. The chart given in 
the front of the volume is a help to the understanding 
of the subsequent chapters. There is no doubt that 
matters pertaining to the last things are, in the mind of 
the average believer, in a state of flux. ...In this 
volume much is cleared up, and a scheme of the "Ages" 
propounded which is both interesting and edifying, if 
not quite final on the subject. 



"The book as a whole is most loyal to the Scriptures, 
and has interesting and vindicating chapters on 
The Permission of Evil, The Day of Judgment, Ransom 
and Restitution, The Existence of an Intelligent Creator, 
The Bible as a Divine Revelation, viewed in the Light of 
Reason; and in matters of eschatology would probably 
open the eyes of Presbyterian and Methodist divines to 
their profit and advantage. The book is issued by the 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, Allegheny, 
Pa., U.S.A.; it is neatly got up on good paper, has 
clear type, and is a marvel of cheapness."— Evening 
Mail, Bendigo, Vic, Oct. 7, 1904. 



"MILLENNIAL DAWN," by Charles T. Russell: -Watch 
Tower Bible & Tract Society, Allegheny, Pa., U.S.A. 

"Whenever human methods of reasoning have 
failed to solve the 'Divine Plan of the Ages,' whenever 
our system of theology has failed to harmonize in itself 
every statement of the Bible, we have been prone to console 
ourselves with the unsatisfying reflection that God's 
ways are not our ways. Revised versions of the Bible 
have helped but little, for we have been content to accept 
as unquestionable a system of theology based in many 
cases upon an erroneous interpretation of Holy Writ. 
The book under notice convinces us that this is so. It 
claims to unfold a system of theology that harmonizes 
in itself every statement of the Bible, and appears to 
thoroughly justify its claim. Where it differs from the 
system of theology commonly preached, it upholds its 
claim by the strongest scriptural evidence. It is designed 
to be a 'helping hand for Bible students,' and will, we 
believe, be hailed as a book of glad tidings, strengthening 
the earnest and encouraging the weakhearted. 
Those who have loved their Bibles and found therein 
comfort and help in adversity, will find new beauties 
revealed, and derive fresh hopes in the light of this 
interesting guide. 

"The various creeds of to-day teach that the many 
hundreds of millions of Christless heathen are on the 
road to everlasting torment. Most Christian people 
appear to accept this idea with a shudder, perhaps, at 
the awful punishment for blameless ignorance. Missionary 
enterprise is not without energy, but among such 
countless hordes, the best missionary efforts in the world 
are as the drops of water that wear a stone. Then, there 
are those humane persons, who argue that a merciful 
Creator will not punish with eternal torture the blameless 
ignorance of the heathen. In other words, that either 
Christ's sacrifice or heathen ignorance will suffice for 
salvation. They don't mean this, but that is what the 
argument amounts to. When asked 'What must I do 
to be saved?' the Apostles answered, 'Believe on the 
Lord Jesus Christ.' 'There is none other name under 
Heaven given among men whereby we must be saved.'— 



Acts 4:12. 

"These difficulties have long wanted a solution in 
vain. Altogether it cannot be said that the system of 
theology commonly accepted among Christian peoples is 
a satisfactory one. Not only has it been repugnant to 
our ideas of justice that the ignorant shall be punished 
while salvation through ignorance is opposed to reason 
and Scripture; but it has occurred to many that of those 
who fail in the broad light of Christianity, all are not 
equally culpable. Some have been brought up surrounded 
by every influence for good, others in associations of 
vice and wickedness. Clearly the struggle has not been 
at all equal. Christ said to Capernaum, If the mighty 
works which have been done in thee had been done in 
Sodom, it would have remained until this day.' 

"The author of 'MILLENNIAL DAWN' quotes many 
Scriptures to show that the day will come when all, 
under whatever conditions they have lived, will have 
equal opportunities, when any who sin wilfully against 
full light and ability will perish in the second death. 
And should anyone during that age of trial, under its 
full blaze of light, spurn the offered favors, and make no 
progress toward perfection for a hundred years, he will 
be reckoned unworthy of life, and will be "cut off" tho 
at a hundred years he would be in the period of comparative 
childhood. Thus it is written of that day: As a lad 
shall one die a hundred years old.' (Isa. 65:20.) Thus 
all must have at least one hundred years of trial, and if 
not so obstinate as to refuse to make progress, their 
trial will continue throughout the entire day of Christ, 
reaching a culmination only at its close. 

"This is a very different idea of the Judgment than 
that ordinarily held by Christians, but it is a hopeful 
one, and tho space does not permit us to give the whole 
array of reasoning put forward by the author, we trust 
sufficient has been said on the point to induce a study 
of the book. ...We heartily commend it to all 
Bible readers, and hope that it will prove the boon to 
them we anticipate from our careful reading."— Daily 
Argus, Bathurst, N.S.W., Nov. 17, 1904. 



page 145 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVI. MAY 15, 1905. No. 10 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 147 

The Wrong -Headedness of Higher Criticism 147 

Pope Pius X. and France 148 

Holy Russia in the Balances 149 



Ingersoll's Chances for Salvation 150 

Rev. S. G. Lee's Dream of the Future Church... 151 
The Greatest Event of History 152 

"Via Dolorosa"— the Way of the Cross 153 

Killing the Prince of Life 154 

"Sitting Down, they Watched Him There" 155 

A Little Talk with Jesus (Poem) 156 

"I am Alive Forevermore" 156 

"Many Infallible Proofs" 157 

Why the Different Forms? 158 

"Whosesoever Sins Ye Remit" 159 

page 146 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



GENERAL CONVENTION, CHATTANOOGA, TENN, JUNE 3-6 



THE RAILROADS of Southern, Central and South-western 
Associations will sell tickets to this Convention 
at one fare and one-third, plus 25 cents, on the 
"Certificate Plan." You purchase a regular ticket to 
Chattanooga, telling your ticket-agent at the time that 
you desire a Certificate, that you are going to the WATCH 



TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY'S CONVENTION, and 

which will entitle you to purchase a return ticket at 
one-third a regular fare. Hold on to that certificate, as 
without it you would be charged full fare when buying 
your return ticket. The Certificates will need to be 
signed, but we will publicly announce at the Convention 
the name of the brother who will attend to the matter 
for you and save you all trouble. 

ACCOMMODATIONS should be secured in advance to 
avoid confusion and trouble to yourself and the Entertainment 
Committee. Therefore, if you will attend, 
write at once, saying briefly (a) how many will be of 
your party; (b) how many of each sex; (c) if colored, so 
state; (d) married couples desirous of rooming together 
should so state. AS TO RATES. --It will be safe to count 
that a room for one person will cost $1.00 per night in 
a good, respectable house, or a room for two $1.25. Unless 
you specify to the contrary, arrangements will be 
made for two in a bed and two beds in a large room at 
the cost of 50 cents each person. MEALS can be secured 
from 15 cents up, according to quantity, kind and service. 

Do not write on this subject at length. Tell us 
about things at the Convention. Give the information 
briefly and to the point. A postal card will do. Address 
the WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 612 
Arch St., Allegheny, Pa. 

GET READY PROPERLY 

Prepare your heart for a blessing. Come to the Convention 
in the proper spirit— as a disciple, a learner. 
Come intent also on doing good as well as getting good, 
of consoling and encouraging others, as well as to be 
yourself comforted. Above all, come realizing that the 
Lord himself is the fountain of blessings, and remembering 
his word— not by might, nor by power, but by the 
Lord's Spirit are we to expect the blessings we hope for. 
In making ready and en route do not forget this important 
item, for on it your share in the Convention's blessing 
greatly depend. 



R3563 : page 146 

THE SOLON JOURNAL DISCONTINUED. 



The brethren of the "Solon Association" request us to 
explain that its "Solon Journal" was started largely to reach 
and advantage WATCH TOWER readers, and that having 
issued the four numbers promised to our readers its further 
publication has been abandoned for the present, because 
its motive was misunderstood or not appreciated. Subscriptions 
paid in will be refunded. Those of our readers 



interested in the purposes of the Solon Association, or who 
desire to use it further, are promised every assistance if they 
will address "Solon Association," P.O. Box 1134, Pittsburgh. 



R3557 : page 147 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
THE WRONG-HEADEDNESS OF HIGHER CRITICISM 



EMIL REICH, a Hungarian writer, discussing and 
contradicting the conclusions of Higher Critics, 
in the Contemporary Review, says,— "The complete 
wrong-headedness of the whole method of higher 
criticism cannot fail to be manifest to anybody who bases 
his judgments upon the true essence of the matter in dispute, 
and not upon mere externals. 

"Some of the latest samples of philological jugglery 
with which the public has been duped are too amusing to 
be omitted. If only read from the humorous standpoint, 
it is doubtful whether any book could afford a merrier 
half-hour than one of the latest achievements of Prof. 
Hugo Winckler— two volumes in which he finally dissolves 
into myth the small portion of Jewish history 
which had been mercifully left to us. Listen a while, and 
you shall hear how Jewish tradition is a mere flimsy 
plagiarism of Babylonian myths. Among the general 
massacre of Biblical personalities we can only mention a 
few of the victims. What person has hitherto been more 
historical than Joseph? But to Professor Winckler he is 
an obvious astral myth, for in the 43d chapter of Genesis, verse 25, 
does he not come at noon? And is not this clear 
enough proof that he is a mere personification of the sun? 
Besides, if we are disposed to doubt, we must recollect 
that Joseph dreamed that the sun, moon, and eleven stars 
bowed down to him; and who should they bow to save 
the sun? Joshua, too, is the sun. For he is the son of 
Nun, and does not Nun, being interpreted, mean fish? 
and does not the sun at the spring equinox issue from the 
constellation of Pisces? What could be more conclusive? 
Besides, does it not amply explain why Joshua's companion 
is Caleb? Now Caleb is Kaleb, and Kaleb is Kelb, 
and Kelb is a dog. So of course Caleb is clearly put for 
the dog star Sirius." This, as he suggests, is "philology 
run mad" and "utter misconception." 

"They imagine because they have been able to trace 
similarities, or even identities, between the purely external 
phenomena of Judaism or of Christianity and the religious 
ceremonials of ancient Babylonia, that they have 
thereby proved that Christianity and Judaism are nothing 
but cribs of what the Babylonians long before possessed." 
But "within the last few weeks matter has been published 



which should finally turn the higher critics out of 

the position in which they have been so long comfortably 

entrenched." 

Reference is here made to the recent discovery 
in east Africa, of an obscure tribe of negroes, whose 
religious myths and traditions show an extraordinary 
similarity to those of the Hebrew Scriptures. Herr 
Reich argues that this confirms the thought that Babylonia 
and other lands possessing such religious foundations 
got them from the Hebrews; contradicting the 
"higher critical thought" that the Hebrew ideas 
on religious subjects were but a rehash of what the 
people of Babylonia possessed long, long before Moses' 
day. Continuing on this line he says: 

"Arabia, at all times the 'store chamber of nations,' 
was never able to feed her untold thousands of hardy, 
beautiful, gifted people. Accordingly, they emigrated 
in all directions, as they did in the times of Mohammed 
and at other times. Thousands of years before Christ a 
stock of religious and other legends had grown up among 
them about the great riddles of the world. This they 
carried into their new countries; and thus the Babylonians, 
the Hebrews, the Masai, and very probably many 
another now unknown tribe from Arabia, whether in Persia, 
Afghanistan, Beluchistan, or India, preserved, and 
still preserves, the legends about creation, the deluge, the 
decalogue, etc., in their aboriginal form. It is just as 
possible, with purely philological arguments, to deduce 
the Masai legends from Hebrew stories as it is to deduce 
Hebrew legends from Babylonian myths. Or, to put it 
in a different fashion, the same philological arguments 
that have served to declare the Hebrew legends as mere 
copies of Babylonian myths, may now be employed in 
proving that all the Hebrew legends are of Masai origin, 
or vice versa. This absolute inability of the philological 
method of higher criticism to decide definitely which is 
the parent and which the child, at once condemns it."... 

"It is evident that philological reasoning which 
brings us to results which are so little permanent, results 
which are absolutely overturned by the first chance 
discovery, must have something fundamentally wrong 
in it. This fundamental and initial vice, quod tractu 
temporis convalescere nequit [which the lapse of time cannot 
heal], which can be cured neither by the moderation and 

R3557 : page 148 

soberness of Hommel, who together with a few other historians 
has not yet given in to the claims of the 'higher 
critics', nor by a still greater refinement of philological 
methods— this initial fault has vitiated and will vitiate all 
modern hypercriticism of ancient records. Nor is there 
any particular difficulty in finding out the true nature of 
this fault. It is this: The history of the ancient nations 
must be constructed not on the basis of the philological 
study of their records, but mainly on the basis of 



considerations of geography, or, as the present writer has 

ventured to call it, of geo-politics. What made the few 

tribes, 'Semitic' or other, in Palestine, Syria, and Phenicia, 

so important a factor in history was neither their language 

nor their 'race'. The Hebrews and the Phenicians 

have indeed played in history a role of the first magnitude. 

So have, even in a greater measure, the Hellenes. 

All the three were— and this is the capital point— border-nations 

proper. They lived on the great line of friction 

between the powerful and civilized inland empires of Assyria, 

Babylon, Egypt, the Hittites, the Phrygians, the 

Lydians, etc. All these inland empires necessarily, and 

as a matter of history, gravitated toward the 'Great Sea,' 

or the Mediterranean; all the peoples on the 'line' between 

the Mediterranean and the territories of the conflicting 

empires were then necessarily exposed to the 

maximum of friction, danger, and deeply agitated activity. 

Those nations were called the Hellenes, the Phenicians, 

the Hebrews, the Edomites, etc. Being in imminent 

danger of absorption at the hands of the empires, 

those nations could not but see, and did see, that they 

could protect themselves with success only by having recourse 

either to the immense leverage of sea-power, which 

the empires did not possess; or by energizing themselves 

both intellectually and politically to a degree much more 

intense than the empires had ever done. Accordingly 

some of them were forced to lay extraordinary premiums 

on higher intellect and spiritual growth, by means of 

which they resisted the more massive onslaught of the 

intellectually inferior empires. ...That gigantic 

intellectual struggles, such as those border nations were 

forced to undertake or else perish, can not be conducted 

without personalities of the first order, only a mere text-critic 

can doubt. One may deny the existence of the 

Jews; but once their existence is conceded one can not 

deny the existence of Moses. One may deny the existence 

of the Carthusians; but once their existence, i.e., 

their secular spiritual struggle with all the forces of life is 

admitted, one can not possibly deny the historic existence 

of St. Bruno. One may minimize, or doubt the Reformation; 

but certainly not Luther. Higher criticism 

has arrived at its final term: bankruptcy." 

POPE PIUS X. AND FRANCE 



The conflict between the French government and 
the Pope continues and is expected soon to result in 
the dissolution of the "Concordat" and thus in a complete 
separation of Church and State in France. The 
"Concordat" is an agreement in writing under which 
France is bound to support and defend Roman Catholicism 
in France and to some extent its missions, etc., in 
foreign lands. In consideration of this the papacy 
acknowledges the right of the French government to 



have a voice in determining who may or may not be the 
bishops, arch-bishops and cardinals of France. 

The present trouble, it will be remembered, began 
with the determination of the French to put their schools 
on a higher level, to accomplish which, necessitated the 
prohibiting of further teaching by Jesuits, nuns and 
others of monastic orders, in their official garbs, etc. 
In other words France wanted such Free Schools as 
have so greatly profited the people of the United States. 
This led to wordy-strife, many ecclesiastics attacking 
and denouncing the Government. These in turn were 
opposed by the Government which speaking for the 
majority of the people, declared such strife to be against 
France, and some of the bitterest, accused of attempts 
to foment rebellion and civil commotion were expelled 
from the country. 

As one bishopric after another became vacant and 
a successor was nominated by the Pope he was seen to 
be of the bitter anti-France kind and was refused under 
the terms of the "Concordat." The Pope has refused to 
nominate other bishops more acceptable to the French 
until now ten bishoprics or sees are vacant, and the 
Catholic populations of the same are, it is claimed, 
suffering "spiritual deprivations" as a consequence. 
We doubt this, but it is a cause for continued and increasing 
friction. 

France is firm and declares she will cut the "Concordat" 
knot and be free to manage her own Church 
affairs— either paying such priests and bishops, etc., as 
she chooses or leaving them as in the United States to 
be supported by the people who desire them. The latter 

R3558 : page 148 

plan is not likely, however, because the French people, 
unused to paying their preachers, could not be expected 
to voluntarily contribute more than a tithe of the amount 
now paid to support the clergy, and because the Government 
and wealthier class would fear to lose a restraint 
over the masses maintainable through a paid ministry. 

The Pope is blamed by many "liberal" French 
Catholics for being short-sighted and likely to do great 
injury to Romanism. The Pope on the contrary declares 
that he is quite willing that France should do her worst, 
declares that he will not recede, and that the breaking 
of the "Concordat" will furnish him the better opportunity 
to "purge" the French clergy amongst whom 
he implies there is serious unfaithfulness— the result of 
their semi-political appointments. 

A writer in The Edinburgh Review criticizes the 
Pope's course as unwise and says:— 

"Certain prelates of unblemished reputation, whose only 
offenses are their attitude of reserve toward the congregations 
(religious orders), their refusal to support the campaign 
against the republic, and— in a few cases— their sympathy 
with the movement toward a scientific theology, are already 



marked out for attack. The refusal of Rome to institute to 
the ten sees now vacant gives color to this belief, which is 
entertained in quarters usually well informed and has been 
encouraged by the clerical press. This process of 'purging' 
would be facilitated by the repeal of the Concordat." 

The writer thinks that then,— 

"The bishops and higher clergy would be simply nominees 
of Rome. Thus the rights of the laity, surviving, however 
faintly, under the present system, as in our own 'conge 
d'elire,' would be extinguished; thus the last vestige of 
popular election, without which the early church refused to 
acknowledge a bishop as legitimately appointed, would disappear. 
The present method of selection is not ideal. 'Le 
gouvernement propose un fripon; Rome un cure de campagne: 
on nomme un imbecile' [The Government proposes 
a rascal; Rome a country pastor; an idiot is appointed'] 
said a cynic." 

We cannot concur in this view. If the French 
Government shall "hire" the priests and bishops, 
Rome's nominations will be of insignificant force, unless 

R3558 : page 149 

done privately, through the people. The same 

writer gives the following portrait of the Pope, which at 

least gives him credit for sincerity. 

"Everything is against him: his seminary training, his 
provincialism, his seclusion from the free air of the world. 
France— her people, her history, her language even— is 
strange to him: he sees 'men as trees, walking'; he misconceives 
the situation with which he has to deal. He sees, because 
he is prepared to see it, an atheist ministry kept in 
power by the vote of a godless majority; persecuted religious 
—guileless Jesuits and peace-loving Assumptionists— secularism 
rampant in the schools; unbelief, in the shape of 
criticism, invading the clergy; religion attacked from without 
and from within. And his singleness of purpose forbids him 
to take into account the motives of prudence that would have 
weighed with his predecessor: he is for rebuilding the walls of 
Jerusalem, sword as well as trowel in hand." 

"As to the reasons for the estrangement from religion of 
so large a proportion of the French people thoughtful Catholics 
are pretty well agreed. They hold Rome to be chiefly 
responsible. The Vatican, they say, has for the last half-century 
and more persistently encouraged fanatics and 
crushed every movement that promised to bring about a 
revival of religion in France. There have been several such 
movements since the time of Lamennais, and they have all 
met the same fate as that with which he was identified. In 
the early nineties there was a great revival of enthusiasm 
among French Catholics; partly, at least due to the encyclical 
Rerum Novarum of Leo XIII. and other utterances of 
the late Pope which seemed to be progressive in tendency. 
This enthusiasm found expression in such organizations as 
the 'Union progressiste de la Jeunesse catholique,' of which 
M. Felix Boudin was the founder. The movement was 



bitterly opposed by the Ultramontane party in France, but 

it grew stronger and more influential in spite of their opposition 

until at last Rome, as usual, yielded to the fanatics, 

and the movement was ended by the letter of Leo XIII. condemning 

'Americanism' in January, 1899. 

"If ever a Pope had need of accurate information and 
prudent counsel, that Pope is Pius X. Never was the incompatibility 
between Catholicism, as a polity, and society more 
palpable; never was the opposition between Catholic teaching, 
as commonly presented, and science more radical or more 
widely felt. This incompatibility and this opposition have 
reached their climax in France." 

In our opinion the Lord is overruling in France, 
as elsewhere to the intent that now in this "harvest" 
time his sincere truth-hungry people may be fed the 
meat in due season, each according to his condition and 
hunger. Whoever overlooks the supervision of our 
present Lord in the affairs of the nations and churches 
of "Christendom," ignores the principal factors in the 
momentous events through which the world is now 
passing, and which will culminate in anarchy, worldwide, 
by the end of A.D., 1914, according to our reading 
of the prophetic Word. 

HOLY RUSSIA IN THE BALANCES 



Many of the Russians are very religious. In their 
estimation the term "Holy Russia" is applied in all 
sincerity. To them (as to the Chinese) all the remainder 
of the world is benighted and barbarian. The Czar is 
their emperor and pope. God is the "Great Father," 
the Czar is the "Little Father." To them the fulfilment 
of our Lord's prayer petition, "Thy Kingdom come," 
means the spread of the Russian empire over all the 
earth. 

Some time ago they were mere serfs— slaves to 
the Nobles. The reform movement of some time since, 
changing all that and making the people free, was 
hailed as a boon from heaven through the "Little 
Father." The measure was really a good one, but in 
selfish hands it has been perverted. Instead of the 
many nobles, Russia now has, besides the Czar, his 
close relatives, the Grand Dukes, under whom a bureaucracy 
has sprung up that oppresses both the nobles, 
used to favor, and the people who, released from slavery, 
had hoped for so much more liberty and prosperity. 
Thus it happens that Russia is full of discontent and 
both the upper and the lower classes are longing for a 
change. The Czar no doubt is doing his best, but is in 
a trying position. His close relatives as his advisers control 
the army of office-holders, who, drawn from the 
lower social planes, are their willing tools— each for his 
price, of imperial favor and financial prosperity. 

The shaking which Russia is experiencing from the 



Japanese is joined to the shaking and discontent at 
home, and the results look ominous. Where it will end 
none can tell. The shaking will no doubt awaken the 
poor, ignorant peasantry and at a great cost of pain and 
sorrow may prove a blessing in disguise. The N.Y. 
Sun gives particulars respecting a great revolutionary 
demonstration recently at the renowned University of 
St. Petersburg, participated in by the faculty as well as 
the students. The meeting denounced the government, 
tore a portrait of the Czar to shreds and displayed a red 
flag and a motto, "Hail to the Constituent Assembly." 
It voted to discontinue the work of the University for 
the remainder of the term and passed 

RESOLUTIONS AS FOLLOWS: 

"Effete Russian absolutism is drawing daily— nay, 
hourly— to its inevitable doom. Powerless to cope with 
an awakened people, in its agony it devises one measure 
more ridiculous than another and one method more 
reckless than another to delay its downfall. 

"It entered upon a criminal adventure in the Far 
East, which has cost the people tens of thousands of 
lives and millions of hard-earned money. Conscious of 
its goal, the intelligence of the students has long conducted 
a stubborn fight to obtain the most elementary 
human rights, often falling fainting before the brutal 
force of an unbridled Government until at last the 
proletariat entered the historic arena, and at the same 
time, as it came to the knowledge of itself, dealt czardom 
the heaviest blows. 

"The recent bloody events have clearly shown what 
absolutism is capable of in defense of its pitiful, shameful 
existence. The sincere, fraternal, harmonious action 
of the proletariat on those days of January signed the 
death-warrant of absolutism and without doubt insured 
the speedy political liberation of Russia. 

"We, as a section of the educated community, conscious 
of our goal, welcome the solidarity of workmen 
and put forward the following demands: 

"First— Summoning a legislative assembly on the 
basis of a universal, equal, and secret ballot of male and 
female citizens; freedom of speech; freedom of the press; 
freedom of organization and of striking. 

"Second— Amnesty for all who have been punished 
for their political or religious convictions. 

"Third— The fact of belonging to any particular 
nationality shall not prejudice political rights. 

"Further, as a guarantee against interference of 
the Russian Government in the free execution of these 
demands, a people's militia must immediately be formed, 
in whose ranks all citizens can fight to realize our 
aspirations. 

"Recognizing the significance of this historical 

R3559 : page 150 



moment, when Russia is emerging from a period of 
ferment into open revolt, and when every one has but 
one end in view, we can not pursue our studies, and 
therefore suspend them until September. By that time 
events will have furnished new material for the solution 
of these questions." 

HOW RUSSIAN NOBILITY VIEW THINGS 

The following is from the N.Y. Tribune, an editorial. 

"A significant light is cast upon the state of unrest 
pervading all classes in Russia by the personal message 
of a prominent Russian to a friend in this country which 
we are permitted to publish. For obvious reasons it 
would not do to give the writer's name or furnish any 
hint of his identity. He belongs, however, to a wealthy 
family which is on terms of intimacy with the imperial 
household. He is related to members of the Ministry 
and is himself a high official. His message was written 
in French on one of the Red Cross picture postal cards 
which have been sold in large numbers to swell the fund 
to care for the victims of Japanese bullets. His words, 
literally translated, are: 

'"I had wished to write thee a letter, above all, 
about our ideas on the war. The war is most unpopular, 
and we all desire our own defeat. We hope that it will 
open the eyes of the common people to the fraud of our 
government, which is universally hated. One hears on 
all sides that the Japanese are fighting for our freedom- 
there is nowhere the slightest feeling against the 
Japanese.' 

"How this remarkable sentiment ever came to be 
let out of Russia is a subject for speculation, but certainly 
it came out by mail and was duly delivered in this 
country by the postal authorities. 
...If on 'all sides' among the Russian upper 
classes it is said that the Japanese are fighting for Russian 
freedom and an intelligent Russian can report 
'we all desire our own defeat,' on what a precarious 
foundation must the whole bureaucracy, with its domestic 
and foreign troubles, stand? However we may consider 
this letter, it is prophetic of important changes 
in Russian society." 



The world is making history very rapidly. One year 
counts for almost as much as fifty long ago,— for more 
indeed. How easily all we expect of Scripture fulfilment 
can come about by October, 1914! 

INGERSOLL'S CHANCES FOR SALVATION 



A minister having expressed hope that Robert Ingersoll 
may be reckoned amongst the saved, the New York 
Herald sent reporters to interview ministers of various 
denominations on the subject. Some of the replies 
quoted below seem peculiar, to say the least. The keynote 
of all is that Faith is not essential; a contradiction 
to the Scriptural declaration that— "without faith it is 
impossible to please God," and many others of like import. 
We quote: 

The Rev. William B. Bodine, rector of the Protestant 
Episcopal Church of the Savior, said: "I do not know why 
any agnostic, if honest in his beliefs, should not enter the 
Kingdom of heaven." 

What kind of a Kingdom does this gentleman- 
titled, ordained, and doubtless esteemed, but Scripturally 
an unlearned "teacher"— imagine? He certainly does not 
stumble into the erroneous idea that each denomination 
of Christendom is a Kingdom of heaven, for doubtless, he 
knows that Ingersoll was not a member of any of them 
in his lifetime, and could not join any of them since. We 
are bound to suppose that he has in mind the glorious 
Kingdom to be established at our Lord's second advent, 
respecting which he said to his apostles and footstep followers: 
"Fear not, little flock; it is the Father's good 
pleasure to give you the Kingdom." Our Lord again 
said to his followers, "Through much tribulation shall ye 
enter the Kingdom;" and again, "Blessed are the poor in 
spirit for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven." and "Blessed 
are they that are persecuted for righteousness' sake, for 
theirs is the Kingdom of heaven;" and again, "Except a 
man be born again he cannot enter the Kingdom of 
heaven." 

We have no unkind word or wish for Mr. Ingersoll, 
but we confess that we never knew him as meek or "poor 
in spirit," nor as persecuted for righteousness, nor as 
"born again," nor as one of the Lord's jewels, his "little 
flock." If this reverend gentleman teaches truthfully 
on this subject we would like very much to hear him tell 
us just what classes of men are outside the "little 
flock" and not "born again." 

The Rev. Chas. W. Bickley, of the Mariners' Methodist 
Episcopal Bethel, said: "I cannot believe that an all-merciful 
Father will punish his erring children when they unknowingly 
disregard his divinity. Ingersoll's many good acts and 
strict moral life will plead with him who abundantly pardons." 

Here an appeal is made to divine mercy regardless of 
the divine testimony that all of God's mercy is exercised 
through Christ— that "there is none other name given, 
under heaven or amongst men, whereby we must be 
saved." Hope built on any other foundation is false 
hope. And any teaching of any other hope is false 
teaching. 

We are glad to note the sentiment of compassion 
expressed, but must repudiate the thought, that Ingersoll 
or any other member of the human family has or ever had 
such acts and morals as would plead his cause with God 



and secure his forgiveness. If that be true teaching it 
would follow that Christ died in vain, "the just for the 
unjust to bring us to God,"— then every man should be 
told to let his acts and morals "plead" for him. 

Ingersoll's acts and morals do not need to "plead" 
for him; because God had compassion on him and all of 
our race before we were born, and sent forth his Son to 
redeem us all from our death sentence and to make possible 
to all a return to divine favor. All must learn of 
this favor in God's "due time," and if the present life 
was not Ingersoll's due time to learn of God's grace his 
will surely come to him in the future life. And he will 
have a full opportunity to profit by the "resurrection by 
judgments."— John 5:28,29. 

The Rev. Dr. William Lyons, of the First Unitarian 
Church of Brookline, said that "the statement of the clergyman 
who said that if Ingersoll was sincere and honest in his 
belief he would be saved, is morally all right. We must all 
come to the truth, and Ingersoll, no matter what his belief, 
has come to the truth in the life hereafter." 

This reverend gentleman's views would be amusing 
were the subject a less serious one. We could have 
agreed had he said that Mr. Ingersoll will come to a knowledge 
of the truth in the life hereafter, but we deny that 
he could come to any knowledge in death, because, as the 
Scriptures declare, "The dead know not anything." 
"There is neither wisdom nor knowledge nor device in the 
grave." (Eccl. 9:10.) How then can it be said that dead 

R3559 :page 151 

Mr. Ingersoll "has" come to knowledge beyond that 
enjoyed while alive? As to how he "has" attained 
knowledge in "the life hereafter" is not explained. The 
life hereafter is still future, and must be entered upon 
before any knowledge respecting it can be acquired. 

Rt. Rev. Jas. A. McFaul, Bishop of Trenton, said: 
"Robert Ingersoll evidently owed his prejudice against 
Christianity to his early Calvinistic experience. Had he 
studied the doctrines and practices of the Catholic Church 
he would have beyond doubt regarded Christianity in a 
more favorable light. If he was sincere in his belief and 
lived a moral life we are allowed to hope that God has 
shown him mercy." 

Like the minister first quoted, Bishop McFaul 
evidently thinks that an "agnostic" can be honest in his 
"beliefs." But here we are in trouble, for the word 
"agnostic" signifies without belief; and Ingersoll, a professed 
and boasted agnostic, could not therefore be considered 
"honest in his beliefs" when he had none. The 
gentleman must therefore be understood to mean that he 
was honest in his disbeliefs. 

The bishop kindly says: "We are allowed to hope 
that God has shown him mercy." We fear that his kindness 
of heart led the bishop to abbreviate his statement 
of his "hopes," and that many readers will 



not accurately understand his words unless we amplify 

for him, as we are about to do. When he says, "We 

are allowed to hope," it implies that the teachings of Roman 

Catholicism grant the hope. Only, therefore, when 

we know those teachings can we properly weigh the bishop's 

hope for Ingersoll. Thus delimited it is— 

(1) A hope that although a hell of everlasting and untellable 
anguish is set forth as the penalty of all heretics- 
all living in Christian lands and not giving adherence to 

the Church of Rome,— yet as a glimmer of hope is held 

out for all heathens and idiots, or others not knowingly 

and willingly opposed to Papacy, so there is such an allowance 

of hope for Ingersoll. 

(2) But what does this "hope" amount to? This: 
That he has gone to Purgatory for hundreds or perhaps 
thousands of years, and may hope "some sweet day" to 
get out of it and into heaven. This is either a warm or a 
cold hope, according to chance, as taught by Doctor 
Dante in his great poem, "Inferno." He pictures some 
frozen solid in the ice, and others in other quarters burning 
in fiery ovens. 

The bishop is "allowed to hope" that Ingersoll will 
get the full limit of punishment, hot or cold or alternated, 
because he left no money to pay for masses, nor has he 
friends who will spend their money for them thus to secure 
a curtailment of his sentence. 

No intelligent Catholic can, on reflection, doubt that 
we have rightly outlined the bishop's "hope," for if bishops, 

R3560 :page 151 

archbishops, cardinals and even popes must tarry for a 
longer or shorter period in purgatory, according to Catholic 
doctrine, it follows, as beyond peradventure, that 
Ingersoll would be required to tarry quite a while in Inferno 
to get rid of his unbeliefs, etc. 

The Rev. A. A. Berle, Congregationalist, said: "Colonel 
Ingersoll was a brave, chivalrous, high-hearted man, 
resolute in his championship of what he believed to be true, 
infinitely more to be respected than certain clerical infidels 
who discredit both the gospel and the Bible by covert insinuations. 
Peace to his ashes!" 

We are pleased to find in the list of comments this 
one which we can unqualifiedly endorse. Mr. Ingersoll's 
outspoken opposition to the Bible is indeed to his credit 
as compared with the covert attacks on the Bible of so-called 
"higher critics," who in the name of the Lord and 
under vows of belief and under pay as defenders of the 
faith, are doing all in their power to undermine the Scriptures. 
Yes, Ingersoll was saintly as compared with these. 

"Peace be to his ashes!" We can agree to this, too. 
His ashes are in the cold ground. He is suffering nothing, 
enjoying nothing, simply waiting unconsciously for the 
Lord's Millennial Kingdom, which will overthrow sin and 
every evil, causing the knowledge of the Lord to fill the 
earth, and calling forth from the tomb all of our race to 



test their willingness to live everlastingly, righteously, 
under reasonable conditions, or die the second death as 
utter reprobates. We have hope that Ingersoll when 
called forth from the tomb will be one of many to accept 
and obey the new government and share the blessing of 
the destruction of sin and all enemies, even "the last enemy" 
—death. 

DR. S. G. LEE'S FUNNY DREAM OF THE FUTURE CHURCH. 



"The Christian religion is facing the most obstinate 
and bewildering crisis in its history. The Church is not 
in a commanding position because the rest of the world 
is more eloquent than we are— is not so bodiless. The 
new Church is going to be the next feat of the Strong 
Man. He has attended to the other things. The iron 
in the ground in America— the unborn iron— is organized 
into a steel trust. The very coal, down in its thousands 
of years' sleep in the earth, is massed or nearly all 
massed and is getting ready to move as one body for 
the winter. The very ice on the ponds, before it is 
frozen, has a body all waiting for it, distributing it to 
its finger-tips in the great cities. Even sugar has a body. 
Millions of hens are laying eggs to-day as if they were one 
hen, for a syndicate out in Chicago. We are familiar 
enough with the fact that all powerful ideas are magnificently 
organized, and insist on having bodies. It is 
the fundamental fact that every man is dealing with, 
in the conduct of his business every year, and yet right 
in the midst of it we have the spectacle of the Christian 
churches still clinging to a sort of pleasant basket-picnic 
idea of religion, separate churches, separate denominations 
of separate churches, flocking feebly together on 
the round earth, each family bringing its own little 
basket of its own special food and keeping a little apart 
and chewing on it, looking over its shoulders at the others 
perhaps now and then in a sort of empty, anxious, kind-hearted 
way— getting together for a few remarks, or a 
city census, possibly. But that is all. 

"As I see the Church of the future, we are not going 
to give anything up; we are all going to have our individual 
ways, our chapels, but we are all going to insist 
upon having a great central cathedral in every city, 
which shall belong to all of us. The Church of the future 
is going to be a great spiritual metropolis, every man 
going there, every man belonging there. It shall be like 
a great worshiping street of souls. Men shall feel in 
Church as in some great hushed city of each other's 
lives. It shall be the one place where a man can go with 
a whole human race and face God. It is simple enough 
to get people to agree if we have something big enough. 
It is going to be a Church where Jonathan Edwards and 
John Wesley and Ralph Waldo Emerson and Cardinal 
Newman and Luther would be able to worship in the 



same pew— and without having to be born several 
hundred years ago— to have people see that their souls 
belonged together. The Church of the future is going 

R3560 : page 152 

to give room to every man's life while he has it. If it 

does this, we will all get together. And if we all get 

together, the cathedral is inevitable. We will soon give 

God a body on the earth. The Church in every town at 

last shall be to every man and to every growing boy the 

greatest thing he knows. It shall be like the sky over 

the other things. It shall be fair to God. I am convinced 

that not until we have the cathedral in every community 

to symbolize the oneness in the churches, and the denominational 

chapels clustered about it to symbolize 

their individuality, can we expect a Church that will at 

once command and invite great cities and mighty men. 

The nations of the earth shall be seen kneeling in it, 

and all the institutions of the sons of men, the universities, 

the corporations, the very railroads, the stately 

lines of ships from around the sea, shall bow themselves 

and the great brutal mines from the hollows of the earth 

—all these shall come, and be seen kneeling there before 

the God who is the God of all that is. To say that he is 

the God of all that is, is what the cathedral is for. With 

its hundreds of voices, its hundreds of instruments of 

praise, its scores of preachers, its unceasing services and 

kinds of services, it shall enfold all men in one prayer and 

song. The same men will separate to be theological, 

perhaps. They will need to go off into different rooms 

and back parlors to be intellectual, and into different 

offices or parish houses to perform the details and to 

execute the business of religion; but for worship, the 

one thing that all Christians have in common, they are 

going to unite, that the worship may be worshipful, that 

the spirit may have a body and God be made amazing 

on the earth."— The Outlook. 



R3560 : page 152 

THE GREATEST EVENT OF HISTORY 

-JOHN 19:17-30.-MAY 28.- 

Golden Text:— "Christ died for our sins 
according to the Scriptures."— 1 Cor. 15:3. 

CALVARY was the scene of the most wonderful 
event of history, the fulcrum as it were upon 
which divine Love and Justice operated for the 
rolling away of the curse resting upon humanity. Its 
site is not definitely known, yet the Latin word Calvary 
furnishes a clue, being an equivalent to the Hebrew 



word golgotha and signifying "the place of the 

skull." There is a bare knoll of a hill, with two caves 

in the front, which, looked at from a distance has rather 

the appearance of a skull, the caves and the brush growing 

therein representing the eye sockets. It is presumed 

that this was the 

place of the 

crucifixion. The 

same custom of 

describing rocks 

and hills by 

things which 

they somewhat 

resemble still 

prevails. Thus 

we have Sentinel 

Dome and Bridal 

Vail Falls in 

the Yosemite, 

Pulpit Rock and 

Teakettle Rock 

in the Rocky 

Mountains, the Owl's Head in the White Mountains 

and Caesar's Head in the Blue Ridge. 

Crucifixion is a most horrible and torturous form of 
death, yet it was not the torture of death which our 
Redeemer suffered on our behalf which so much gives 
us a feeling of sympathy and sorrow as our minds go 
back to Calvary and the scenes preceding it. Two others 
were crucified with Jesus; many others had suffered 
a similar death before and since, and some, we may 
presume, suffered as much or more agony through 
longer-drawn-out torture, gradual burning at the stake, 
lacerations, etc. The thought which impresses our 
hearts most deeply is that our dear Savior's experiences 
not only were undeserved, unmerited by the one "who 
went about doing good," but that his experiences were 
in connection with the payment of our penalty, so that 
"by his stripes we are healed."— Isa. 53:5. 

"THE LOVE OF CHRIST CONSTRAINETH US" 

The thought that Christ died for our sins, the Just 
for the unjust, that he might bring us to God— that we 
might be restored to divine favor, released from the 
just curse or sentence of death which was upon us— 
this thought moves our hearts to loving sympathy. 
"The love of Christ constraineth us; and we thus judge 
that if one died for all, then were all dead [under just 
sentence of death]: and that we who live should henceforth 
not live unto ourselves but unto him who died 
for us."-2 Cor. 5:14,15. 



"In the cross of Christ we glory, 

Towering o'er the wrecks of time; 
All the light of sacred story 



Gathers round its head sublime." 

Proportionately as in our day the D.D.'s and college 
professors and the "wise of this world" are denying 
the necessity for our Lord's death and the value of the 
precious blood as an atonement for the sins of mankind, 
in that same proportion must those whose eyes have 
been opened by the grace of God to see the divine plan 
emphasize more and more the value of the cross as the 
basis of reconciliation between God and man. There 
is a great falling away in our day from this foundation 

R3561 :page 152 

feature of the Gospel. Jesus is presented as good, 
noble, a wonderful and wise teacher, whose words are 
suitable for texts and comments; but the sin of the 
world is denied when it is claimed that man is by an 
evolutionary process rising from the monkey condition 
to the divine likeness, and if there is no sin of the world 
to be atoned for, of course, the Scriptural record that 
Jesus made atonement for the sins of the world is in 
error, and this is the view that is rapidly spreading 
throughout Christendom and destroying all true Christian 
faith. 

Any other faith is not the true Christian faith, not 
the faith once delivered to the saints, not the faith that 
is pleasing to God, not the faith that is the basis for 
justification and forgiveness of sins, not the faith that 
is to be respected and honored, blessed and rewarded by 
the Lord in due time. We cannot enunciate this matter 

R3561 :page 153 

too distinctly, even though it may offend some to be 
told that they are not Christians in the Scriptural 
sense of the word when they no longer hold the doctrine 
of the atonement through the blood of the cross— through 
the death of Jesus. Ultimately this doctrine will be 
seen to be the touchstone which will clearly show who 
are the Lord's and who are not. Those who lose this 
hub or center of faith, lose all part and lot in Christ so 
far, at least, as the present age is concerned. They are 
no more Christians than are Mohammedans or Jews or 
Confucians or Brahmins. Jews, Mohammedans and 
infidels believe that Jesus lived and that he died and 
that he was a great teacher, but this does not make them 
Christians and does not justify them. We are justified, 
as the Apostle points out, "Through faith in his blood." 
-Rom. 3:25. 

"VIA DOLOROSA"-THE WAY OF THE CROSS 

The way from Pilate's judgment hall to Calvary 
was indeed a sorrowful way, a doleful way. Pilate felt 
uncomfortable in having done the only 



thing he could reasonably have been 
expected to do under all the circumstances. 
The chief priests and doctors 
of divinity had scored a 
victory, and might be expected 
to exult as they saw 
their victim 
led as a lamb 
to the slaughter. 
Yet we 
must give 
them credit 
for some conscience 
and 

must suppose 
that they 
were far from 
happy; that 
although they 
had said to 
Pilate, "His 
blood be upon 

us and upon our children" they felt a mysterious dread of 
this wonderful person against whom they were prevailing. 
To suppose that their hearts were not troubled 
would be to discredit them everyway. On the way 
tender women, not disciples of Jesus, wept as Jesus 
passed by. Pilate had endeavored to appeal to the 
accusers of Jesus by having him scourged and then 
presenting him before them, crying, Ecce Homo- 
Behold the man! Look at the man whom you are 
asking me to crucify: no man in all your nation has 
such a face and form as his; not one of you for a moment 
considers that he is a wicked man; his face shows to 
the contrary. Will you not be satisfied? Will not your 
anger against him be appeased by the scourging which 
he has received? Will you not consent that I should 
let him go? But all these appeals were futile. His 
enemies were so filled with bitterness and envy that they 
were blind to his personal attractions. These, however, 
appealed to the women as he passed; they wept. Jesus 
was the most composed of all in that scene, because he 
had the assurance that he was doing the Father's will. 
This assurance had kept him calm and unmoved from 
the moment the angel appeared in Gethsemane to give 
him the word of divine favor and thus strengthen him. 
He was ready to endure anything that would be the 
Father's will, that would carry out the Father's plan, 
he had such confidence in the wisdom, the love, the 
justice and the power of God. To the weeping women 
he said, "Weep not for me, weep for yourselves"— 
doubtless having in mind the awful trouble which thirty-seven 
years after came upon that city. 

"LET HIM TAKE UP HIS CROSS AND FOLLOW ME" 



Jesus, bearing his cross, headed the procession, 
accompanied by four Roman soldiers; following came the 
two thieves with their crosses and four soldiers guarding 
each, the whole under the charge of a Centurion. 
Our Redeemer, less coarse by nature, less animal, more 
intelligent than the thieves, was probably less able 
naturally than they to carry the heavy timber of the 
cross— besides, he had been under a nervous strain and 
without food for about twelve hours. Evidently he 
was scarcely able to carry his load, and the Centurion 
compelled Simon of Cyrene, a countryman, to bear the 
cross after Jesus. Whether this means that he walked 
behind Jesus in the procession, carrying the cross, or 
that he carried the hinder part of the cross with Jesus, 
is uncertain; but in any event he had a most glorious 
opportunity, even though it was compulsory. 

Many of the Lord's dear people, reading the account, 
have wished that they could have had a share in the carrying 
of that cross. Where were Peter, James and John 
and the others? Alas, they allowed fear to hinder them, 
to deprive them of a most glorious service. While 
thinking of this it is well to remember that our Lord 
has graciously provided that all of his followers may 
share in the carrying of his cross. The offense of the 
cross, the weight of the cross, has not ceased; the cross 
of Christ is still in the world; the privilege is still with 
us to bear it with him, following after him. Although 
the apostles lost the privilege of bearing the literal 
cross for Jesus, they gloriously recovered from their 
fear, and we have the record of their noble service, 
bearing the cross of Christ for all the years of their 
lives afterwards. 

Let us love much, and let us show our love by our 
zeal in cross-bearing; and if at any time that zeal 
grows cold, let us remember the axiom, "No cross, no 
crown;" let us remember the Apostle's words, "If we 
suffer with him we shall also reign with him; if we 
be dead with him, we shall also live with him." Yet 
neither the fear of death nor the appreciation of the 
crown must be the controlling motive. The mainspring 
of our devotion to the Lord must be an appreciation of 
what he has done for us, our love to him, and our desire 
to do what would please him, and thus show a responsive 
love. Let us remember that while the Lord Jesus, the 
Head of the Church, was glorified long ago, there are 
still about us in the world those whom he recognizes 
as his brethren, as "members of his body," and that 
whatsoever we do to one of the least of these, whatever 
assistance we render to these in the bearing of their 
crosses, is so much that he will appreciate as manifesting 
our love for him, as so much that is done unto him. 

"HE WAS NUMBERED WITH THE TRANSGRESSORS" 

Our Lord's crucifixion between two thieves may 
be viewed from various standpoints. To himself it 



would mean the depths of humiliation. Every noble 
and pure man or woman prizing purity in his own heart 

R3561 :page 154 

would find it specially detestable to be so misunderstood 
as to be numbered with transgressors, murderers, 
thieves— accounted one of them. And if this is true 
with us in our imperfect condition of mind and heart, 
and our imperfect appreciation of justice and of sin, 
how much more intense must this feeling have been in 
the perfect one, our Lord. How he must have loathed 
sin, how utterly opposed to it in every sense of the word 
he must have been, and how much more shame he must 
have felt than we could possibly have felt in his position. 
From the heavenly Father's standpoint this permission 
that his Son be numbered with the transgressors was 
evidently to be a demonstration to angels and to men 
of the Son's loyalty of heart to the utmost extreme, as 
we read, "He humbled himself unto death, even the 
death of the cross." 

Thus the Lord demonstrated, not only by his willingness 
to die, but his willingness to die in the most despicable 
manner, his full self-renunciation, the complete 
deadness of his own will and the thorough aliveness of 
his own heart and mind to the Father's will. In all this 
he became an illustration to his followers, as the Apostle 
suggests, "Humble yourselves, therefore, under the 
mighty hand of God [no matter how deep the humiliation 
which obedience to God may bring] that he may exalt 
you in due time." From the standpoint of the priests 
and Pharisees the Lord's crucifixion with the two thieves 
was specially desirable; it would help to keep the people 
from thinking of him as a martyr, it would demean and 

R3562 : page 154 

degrade him before the people, and make any ashamed 

to acknowledge themselves the followers of a religious 

teacher who was publicly executed as a malefactor, as 

an enemy of God and man. How could it be expected 

that any could ever glory in the cross of Christ? But 

how wonderfully God's plans overrule all human arrangements, 

and make even the wrath and envy and villainy 

of the human heart work out to his praise and in accord 

with his plan? 

KILLING THE PRINCE OF LIFE 

The distance from Pilate's palace to the Place of the 
Skull is not great, though the latter is outside the city 
wall. The spot was soon reached, the crosses were laid 
upon the ground, and the soldiers quickly stripped the 
prisoners and nailed them, probably with wooden spikes, 
to the crosses which they then lifted and dropped into 
the holes previously prepared for them, the feet of the 



crucified coming within about two feet of the ground. 
The agony incident to such a proceeding can be better 
imagined than described, especially at the moment when 
the cross dropped into the socket, and when the weight 
of the body together with the swinging and surging and 
jolting of the cross would make the pain terrible in the 
extreme, more to one of refined temperament and nervous 
system than to the coarser and more brutal— severer, 
therefore, to our Lord than to his two companions. 
Well may the devoted disciples of Jesus say to themselves, 
"My Lord bore this for me," and we may ask 
ourselves in turn what have we borne for him of shame or 
ignominy or pain? The very thought of this should 
make us ashamed to mention boastfully any trials we 
may have endured, and also make us more courageous 
to be patient and to endure all things which divine 
providence may permit to come to our cup because of 
our discipleship. 

THE KING OF THE JEWS 

It was Pilate's turn to get even with the envious 
and malicious Jewish rulers who had forced him, contrary 
to his will as well as contrary to justice, to crucify 
Jesus. It was customary to publish the crime for which 
the execution took place by a printed notice over the 
head of the victim. In Jesus' case he wrote, "Jesus of 
Nazareth, the King of the Jews," Mark gives the inscription, 
"The King of the Jews," and Luke, "This is 
the King of the Jews." All three may be correct, for the 
notice was written in three languages, Hebrew, Greek 
and Latin. 

In his trial before the High Priest he was sentenced to 
death as a blasphemer in calling himself the Son of God; 
but, as we have seen, this charge would not stand before 
Pilate, since the Roman government cared nothing 
whether a man blasphemed one god or another. To 
secure his execution by the Romans he was charged 
with rebellion against Rome, claiming that he was the 
King of the Jews. Pilate's decision not to alter the 
writing was correct, and ultimately all the blind eyes 
of the world shall be opened to this great fact that Jesus 
was indeed divinely anointed to be the King of earth. 
But as he said, "My Kingdom is not from hence"— not 
yet. As he represents elsewhere, the time is coming when 
"he shall take unto himself his great power and reign." 
Those who acknowledge him as King now are a very 
small and very insignificant people in the world— "not 
many great, not many wise, not many learned"— 
"chiefly the poor of this world, rich in faith." 

To some it seems to be a pleasing fiction to say that 
Jesus is now the King of the world and is reigning, that 
Christendom is his Kingdom, and that the 400,000,000 
of nominal professors are his loyal subjects. Those who 
thus conclude are nearly as blind and prejudiced as 
were the doctors of divinity who secured our Lord's 



death. It would be as truthful to call black white as to 
call "Christendom" the empire of Christ and its people 
the servants of Christ. "His servants ye are to whom 
ye render service," was our Lord's standpoint, and 
accordingly the Lord has few real servants in the world 
to-day— the great majority are serving sin in some of 
its numerous forms of selfishness, and are glad to think 
that the day of Christ, the day of the Anointed, when he 
shall take to himself his great power and reign under the 
whole heaven, is far distant. 

Those who "love his appearing," whose souls long 
for the presence of the King and the inauguration of his 

R3562 : page 155 

reign of righteousness in the earth are a woefully small 
number. But all who are of the "little flock," soldiers 
of the cross, should specially appreciate one another's 
fellowship and should be ready, as the Scriptures exhort, 
to "lay down their lives for the brethren." And he who 
would lay down his life for a brother will surely be careful 
in all his dealings to do nothing against the Truth 
but for the Truth, nothing to stumble any, but everything 
possible to assist the members of the body of Christ, 
"The feet of Him." 

"SITTING DOWN THEY WATCHED HIM THERE" 
-MATT. 27:36.- 

The Roman soldiers, ignorant of God and the principles 
of righteousness— their highest conception of 
responsibility being to obey orders— seemed to have no 
heart whatever; the quivering flesh of their victims 
seemed to have touched no tender spot. They sat down 
and looked at him, and straightway began to divide 
his garments amongst them. "The usual dress of a 
Jew consisted of five parts: the head dress, the shoes, 
the outer garment or toga, the girdle (one part for each 
of the soldiers) and the chiton"— the tunic, in our text 
called a coat— a kind of shirt fitting somewhat closely 
and reaching from the neck to the ankles, for which they 
cast lots. 

As those soldiers coldly looked at the Lamb of God, 
who was suffering the Just for the unjust as their redemption 
price, and as they were dividing his raiment as their 
perquisites, they resembled to a considerable degree the 
whole of "Christendom" from that time to the present. 
Millions in all parts of the civilized world have heard of 
Jesus and his love and his sacrifice and that it was on 
our behalf, and are still totally unmoved, unconcerned, 
without thankfulness or appreciation. They are willing, 
indeed, to receive and divide amongst themselves day 
by day the various blessings and advantages which have 
come to them through his death, yet even these are 
received without appreciation or thankfulness or gratitude. 
The most kindly view of such an attitude of heart 



is that which the Apostle has expressed, saying, "The 
god of this world hath blinded the minds of them that 
believe not, lest the glorious light of God's goodness 
shining in the face of Jesus Christ should shine into their 
hearts." 

WITH HIM IN HIS DYING HOUR 

With the Lord in his dying hour were four of his 
very special friends: his mother, her cousin the wife 
of Cleopas, Mary Magdalene and John. We are not to 
think too severely of the apparent lack of courage on 
the part of the others of Jesus' friends. The popular 
bitterness which had led to the crucifixion of Jesus had 
extended in considerable measure to his followers. It 
was natural that they should be afraid; it had even been 
hinted that Lazarus would be put to death also. The 
three women with him might reasonably feel themselves 
free from danger of molestation notwithstanding their 
manifestation of interest in the suffering one; and as for 
John, we remember that he had a friend in the High 
Priest's household, who permitted him to be present 
when Jesus was first brought before the High Priest and 
when Peter was afraid to be known even in the outer 
apartments. Quite probably the High Priest's servant 
was present at the time of the crucifixion to give a report 
of the whole proceedings. John's courage to be present 
may have been influenced by these circumstances. 
It was at this time that Jesus, although in great pain, 
commended his mother to his disciple's care— "Woman, 
behold thy Son;" and to the disciple, "Behold thy 
mother." We cannot show our sympathy at Jesus' 
cross, but we can lend our presence and aid to 
dear "members of his body" in their dark hours; and he 
will count it as done to himself. 

Another Scripture remained to be fulfilled. The 
prophet had declared of him, "They gave me gall and 
vinegar to drink." This would be another mark or 
identification of him, and is given as the reason why 
Jesus mentioned this thirst. Doubtless, with a fever 
raging such as would be induced by the crucifixion, he 
had been thirsting for quite a while, but now the time 
was come to express the matter, to give occasion for 
the fulfilment of the Scripture respecting him. Gall and 
vinegar was given him, not as an injury but as a kindness. 
It was supposed that the mixture would assuage thirst 
to some degree. 

Having thus fulfilled the various Scriptures relating 
to his career, our Lord realized that the end of his course 
had come. It was probably at this juncture that 
the Father's fellowship was withdrawn from him 
for a moment; that for a little space at least he 
should experience all that the sinner could ever experience 
of the withdrawal of divine favor; for he was 
being treated as the sinner for us that we on his account 
might be treated of God as righteous. Of all our Lord's 



experiences we believe that this moment, in which the 
Father completely hid his face from him, was the most 
trying moment, the severest ordeal, and the one apparently 
which our Lord had not foreseen. Bereft of 
every earthly comfort and favor, privilege and blessing, 
up to this moment he possessed a realization of fellowship 
and communion with the Father; but now for that 
to be taken away, that upon which his whole life had 
depended, that was the severest trial. 

In agony he cried, "My God, my God, why hast 
thou forsaken me! What have I done to cause a cloud 

R3563 : page 155 

to come between thee and me? Have I not been faithful 

even unto death?" He probably soon realized the meaning 

of this experience, that it was necessary for him thus 

to fill up the cup of suffering and to demonstrate to the 

very limit his loyalty and obedience and to thus fully 

and completely meet the penalty against our race. 

Probably still under this cloud but with this realization 

he cried, "It is finished!" and died. We often speak 

of people dying of broken hearts, and use the term figuratively, 

but so far as can be known our Lord experienced 

this very matter actually. Apparently he died by the 

actual bursting of his heart. It is the tendency of deep 

grief to interfere with the circulation of the blood and 

to cause a pressure upon the heart. We have all felt 

this at times— a weight and heaviness of heart under 

certain peculiar nervous strains. This in our Lord's 

case seems to have been so intense that the heart was 

literally ruptured. He died of a broken heart. 

R3556 : page 156 

A LITTLE TALK WITH JESUS. 

A little talk with Jesus 

At the closing of the day,— 
How it quiets every anxious fear, 

And drives our doubts away. 

A little talk with Jesus,— 

How it soothes the aching brain, 
How it rests the weary, fainting heart, 

And makes us strong again. 

A little talk with Jesus,— 

How it lights the darkest hour, 
How it keeps us "watching unto prayer," 

And foils the Tempter's power. 

A little talk with Jesus,— 

There can nothing take its placer- 
How we long to reach our heavenly home, 

And see him face to face! 



-G. W. Seibert 



R3563 : page 156 

"I AM ALIVE FOREVERMORE." 

--JOHN 20: 11 -23. -JUNE 4.- 

Golden Text:— "But now is Christ risen from the dead, and 
become the first-fruits of them that slept."— 1 Cor. 15:20. 

WHILE the death of Christ was the greatest event 
in history, his resurrection from death readily 
holds second place. The death of Christ without 
his resurrection would have left our race just as helpless 
and hopeless as before. The word death signifies 
the absence of life just as truly when applied to our 
Redeemer as when applied to others. The Scriptural 
statement that "The dead know not anything" applied 
to him while dead as truly as to others, as also the 
declaration, "There is neither wisdom nor knowledge 
nor device in the grave"— sheol, hades. No religion in 
the world other than that taught in the Bible teaches 
the resurrection of the dead. Heathen philosophies 
assume, contrary to the Scriptures, contrary to reason, 
contrary to facts, contrary to all the evidences of the 
senses, that the dead are not dead, but, on the contrary, 
more alive than ever before. 

It is because so many Christian people have imbibed 
much of heathen philosophy on this subject of death 
that to many of them the resurrection of the dead is a 
superfluous matter, to say the least. Indeed they reason 
soundly when they say that if Abraham lived 175 years in 
this world and at death passed into the spirit world 
more alive than ever, where he has been enjoying himself 
in spirit surroundings for the past 3,800 years, they 
can see no reason why he might not continue to enjoy 
himself just as well for all eternity in that condition. 
Indeed they argue forcefully, logically, that if, according 
to their expectations, his resurrection by and by will 
mean a return to earthly conditions after so long an 
experience in spirit conditions, he doubtless would, if 
given his choice, prefer that there should be no 
resurrection. 

THE INSPIRED RECORD REASONABLE 

The difficulty is that the Scriptural teachings on 
the subject are wholly overlooked in such reasoning. 
According to the Scriptures Abraham has known nothing 
since he died, and the moment of his resurrection 
will mean the revival of all his previous experiences and 
hopes at a time and under conditions which will permit 
of the fulfilment to him of all of God's gracious promises. 



Without resurrection he would be, as the infidel claims, 
"dead as a door nail." From this Scriptural point of 
view it will be readily seen that the resurrection of the 
dead is all important, that on it depends all hopes of 
eternal life. That this is the Scriptural teaching we shall 
see. 

The Golden Text of our Lesson is from the chapter 
which explains the subject of resurrection more particularly 
than does any other chapter in the Bible. It 
assures us that Christ was dead and that he is arisen 
from the dead. In this it agrees with our Lord's own 
words (Rev. 1:18), "I am he that liveth and was dead; 
and behold, I am alive forevermore." How plain, how 
forceful are these words when given their proper weight, 
their true signification! Life and death are here referred 
to as opposites— he is not dead now, but is alive; when he 
was dead he was not alive. It seems strange that it 
should be necessary to examine so simple a statement. 
It surely would not be necessary to discuss the matter 
at all with thinking people were it not that the error of 
thinking of the dead as alive is so prevalent, so deeply 
entrenched in all our minds, in all our thoughts. 

Further, our Golden Text declares that our Lord 
in his resurrection became the "first-fruits of them that 
slept." What does this mean? It means what the 
Apostle states in other language, saying that he 
"should be the first that should rise from the dead;" 
and again, he was the "first-born from the dead." (Acts 26:23; 
Col. 1:18.) None before him was ever resurrected, 
though a few were temporarily awakened, as, for instance, 
Lazarus, the daughter of Jairus, and the widow 
of Nain's son. Jesus was the first to be raised completely 
out of death's power— to perfection of life, of being, on 
any plane of existence. And the word "first-fruits" 
carries with it the thought that there are to be others 
who similarly will pass completely out of death conditions 
into perfect life conditions. 

"IF THERE BE NO RESURRECTION" 

In the context (1 Cor. 15:12-18) the Apostle seeks 
to impress upon his hearers the importance of the doctrine 
of the resurrection as connected with the Christian 
religion. He wrote at a time when the Greek philosophies 
were invading all parts of the then civilized 
world, and when many, imbued with the Platonic 
theory that the dead are alive, had become interested 
in Christ and were more or less associating the Platonic 
view that there is no death with the Christian view that 
death is the penalty for sin, but that Christ paid that 
penalty, and that as a result the resurrection from the 
dead is made possible for every member of Adam's 
race. Because of the prevalence of the error the Apostle 
was constrained to state the truth in the most positive 
form. He says: 

"If Christ hath been preached that he rose from the 



dead, how say some among you that there is no resurrection 
of the dead? But if there be no resurrection of 
the dead, neither hath Christ been raised: and if Christ 
hath not been raised, then is our preaching vain, and 

R3563 : page 157 

your faith is also vain. Yea, we are found false witnesses 
of God; because we have testified of God that he 
raised up Christ: whom he raised not up if so be that the 
dead rise not. For if the dead rise not then is not Christ 
raised; and if Christ be not raised your faith is vain; 
ye are yet in your sins. Then they also which are fallen 
asleep in Christ are perished." 

There is no reasonable ground for misunderstanding 
these plain statements. Only deep-seated errors have 
hindered us from attaching to these inspired words 
their true meaning. They mean what they say: that if 
Jesus remained dead, if he was not raised up from death 
to life, he did not complete the work he undertook, 
he did not become the Savior, the Deliverer. True, indeed, 
his death was necessary as the redemption price, 
but it was also a part of the divine plan that if he accomplished 
the sacrifice in a manner satisfactory to the 
Father, he would be raised from death to a higher plane 
of existence, to a higher than human nature, to the 
divine nature, and that thus raised he should have 
the opportunity of presenting the merit of his sacrifice 
on behalf of the Church first and subsequently 
for the sins of the whole world. 

If he remained in death, was not resurrected, it 
would be a proof that he had failed to come up to the 
divine requirements. If he remained in death, was not 
resurrected, then he could never present his sacrifice 
on our behalf, could never appear as our advocate and 
mediator, could never secure our release from the sentence 
of death, and could never be our helper to bring 
us back into accord with the Father. Hence, as the 
Apostle says, "If Christ be not risen the teachings of 
the apostles are all false," for they are all built upon this 
central fact that "Jesus rose on the third day." Hence 
again, as he states it, if Christ be not risen it proves that 
our hope of forgiveness of sins through the merit of his 
sacrifice is a vain one— then he did not appear on our 
behalf, he did not offer the merit of his sacrifice in mediation 
of our sins, we are not reconciled to the Father, we 
are yet in our sins, yet under condemnation, without 
hope. 

R3564 : page 157 

"MANY INFALLIBLE PROOFS" 

Then comes in our Golden Text, in which the Apostle 
reassures us that it is no fable, that Christ arose from 
the dead, that it was not only necessary to our salvation, 



but that it is a fact well attested. He proceeds in his 

argument to show that thus by the resurrection of 

Christ is ultimately to come the resurrection of the 

Church to full harmony with God, ultimately to be completely 

delivered from the power of sin and death— "As 

all in Adam die, so all in Christ shall be made alive"— 

a full release from death, which is the great enemy. 

He proceeds to say that ultimately, at his second advent, 

"Christ must reign until he hath put all enemies under 

his feet. The last enemy to be destroyed is death." 

With this view of the importance of the resurrection 
of Jesus, we cannot wonder that the Scriptures 
lay great stress upon that fact, and deduce various 
proofs and demonstrations intended to establish our 
faith in it. All four of the evangelists give the details 
respecting our Lord's resurrection and manifestation to 
his apostles with great particularity. In the book of 
the Acts (1:3), the writer begins with this assurance, that 
Jesus "showed himself alive after his passion by many 
infallible proofs, being seen of his disciples [occasionally] 
during the space of forty days, speaking of the things 
pertaining to the Kingdom of God." 

When the Apostle would outline the great plan of 
God he shows the importance of the resurrection, not 
only for Jesus but also for all who ever shall be blessed 
through him as the Savior. He begins his dissertation 
on the subject by saying, "I delivered to you first of 
all that which I also received [first of all]: how that Christ 
died for our sins according to the Scriptures, and that 
he was buried and that he rose again the third day 
according to the Scriptures: and that he was seen of 
Cephas, then of the twelve, and after that he was seen 
of above five hundred brethren at once, of whom the 
greater part remain until now, but some are fallen 
asleep. After that he was seen of James, then of all the 
apostles, and last of all he was seen of me also, as of 
one born out of due time." 

A VERY PREVALENT ERROR 

Those who think of the dead as being alive and 
who still desire to apply in some manner the Scriptural 
teaching respecting the resurrection, have forced themselves 
to the thought that it is a resurrection of the body 
that is promised, which is a mistake. It is the being 
or soul that has the promise of a resurrection, and some 
beings or souls are to be resurrected to one plane of 
existence and others to another plane. For instance, 
the promise to the Church of Christ is a resurrection in 
a spirit body. The Apostle describes "the" resurrection 
of "the" dead as the resurrection of the Church, 
born again to a new nature, a spiritual, a heavenly 
nature. He says of the being or soul of such, "It is 
sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption; it is 
sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is sown in 
weakness, it is raised in power; it is sown an animal body 



it is raised a spiritual body." 

Although not discussing particularly the resurrection 
for the remainder of the world, the Apostle intimates 
that not all will be raised celestial bodies, heavenly 
bodies, and he explains that there is a glory for the 
celestial and a glory also for the terrestrial. He proceeds 
to contrast the first Adam, of the earth earthy, with the 
second Adam, the heavenly Lord, saying, "The first 
was made a living soul [an animal being], the last was 
made a life-giving spirit." But it was not until our 
Lord's resurrection that he became a life-giving spirit, 
for as the Apostle Peter declares elsewhere, "He was put 
to death in the flesh, but quickened in the spirit." These 
two Adams are samples or patterns of what mankind 
may attain to in the resurrection: the Church is to 
attain to the likeness of the second Adam, the world the 
likeness of the first Adam— "as is the earthy, such are 
they also that are earthy; and as is the heavenly, such 
are they also that are heavenly." 

Only the Church of this Gospel age has been granted 
the opportunity of becoming spiritual children of God, 
joint-heirs with Christ their Lord. Theirs is the great 
blessing, the privilege of the first resurrection, concerning 
which the Scriptures declare, "Blessed and holy 
are they who have part in the first resurrection; on such 
the second death has no power, but they shall be priests 
of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand 
years." It is this wonderful hope that God has set before 
us in the Gospel, the hope of participation with our 
Redeemer in the sufferings of this present time and also 
in the glories that shall follow, and our hope is attainable 

R3564 : page 158 

in and through and by the first resurrection, of 
which the Lord was the first fruits. 

Subsequently will come the world's opportunity 
for a resurrection. This is elsewhere described as restitution, 
a return to all that was lost in Adam— a return 
to the likeness of God in the flesh which Adam had 
before he transgressed, and which all of his children are 
yet to attain to if they will— through the redemption 
which is in Christ Jesus and during the period of his 
Millennial Kingdom. The world's hope in Christ is a 
resurrection hope and a glorious one, but the hope of 
the Church excels in glory, honor and immortality. 

MARY THE FIRST WITNESS 

The honor of being the first witness to whom our 
Lord manifested himself after his resurrection came to 
Mary Magdalene, who at one time was possessed by evil 
spirits, but who, being freed from their domination 
became a faithful and loyal follower of Jesus. This was 
not the Mary, sister of Lazarus and Martha, neither was 
it Mary the "sinner," who washed our Lord's feet with 



her tears in the Pharisee's house. She is called Mary 
Magdalene, probably because her home town was 
Magdala. 

Early on the next morning after the Sabbath— corresponding 
to our Sunday, the first day of the week- 
Mary had an appointment with others of the Lord's 
friends to go to the tomb with spices, etc., to embalm 
his body, a proceeding which had been impossible because 
of the lateness of the hour of his crucifixion, and 
because on the Sabbath intervening no such work was 
permissible under the Law. Their thought was to take 
advantage of the very earliest opportunity for the 
embalming before decomposition could set in. Arising 
earlier than her companions Mary went alone to the 
sepulcher, and, looking in, saw that the body of Jesus was 
gone. She wondered why he had been removed and 
where, and wept; then stooping down again, because 
the door of the sepulcher was low, she beheld two persons 
in white raiment, whom she recognized as angels, 
sitting at the head and foot of the place where Jesus' 
body had lain, as though they were keeping guard. 
They asked why she wept; she answered because they 
had taken away her Lord and she knew not where they 
had laid him. 

Turning, Mary saw a man near her, whom she took 
to be the caretaker of the garden in which was Joseph's 
tomb. He also asked why she wept, and she appealed 
to him that if he had removed the body, being dissatisfied 
that it should remain in that tomb, if he would 
give it to her care she would take charge of it. Nothing 
about this person indicated who he was. He looked 
like a gardener, probably had on gardener's clothing— 
(his own clothing we know had been appropriated by 
the soldiers who crucified him, and the linen clothes 
were still lying in the tomb). It was not until Jesus 
called her by name, probably in the old familiar voice, 
that she recognized that the one before her was her 
Lord— in a different body, in another form, but still he. 

Falling at his feet and clasping them she simply 
uttered the word, "Rabboni!" Master; but Jesus did 
not encourage her to thus continue, but intimated 
rather that, having knowledge of his resurrection, she 
should become the newsbearer or gospeller to the disciples, 
informing them that he was risen and that by 
and by he would ascend, "To your Father and to my 
Father, to your God and to my God." 

ART THOU A STRANGER? 

Our risen Lord evidently revealed himself to Mary 
only by his voice. The clothing was not such as he had 
previously worn nor was the appearance the same; 
she knew him not until he spoke. Later in the day 
two of his disciples were going to Emmaus and the 
Lord overtook them and saluted them kindly, inquiring 
why they were of such sad countenances and evidently 



in deep sorrow. They knew him not, they saw not the 
print of the nails in his hands nor in his feet, they saw 
not the features they had long known nor the clothing. 
They said to him, "Art thou a stranger in these 
parts and hast not heard about Jesus?" etc. He 
took occasion to open unto them the Scriptures, to 
point out to them from the prophecies how it was necessary 
that Messiah should thus suffer in order to enter 
into his glory, in order that his Kingdom might come, 
in order that mankind might be blessed, in order that 
an elect Church might be gathered to be associated 
with him in the blessing of the world. 

Finally, after being with them probably for several 
hours, and doubtless being esteemed a very wonderful 
man indeed, who could thus open up the Scriptures 
so as to cause their hearts to burn within them with 
love and devotion and with faith, he revealed himself 
to them in the breaking of bread and immediately vanished. 
Something about his words or about his manner 
of giving thanks told them at once that this was their 
Lord, and accounted for all the peculiar phenomena 
they had noted. 

The same evening he met with his assembled disciples, 
who, in fear of the Jews, behind fast-closed doors, 
were discussing their own safety and also the reports 

R3565 : page 158 

of Mary and the other women at the sepulcher when 
Jesus appeared suddenly in their midst. They were 
astounded and fearful. How could any being get into 
their midst while the doors were fast? Surely the being 
before them must be a spirit. They were in fear and 
trepidation, but the Master's words, "Peace," stilled 
their fears. He showed them his hands and his side, 
and he ate before them and said, "Handle me and see 
that it is I: a spirit [pneuma] hath not flesh and bones, 
as ye see me have." Then were they glad as they realized 
the truth, and so are all glad who realize this great 
fact of our Lord's resurrection from the dead and who 
have any conception whatever of its weighty importance 
as connected with the divine plan for our 
salvation. 

WHY THE DIFFERENT FORMS? 

We may be sure that there was some good and 
wise purpose served by the Lord's course— by his appearing 
in various forms and later on vanishing from 
sight. Nothing, we may be sure, was done in vain; 
everything had a purpose, especially at such a time. 
It is for us to reverently examine the matter and note 
the purpose, the object, of such manifestations. We 
accept them as follows: (1) Our Lord would convince 
them that he was not any longer the fleshly Jesus 
whom they had known for several years; he would convince 



them that although put to death in the flesh he 

was quickened in the spirit, that henceforth he was a 

spirit being. They knew about angels— Mary herself 

R3565 : page 159 

had seen two in the sepulcher; they knew that angels 
could appear and disappear; they knew that angels could 
assume human form and flesh; they knew from the record 
that angels had appeared to Abraham and had 
eaten dinner with him, and that Abraham knew not 
that they were angels until subsequently. 

Our Lord would show his disciples that not only 
was he not dead, but that now he could go and come 
like the angels, he could appear and disappear, he could 
manifest himself in the flesh or be present without flesh, 
he could create clothing as easily as the flesh for these 
appearances and did so, yet none of the clothing and 
none of the flesh were the same that they had previously 
been in contact with. The clothing was with the soldiers 
still— the flesh, we know not where it is; we simply 
know that Jesus was not raised in the flesh, and we 
know also that the elements of the fleshly body are 
not at all necessary to God for the creation of a spirit 
body. 

Our Lord illustrated in his own person the very 
lesson he had given them on the occasion of the visit 
of Nicodemus. He then said that those born of the 
spirit could go and come like the wind, and that none 
would know whence they came nor whither they went. 
How appropriate that he should illustrate this and 
thus give them their first lessons in spiritual things, 
which, however, they would not be fully able to appreciate 
until after Pentecost, when the holy Spirit 
would be poured out. 

"A SPIRIT HATH NOT FLESH" 

But some, perhaps, may say, Did not Jesus contradict 
the thought that he was a spirit when he used the 
words, A spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye see me 
have? The two thoughts are quite in harmony: they 
were not seeing the spirit Jesus, they were merely seeing 
the flesh and bones which the spirit Jesus assumed 
for the purpose of conversing with them, just as the 
angels assumed flesh-and-bone bodies when they made 
certain communications as recorded in the Old Testament 
Scriptures. He did not say, "A spirit hath not 
flesh and bones as ye see I am," but "as ye see me 
have." 

The spirit Jesus manifested himself through the 
flesh and bones and clothing. He saw that, if they 
could but realize that they were looking at flesh and 
bones their fear would depart, and as they would be 
thus calmed, Jesus would be the better able to explain 
to them the fact of his resurrection and to give them 



the initiatory lessons connected with their future work 
as his representatives in the world when he should be 
gone. This was the object of his various manifestations 
during those forty days, about eleven in all, and very 
brief in every case. The appearing in the flesh would 
remove their fear and enable them to hear the better 
what he had to say to them. Their seeing him on two 
occasions in a body of flesh resembling the one he had 
been crucified in, and perhaps in clothing resembling 
that the soldiers had divided among themselves, assisted 
them also to grasp the thought of the resurrection, that 
he was no longer dead; and his appearing in different 
forms proved to them conclusively that none of these 
forms was his own proper one, but that they were merely 
so many appearances through which he communicated 
with them. 

Doubtless it was for this same reason that he remained 
forty days, manifesting himself occasionally, 
yet invisible to them all the remainder of that period. 
He would have them learn gradually not to expect him 
again in the flesh, but to realize, nevertheless, his presence 
with them and care over them, so that they might 
the better understand, when he should leave them, 
how he could still maintain his presence with them 
and his guardianship of all their interests. He was sending 
them forth as his special representatives in the 
world as his words indicated, "Peace be unto you. As 
the Father hath sent me even so send I you." Jesus 
Christ was the Father's representative; we are the 
special representatives of our Lord and Head, though 
of course through him and in him representatives also 
of the Father. 

"RECEIVE YE THE HOLY SPIRIT" 

The disciples had not yet received the holy Spirit. 
Only Jesus had ever received it in the sense of a begetting, 
although the prophets had received it in a mechanical 
sense to work in them and through them. 
This is in harmony with the statement elsewhere made, 
that "the holy Spirit was not yet given because Jesus 
was not yet glorified." In other words, God could not 
communicate his spirit to any until after the merit of 
Christ's sacrifice had been appropriated to them. This 
was done after the Lord had ascended up on high, there 
to appear in the presence of God on our behalf. Forthwith 
the holy Spirit, in Pentecostal power and blessing, 
was shed forth. 

The Lord would have the disciples anticipate the 
blessing that was to come to them; he would have them 
understand that the holy Spirit he would send would 
not be a person, but the Father's spirit and his own 
spirit— the breath or spirit of God, the breath or spirit 
of Jesus, the spirit of truth, the spirit of holiness, the 
spirit of a sound mind. 



"WHOSESOEVER SINS YE REMIT" 

Our Lord's declaration that his disciples might or 
might not remit sins is not to be understood after the 
manner in vogue amongst Roman Catholics, Greek 
Catholics, etc.— that a priest, by virtue of the sacrifice 
of the mass or otherwise, is able to remit sins. The 
thought rather is that these twelve apostles in particular, 
and less particularly all the Lord's true members 
while in the world, would be under the influence and 
guidance and instruction of his holy Spirit to such an 
extent that they would know the terms and conditions 
on which it would be possible to forgive sins, and that 
they might thus know so certainly as to be able to tell 
their hearers whether or not their sins were forgiven by 
the Lord. 

We have this privilege still, and every true child 
of God should know how to exercise it, so that if brought 
into contact with penitent sinners he could render them 
the necessary assistance and indicate to them upon 
what particular terms they might know that their sins were 
forgiven of the Lord. For instance, we may assure 
any one who gives evidence of contrition, of heart repentance, 
restitution to the extent of ability, faith in 
Christ and obedient desire to walk according to his 
ways— we may assure any such person that his sins are 
forgiven; not that we have the power to forgive them, 
but we, being intimate with the Master and knowing 
his mind on the subject, can speak for him as his mouthpiece, 
to declare the terms of reconciliation. Whoever 
can know about his own sins, should know also how 
to direct and assist others in knowing of the cancelation 
of their sins. 



page 161 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVI. JUNE 1, 1905. No. 11 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 163 

Religious Liberty in Russia 163 

The Open Shop and Socialism 164 

The Duty of Church Membership 164 

Scholarly Infidelity Claimed 164 

Spiritualistic Manifestations Increasing 165 

Thoughts Regarding Jonah 166 

The Message of the Risen Christ 167 

Seven Golden Candlesticks 168 

"In His Right Hand Seven Stars" 169 

The Heavenly Jerusalem 170 

"The River of the Water of Life" 171 

"The Healing of the Nations" 172 

Bible Study for June 174 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers 174 

page 162 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



GENERAL CONVENTION, NIAGARA FALLS, N.Y., JULY 8-11 



THE RAILROADS of the New England, Trunk Lines, 
Central, Western and South-western Associations will 
sell tickets to this Convention at one fare and one-third, 
plus 25 cents, on the "Certificate Plan." You 
purchase a regular single-fare ticket to Niagara Falls, 
N.Y., telling your ticket-agent at the time that you 
desire a Certificate, that you are going to the WATCH 
TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY'S CONVENTION, and 
which will entitle you to purchase a return ticket at 
one-third a regular fare. Hold on to that certificate, as 
without it you would be charged full fare when buying 
your return ticket. The Certificates will need to be 
signed, but we will publicly announce at the Convention 
the name of the brother who will attend to the matter 
for you and save you all trouble. 

ACCOMMODATIONS should be secured in advance to 
avoid confusion and trouble to yourself and the Entertainment 
Committee. Therefore, if you will attend, 
write at once, saying briefly (a) how many will be of 
your party; (b) how many of each sex; (c) if colored, so 
state; (d) married couples desirous of rooming together 
should so state. AS TO RATES. -It will be safe to count 
that a room for one person will cost $1.00 per night in 
a good, respectable house, or a room for two $1.25. Unless 
you specify to the contrary, arrangements will be 
made for two in a bed and two beds in a large room at 
the cost of 50 cents each person. MEALS can be secured 
from 15 cents up, according to quantity, kind and service. 

Do not write on this subject at length. Tell us 
about things at the Convention. Give the information 
briefly and to the point. A postal card will do. Address 
the WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 612 
Arch St., Allegheny, Pa. 

OTHER EXCURSIONS 

From many points there are other Special Excursions 
run every summer to Niagara Falls. Some of these are 
at extremely low rates. It will be well for each to inquire 
of the railway ticket agents of his own city on this 
subject, and to select the excursion that will suit his 
convenience best. But take our own Excursion mentioned 
above unless you can do better. 

GET READY PROPERLY 

Prepare your heart for a blessing. Come to the Convention 
in the proper spirit— as a disciple, a learner. 
Come intent also on doing good as well as getting good, 



of consoling and encouraging others, as well as to be 
yourself comforted. Above all, come realizing that the 
Lord himself is the fountain of blessings, and remembering 
his word— not by might, nor by power, but by the 
Lord's Spirit are we to expect the blessings we hope for. 
In making ready and en route do not forget this important 
item, for on it your share in the Convention's blessing 
greatly depends. 



R3565 : page 163 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
RELIGIOUS LIBERTY IN RUSSIA. 



THE CZAR has commemorated Easter by an edict 
granting religious freedom to all the religions of 
his empire except the Jewish. The principal 
newspapers of the world seem to consider this one of 
the most momentous events in Russia's history. It is 
presumed to be granted with a view to the conciliation 
of the various classes affected. 

The Greek Catholic Church is still the "orthodox," 
the State Church however, with advantages every way 
over all competitors. For some time all religions have 
been tolerated in Russia, but hampered by various disabilities, 
and none were permitted to either publicly or privately 
proselyte. A man born a Mohammedan, for instance, 
might continue thus to worship, but if he ever 
became a Greek Catholic it would go hard with any who 

R3566 : page 163 

would convert him back to Mohammedanism or anything 
else, and in leaving the Greek Church he would forfeit 
all his civil rights. Indeed only the Greek Catholics had 
any civil rights. Others could not hold property, were 
debarred from certain schools, and although compelled 
to do military service they could not rank higher than 
privates. They were not permitted to erect church or 
school buildings nor to circulate controversial literature. 
Their marriages were "illegal," unless performed by a 
Greek Catholic priest, etc. It is estimated that about 
one-third of the Czar's subjects are benefitted by this 
"ukase" or order. The chief party of dissenters in Russia 
are styled "Old Believers." These, though but slightly 
different from the Greek Catholics in forms, have been 
persecuted for nearly two hundred and fifty years. After 
referring to these "Old Believers," The Herald says:— 

"The humbler dissenters have had a much harder 
time, being hunted down until secretly they gave rise to 
a breed of sects. One preached redemption by suicide 



and a fiery or a bloody baptism; others worshiped images 
of Napoleon as the Messiah, believing that he escaped 
to Siberia and would return some day and establish 
a reign of justice and peace, and still others indulged 
in most licentious rites. Of these dissenters there are 
about 12,000,000. 

"The Emperor's act will affect about forty millions 
belonging to alien faiths, such as the Catholics, and Lutherans 
of Poland and the Baltic Provinces, the Protestants 
of Finland and the followers of Islam and Buddha 
in the Urals, the Crimea, the Caucasus, Turkestan and 
Central Asia." 

The Chicago Record-Herald says:— 

"The Easter decree seems to put an end to all religious 
persecution. Secession from the State Church is 
not to be punished as a crime and is not to involve any 
loss or forfeiture of rights. Dissenters are to be permitted 
to establish monasteries and schools, print and circulate 
religious works and maintain missions. It is 
stated that the decree also affects the millions belonging 
to alien faiths. 

"Those who know the influence of the orthodox 
church of Russia will regard this decree as more revolutionary 
even than that of March. The right— indeed 
the duty— of enforcing conformity and preventing heresy, 
within the church has been aggressively asserted by the 
exponents of the old policy, and even the priests, who a 
few weeks ago published a bold appeal for the separation 
of the church from the bureaucratic organization 
and the restoration of the independence it enjoyed prior 
to the abolition of the patriarchate by Peter the Great did 
not go so far as to include a demand for real religious freedom. 
As the liberals pointed out, the priests wanted more 
power and dignity for the church, but not more liberty 
for the individual subject. The Czar has declared the 
movement for church independence inopportune, but in 
conferring religious freedom on the empire he has done 
more than that movement contemplated. And religious 
liberty spells other liberty. It is an earnest as well as 
an achievement." 

The New York Tribune remarks on the exception 
of the Jews:— 

"The Jews, five million strong, are still outlawed, 
That may be because the Jewish religion is esteemed in 
Russia less highly than the Mohammedan. It may be 
because the Jews are a nation without a country, and 
no foreign government is inclined to champion their 
cause, and therefore no political end is to be served by 
emancipating them. Whatever the reason, this omission 
must be deplored as gravely marring what would 

R3566 : page 164 

otherwise be one of the most splendid acts in the history 
of Russian government." 



Apparently conciliatory measures will avert any 
immediate collapse of the Russian government; but 
many of her sons are incessantly planning a complete 
revolution. It will doubtless come in due course within 
the next ten years, as a part of the great world-trouble 
predicted at the consummation of this age. 

THE OPEN SHOP AND SOCIALISM. 



A builder of large experience, a WATCH TOWER 
reader, sends us a clipping from The Builder, with the 
remark,— "This will cause a rapid growth in Socialism." 
We agree that it will have this effect, and that Socialism 
means ultimately the Bible-predicted anarchy, though 
we are equally sure that many of the best and noblest 
Socialists are totally blind to this result. We quote the 
article entire:— 

EIDLITZ ON ARBITRATION 

"At a dinner given by the Contractors' Protective 
Association in New York recently Charles L. Eidlitz, 
president of the Building Trades Employers' Association, 
declared, in responding to the toast, 'Arbitration,' 
that the next fight with the building trades 
unions in that city will be for 'the open shop.' 

"Continuing, Mr. Eidlitz said: 'We will have peace 
for a year, possibly for a year and a half, and then, I 
am confident, trouble will break out again. But our 
fight then will not be along the line of union principles. It 
will be for the open shop— the non-union shop. 

"Arbitration reminds me of the practice of taking 
candy with medicine in order to make the dose more 
pleasant. So it is with arbitration according to the 
theory of union workmen. They seek arbitration as 
candy in order to administer to us a dose which at all 
times is severe. The labor unions of to-day believe 
there is only one way to settle a labor trouble, and that 
way is their way. 

'"Greater labor troubles within a year and a half 
in the building trades than we have ever had, with an 
"open shop" for us all at the end of the struggle, is my 
prediction. 

'"It has been said that the only good Indian is a 
dead Indian. I would change that so as to say that 
the sentiment of the men who would erect buildings 
here, if they only had half a chance, is that the only 
good union, so far as our business is concerned, is a 
dead one. Arbitration has proven a failure and our 
only hope lies in the "open shop". That is sure to come 
in the building trades within a year and a half at the 
most.'"— The Builder. 



THE DUTY OF CHURCH MEMBERSHIP. 



The Pittsburg Christian Advocate publishes a query 
from a Methodist minister as follows:— 

"Within the limits of my pastoral charge are a 
number of professedly Christian people who do not seem 
to realize it to be their duty to become members of any 
Church. Otherwise they give evidence of sincerity in 
their profession. What scriptural arguments may be 
brought to bear in order to convince them of their duty 
to the visible Church?" 

The Advocate's editor proceeds to prove that every 
true Christian should belong to some one of the numerous 
man-made sects;— should get behind some one of the 
numerous man-made creed-fences;— should declare I am of 
Wesley, or Calvin, or Luther or some man;— should thus 
separate himself from other fellow-members of the same 
body of Christ;— should belong to men and not merely 
to Christ, as the Scriptures direct. 

Of course The Advocate did not put the matter in 
this its true form, but, following the general delusion, 
argues that whoever is not a member of a sect is not a 
member of the Church of Christ. 

As the question evidently refers to WATCH TOWER 
readers who stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ 
makes free and avoid all sectarian yokes of bondage, 
we give our answer to the question very briefly, thus:— 

Every true Christian, that is every believer in the 
atonement, secured by the precious blood, who has consecrated 
his all to his Savior and is striving daily even 
though stumblingly to walk in his steps, has a duty toward 
the visible Church— toward the fellow-members of the 
Church of Christ. 

(1) He should recognize all such and that without 
partiality, loving and striving to serve them as "brethren" 
in deed and in doctrine. 

(2) Should he find these "brethren" bound in sectarian 
"bundles" (Matt. 13:30) he should not join a 
"bundle" to please them and encourage them in their 
error; but standing fast in his liberty in Christ he should 
seek the deliverance of the "brethren." His duty is to 
lift up the standard and get the true wheat out of all 

the tare-bundles into the same liberty, in union with 
Christ, the only Head. 

(3) If he cannot have full fellowship at first, he 
will be all the more in the position the Savior himself 
occupied before he got a faithful few delivered from 
Jewish bondage and error. He should be just as kind 
and helpful to opposing brethren as their wrong ideas 
and position will permit; and he should foster fellowship 
specially with those who more and more hear the voice 
of the Shepherd and come out of Babylon. 

(4) The great mistake seems to be in what is called 



a Church. As bricks and beams and stones do not make 
a church, neither is every assemblage of well-dressed 
people a Church. Christ's Church is composed only of those 
united to him in faith and obedience, and these will 
know and fellowship each other always, and need not 
names, badges, grips and passwords. 

SCHOLARLY INFIDELITY CLAIMED. 



"An educated man who would to-day quote the 
Bible as an authority on any physical subject would be 
an object of ridicule in the eyes of all educated hearers. 
Our Bible is but the mould of two thousand years ago 
into which was poured the fundamental principles of 
religion. Its facts are not history as they have been considered 
for the past nineteen centuries. Indeed, there is 
no history in the Bible." 

These were the words of President J. Gould Schurman 
of Cornell University yesterday when he addressed 

R3567 : page 165 

1,200 students from the pulpit of Sage chapel, the 
occasion being the first Sunday of the second semester 
of the university year. 

His subject was "The Christianity of To-day." 

President Schurman said that the Christ of the 
twentieth century must be admitted to be different from 
the Christ of the preceding nineteen centuries. The 
Bible, he said, can no longer be considered a textbook 
of science. It seems strange to us that men should ever 
have considered it as such. 

Explaining the miracles which the Bible attributes 
to Jesus Christ, President Schurman said: 

"We have to-day our Christian Science and our 
faith cure, by means of which we see one man exerting 
great powers over both the minds and bodies of another. 
Who can say what great influence Jesus Christ might 
have had in conformity even with the laws of nature over 
the minds and bodies of men. 

"Altho we have broken away from the garb in which 
the teachings of Christ were first clothed, the principles 
he taught are still needed to save our race from despair, 
materialism and scepticism, and our young men from low 
standards. I know from experience that most of you 
who come to the university from homes where you have been 
taught to believe in the Bible begin to doubt its teachings 
when you begin to learn from science that what it states as 
historical facts cannot be true. I wish to help you in this 
stage and show you that behind the statements in the 
Bible, which we must cast aside, are principles of religion 
which we must follow to-day."— N.Y. Sun. 

INFIDELITY SIMILARLY TAUGHT ABROAD. 



Considerable comment and discussion has followed an 
address delivered by the Dean of Westminster to Sunday-school 
teachers. The dean declared that "our whole 
conception of the inspiration of the Bible has been 
altered." In support of this theory he referred to the 
first two chapters of Genesis as portions of the Bible 
which must be taken as parables and allegories. He 
went on to say that these and many other stories, such 
as that of the talking serpent and the talking ass, are not 
now regarded as literal statements of historical facts, 
but as imagery, clothing certain spiritual lessons. In 
short, the dean advanced as his view of the Bible the 
one that is too well known to need further description 
than is indicated in the above passage. It is his position 
in the Church that has given rise to public discussion. 
Many clergymen have expressed surprise, and Canon 
McCormick protests that this sort of thing upsets the 
whole foundation of belief, because it attacks the question 
of inspiration. He says: "We cannot believe one 
part of the Bible is inspired and another is not, because 
we believe that the compilers were inspired".— Cablegram 
to Globe-Democrat. 

"ALMA MATER" WILL SUCCEED DOXOLOGY 



The "Doxology" has been discarded at the University 
of Chicago. The faculty has agreed with students 
that college songs do more to breed a true religious and 
college spirit than the chanting of the tenets of Christian 
belief, and to-day at all chapel services in the junior college 
the college song "Alma Mater" was substituted for 
the doxology. The gist of the recommendation of the 
students to the professors was that a college spirit was 
the aim of the morning chapel service.— Toledo Times. 



These items tell the tale of the rapid departure of 
faith in the Bible as a divine revelation. But still worse 
is the fact that even the public-school text-books are 
being remodeled, so as to affect the child-mind at its 
earliest and most impressive stage of development. 
What must be the great loss and far-reaching blight that 
will result? True, much that has been taught as truth 
is rankly unscriptural and unreasonable; but with all 
that, there was still an element of truth in every creed, 
on which some hope and reverence hung ever so 
tentatively. 

We see in this war of Scholastic Infidelity a preparation 
for the great anarchistic trouble with which the 
Scriptures predict this age will end in a baptism of fire 



and blood. Thank God for its assurances of the Golden 
age to follow speedily. 

SPIRITUALISTIC MANIFESTATIONS INCREASING. 



Be not deceived said our Master. So far as we are 
able, we desire that all TOWER readers may be proof 
against the deceptions of the fallen angels, who, personating 
the dead, are rapidly deluding the world as 
they are granted more power in this "evil day," as predicted. 
It is remarkable that as Higher Criticism's denial 
of divine inspiration of the Bible finds its advocates 
in the Christian ministry, so Spiritism is choosing the 
same channel, so far as it is able, to deceive the whole 
world. 

While the St. Louis Post-Dispatch tells of a "spirit 
photograph" of General Lee, taken without intention 
when a group was photographed on a veranda— above 
their heads— word comes from Chicago of a spirit-painted 
portrait produced in daylight in the presence of the 
widely known Rev. Isaac Funk, D.D., and for him; 
and another paper publishes a bishop's declaration of 
his faith in such manifestations as from the dead. 

Can we not see that the influence of the demons is 
growing, and does not this betoken a great night of darkness 
so far as the light of the Bible is concerned? Yes, 
the forces of evil are being let loose to tempt them that, 
professing Christ, have received not the Truth in the 
love of it.— 2 Thes. 2:10. 

We quote below the newspaper reports referred to: 



TIME COMING WHEN COMMUNICATION WITH THE OTHER WORLD 
WILL BE EASY, DECLARES BISHOP FALLOWS. 

Chicago, 111.— "As a Christian and a believer in the 
Bible, I must believe in communication between the 
two worlds— that in which we live and that to which 
our friends have gone." 

Bishop Samuel Fallows of the Reformed Episcopal 
Diocese of Chicago, made this statement to-day. 

"But," he went on, "I have a profound distrust of 
the mediums who are pretending to be able to call up 
spirits at will. 

"I believe in apparitions, however, and think it 
possible that there are persons possessed of a certain 
mysterious psychic power which enables them to make 

R3567 : page 166 

of their spirits a channel, as it were, through which the 
earth-bound spirit can communicate with the friend from 
the other side. 



"We are still in a state of groping. I believe the 
time will come, with the further development of those 
psychic powers of which we are just beginning to get 
an inkling, when communication with the other world 
will be very easy."— Inquirer. 

REV. I. K. FUNK, D.D.'S EXPERIENCES. 



AMAZING STORIES OF PICTURES GROWING ON CANVAS BEFORE 
THE EYES OF WITNESSES REVEALED IN CONNECTION 
WITH BANGS SISTERS 

Chicago, 111.— Details of a seance at which a $1500 
picture was painted by dead masters wielding the brush 
in the mysterious world of spirits under the mediumship 
of the Bangs sisters, 654 West Adams street, have 
come to light. 

The amazing story is given on the authority of a 
spiritualist, who had it first hand from Dr. Isaac Funk 
of New York, who paid $1500 for the "spirit painting." 

Dr. Funk is one of the proprietors of Funk & Wagnalls, 
one of the largest publishing firms of the United 
States. He formerly was a Methodist minister. He is 
editor of the Standard dictionary. 

"Funk, when in Chicago last September, visited the 
Bangs sisters," said this informant. "He has long been 
interested in spirit phenomena. But only recently he 
had taken up the investigation of spirit painting. This 
is a rare manifestation of spirit power. The Bangs sisters 
are among a very few mediums through whom dead 
artists paint." 

Dr. Funk was ushered into a south room on the 
second floor at the end of the hall. It was barren of 
everything save a table and a few chairs. Light was 
admitted through one window. No one except the two 
sisters, Dr. Funk and a friend were in the room. 

The sisters showed them several white canvases 
both on stretchers and off and asked Dr. Funk to select 
any one he desired. He picked out one about 20 x 24, 
which was already on a stretcher. 

Nobody spoke or moved. In about three minutes 
a cloud seemed to pass over the canvas, leaving a pearl-gray 
effect for a background. 

A few minutes more and a dull outline of a portrait 
appeared. Every few minutes it grew more distinct. 
Then followed the various colors, and in 45 
minutes the picture, a perfect likeness, was completed. 

AT M. E. BIBLE CONFERENCE-LOS ANGELES. 



Dr. Biederwolf is reported to have answered the question, 
"What is the Evangelical Church?" as follows,— 



very truthfully: 

"I don't know what your idea is, but mine is something 
like the following: 

"The Evangelical Church must be pure in doctrine. 
I mean true to the evangelical creed. The revival of 
the next fifty years must be a revival of doctrine. The 
preacher must first take his stand on the inspiration of 
this Book, and be steadfast, immovable, abounding in 
the Word of the Lord. Once give yourself up to the unsubstantial 
supposition that like all other good books it 
has its errors as well as its truth, its only superiority 
being that it has a little more of the latter, and you will 
either wreck your faith on the barren reefs of a shallow 
liberalism or, like a coward, will use the pulpit of the 
Lord Christ to minister to your pride and purse. If this 
book is the Word of God the only important thing for 

R3568 : page 166 

this world to know is, what it says, and the only call you 
or I ever had from God is to make clear and emphatic to 
the world the message it contains. Blessed Book! 

"And now for the message. The evangelistic 
Church must above all be evangelical in its preaching. 
I wonder if we haven't been placing too little emphasis 
on the trenchant doctrines of the world in our concern 
for practical righteousness; science has put such a beautiful 
dress on man's wickedness that we have almost forgotten 
there is such a thing as sin. 

"Never as to-day has the world been so disposed 
to doubt and deny the real meaning of the cross. And 
this finds encouragement in a two-fold tendency of the 
ministry, the one seeking to please the world with some 
weak and dilettante palliation, the other ignoring the 
cross well nigh altogether. Of the first class none are, 
I presume, here to-day; they are not usually found in 
such places; but, brethren, what about the other class? 
We hear about the wide range of the pulpit, but that is 
not true— its range is very limited indeed— but this is 
true in a sense only— it should be determined to know 
nothing save Jesus Christ and him crucified, and when 
anything crowded in means the cross crowded out both 
are out of their place and the preacher, too." 



R3568 : page 166 

THOUGHTS REGARDING JONAH. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL: -Herewith I send you 
some suggestions which have occurred to me 
in studying the Book of Jonah, and which, 
perhaps, may prove interesting to you. 
Your brother in Christ, D. KIHLGREN. 



The book of Jonah has been especially assailed by 
the "higher critics," and they have ridiculed the story 
of Jonah being swallowed by a fish, as a fable. On the 
other hand the prophecy of Jonah seems to have been, 
doctrinally at least, largely a mystery to God's people. 
It has, however, valuable practical lessons which no 
doubt have been appreciated, namely, God's love to the 
repentant Ninevites; His kindness in reproving the murmuring 
prophet, and as showing how God sometimes uses 
very imperfect instruments in carrying out his designs, 
etc. 

Jonah offers a sharp contrast to the other prophets 
along several lines, viz.:— 

1. His character: disobedient, ignoble. 

2. His mission: To a heathen city. 

3. His success: Unparalleled. 

4. His predictions: Failed. 

However, Jonah was nevertheless a prophet of 
God, whose predictions at another time came true. See 
2 Kings 14:25. He was from Gath-Hephes, in Galilee, 
tho contradicted by the unscrupulous or else ignorant 
Pharisees when they wished to gain a point of argument. 
-John 7:52. 

Our Lord applied Jonah's experiences in connection 
with the fish as being typical of himself.— Matt. 12:39,40. 

R3568 : page 167 

In "Old Theology" Tract No. 41, Jonah 3:10; 4:1 1 
is referred to, as a testimony from this prophet in regard 
to "the restitution of all things." In view of these 
references being given as proof, the inference evidently 
is that Nineveh in some way foreshadowed the world 
in the Millennial age. With this view, I have wondered 
whether Jonah in his disobedience and fleeing from God 
might have represented Adam, and hence also our Lord 
Jesus who took the sinner's place. 

Jonah's disobedient course led to the sea where 
he took ship. Christ's sacrificial course (taking the sinner's 
place) brought him in contact with the Jewish 
people. 

The Revelator tells us that water is a symbol of 
"peoples, nations and tongues."— Rev. 17:15. 

The agitated waters in Jonah's case find a parallel 
in the lawless mob, which clamored for Christ's death. 
The air in motion (wind) which agitated the water may 
represent Satan, "the prince of the power of the air" 
(Eph. 2:2) which then had freedom to work (Luke 23:53). 
The ship, being at the mercy of the sea, may represent 
the Roman government, and the crew might represent 
Pilate; for as the crew prayed to be considered innocent 
for casting Jonah overboard, so Pilate washed his hands, 
declaring his innocence, being forced to deliver Christ 
to death. 



If these premises be true, may they not also be 
applicable to some extent to all the members of Christ's 
body, who, like Christ, have been accused of being the 
real sinners, "turning the world upside down," named 
heretics all through the Gospel age, and one government 
after another, like the Roman, has been compelled by 
God's nominal people to exterminate them, to cast them 
overboard. 

Since Jonah in his experience with the fish typified 
our Lord's death and resurrection "on the third day," 
may he not also typify the church, the Lord's body, 
which is to be raised on the third thousand-year-day? 
-SeeZ.W.T. 1901, page 122. 

If Jonah, then, when cast ashore by the fish, represents 
The Christ resurrected, then the application of the 
reference in tract No. 41 seem to be quite forceful, as 
Jonah would then represent the great prophet, and 
Nineveh the world. 

Forty days was the length of Nineveh's trial time. 
The number forty seems to be associated in several instances 
with a time of trial, for instance, Israel's forty 
years in the wilderness; Christ's temptation, forty days; 
the Jewish and Gospel harvests, 40 years each. May it 
be that Nineveh's forty days of repentance indicate in 
this way the 1,000 years of the world's trial time? 

But did Jonah's predictions really fail? 

No, the old, the wicked Nineveh did perish. In its 
place came repentant Nineveh. So with the world in the 
Millennial age: The wicked shall be destroyed, but there 
will be opportunities for all to have the wickedness 
cleansed out, and thus be spared. (See the double cleansing 
process— "burning" and "judgment," in Isa. 4:4.) 

One thing is sure, and that is that Jonah does not 
in his murmuring represent The Christ. May be the 
murmuring experiences are only practical lessons, or, 
may it be that Jonah in this represents a class that poses 
as God's mouthpieces, but who do not like this "Millennial 
nonsense" of having Nineveh spared? If so, would 
the "gourd" which pleased, and which shielded Jonah, 
be suggestive of the "Confederacy," the "Image of the 
Beast," which will grow up very suddenly and shield 
the gray heads of the D.D.'s for a short while from the 
scorching rays of the sun of truth? 



R3568 : page 167 

THE MESSAGE OF THE RISEN CHRIST. 

-REVELATION l:10-20.-JUNE 11.- 

Golden Text:— "I am he that liveth and was 
dead: and, behold, I am alive for evermore." 

THE messages of our glorious Lord, sent through the 



Apostle John and given to us in the symbols of 
the book of Revelation, are as truly the Savior's 
messages as those uttered during his earthly ministry 
and those subsequently sent us through the apostles. 

The book of Revelation was written at a time when 
severe persecution was upon the infant Church— near 
the close of the first century, probably A.D. 93-96, in 
the reign of the Emperor Domitian, though some date 
it nearly thirty years earlier, in the reign of Nero. No 
matter— in either case it was written at a time of special 
peril and severe persecution. For a time the Lord 
allowed the truth to become well planted and to take 
root; the gifts of miracles and other gifts in the Church 
at that time assisted in this matter. 

For a time, although there were persecutions of 
individuals such as are recorded in Acts, the believers 
as a whole were not subjected to the severest of trials 
at first. It was when the truth began to spread, and 
had not only the enmity of the Jews but also of the 
Greeks, that emperors and governors found favor with 
the masses by persecuting the followers of Jesus. And 
for aught we know, so it will be in the not-far-distant 
future. For a long time the pure truth has been hidden 
from men, and worldliness in the form of godliness 
has had the upper hand in influential circles; but 
doubtless, as the troublous times the Scriptures predict 
for the end of this age draw closer, those who will 
stand firm for the word of the Lord's testimony may 
expect to be made the scapegoats under various pretexts. 
We shall not be surprised to find a considerable 
measure of persecution against all the children of the 
light, who will walk up to the light, developed within 
the next seven years. John, the beloved disciple, in 
some measure or degree typified or represented the last 
living members of the little flock. Doubtless this was 
the meaning of our Lord's statement, "If I will that he 
tarry till I come, what is that to thee?" John did not 
tarry, but a class whom he in some respects illustrated 
are represented to tarry— a class who see with the eyes 
of their understanding the visions and revelations which 
John saw in symbols in a trance. 

John at the time of the trance vision was a prisoner, 
exiled to the Isle of Patmos, a penal colony of those 
days— an island almost uninhabitable, rocky barren. 
The crime for which he suffered this banishment 

R3569 : page 168 

was his faithfulness as a mouthpiece of the Lord. 
At the time he must have been between sixty and 
ninety years of age, supposing that none of our Lord's 
disciples were younger than himself at the beginning of 
his ministry. If his exile in any degree symbolized 
ostracism, which the Lord's followers may expect in the 
close of this age— a complete isolation from others and 
a treatment implying that they are prisoners— we may 



take comfort in the thought that as the Lord's favor 
and revelations to John more than offset his persecutions, 
so the opening of the eyes of our understandings 
and the granting to us of greater lengths and breadths 
and heights and depths of knowledge and appreciation 
of our Lord and his plan will far more than offset the 
various experiences which in his providence he may permit 
to come upon us. His assurance is that all things 
shall work together for good to those who love God, to 
the called ones according to his purpose. Whoever rests 
his faith securely upon his promise may indeed with 
the Apostle Paul count all tribulations as loss and dross 
for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus our 
Lord. 

ON THE LORD'S DAY 

Presumably John referred to the first day of the 
week, now generally called Sunday. It is peculiarly 
to us the Lord's day— the day on which our 
Lord rose from the dead, and on which all the promises 
of God's Word received life and our hopes through 
Christ were quickened. We may see in the expression 
also a reference to the Millennial age, called in the 
Scriptures frequently, "The day of Christ." We, today, 
according to our understanding of chronology, are living 
in the early dawn of this day of Christ, and it is here 
and now properly that we begin to see the wonderful 
things of the divine character and plan. But to see 
these things, to understand these things, we must be 
in the spirit. Only those who have become new creatures 
in Christ Jesus can be expected to understand and 
appreciate spiritual things, and this is the class whom 
John represented. As John heard a voice behind him 
and looked in that direction, so we who now are having 
the realities find that the message is behind us, and turn 
and look toward the past to see the fulfilment of the 
various features of the divine plan and to hear and understand 
the message given to his people by the risen 
Lord. The voice said, "What thou seest write in a 
book and send to the seven churches"— naming seven 
prominent churches in Asia Minor. (The words, "I am 
Alpha and Omega, the first and the last," are not found 
in the oldest Greek manuscripts and are properly omitted 
in the Revised Version. These words, however, do 
occur in the Greek MSS. in verse 8 and again in Revelation 21:6, 
and a portion of them later on in this lesson.) 

There are many reasons for concluding that while 
the messages were given to the seven churches specified 
and were applicable to them, they should properly have 
a still wider application to the whole Church of Christ, 
the number seven representing completeness and the 
order representing different epochs in the history of the 
Church. Thus the Church at Ephesus would represent 
the condition of the Church in the Apostle's days at the 
time of the writing of the messages, while the Laodicean 



Church would represent the Church in our day— in 
the end of this Gospel age. The other churches would 
correspondingly represent different epochs intermediate, 
between the beginning and now. To think otherwise 
would be to attach more importance to those seven 
comparatively small churches of Asia Minor than they 
would seem to have deserved, and would have implied 
an ignoring of other churches more numerous and more 
influential than they; as, for instance, the churches at 
Jerusalem, Antioch, Corinth, Colosse, Philippi, Thessalonica, 
etc. Furthermore, the details of the messages 
given to these seven churches apply to and fit historically 
the one Church of the living God, over every member 
and branch of which the Lord has a care. This 
thought, that the seven represented completeness, we find 
emphasized in the other symbolical representations— in 
the seven golden candlesticks, the seven stars, etc. 

SEVEN GOLDEN CANDLESTICKS 

Turning and looking, John saw in symbol as we 
may now see with the eye of faith and understanding. 
He saw one like a Son of man [like a man— like a priest, 
as implied by the clothes described] walking amongst 
seven golden candlesticks, caring for them, trimming the 
wicks, seeing to the supply of oil, etc. We see that our 
Lord Jesus, our glorified Master, although absent from 
us, has been present with his Church throughout the 
past eighteen centuries and more, protecting the interests 
of his cause and directing in respect to all of his 
people's affairs, especially inspecting and caring for the 
Church as a light bearer, a candlestick. Alas, how poor 
the wicks sometimes have been, how feeble the light that 
has sometimes shone out into the darkness, how much 
of trimming has been necessary and how much more may 
yet be necessary! 

In the Tabernacle, and subsequently in the Temple 
of Solomon, the golden candlesticks or lampstands were 
placed by the Lord's direction— not seven candlesticks, 
but one with seven branches, representing the whole 
Church, the complete Church during this Gospel age. 
In Revelation the same candlestick or lampstand is 
brought to our attention, but the parts are separated— 
the union, the relationship between them, being supplied 
by our Redeemer, the antitypical High Priest. The 
lampstand symbolized the Lord's nominal people of this 
Gospel age, including his "members." It holds forth the 
light of life, the light that shines in the darkness and 
which he directed should be so let shine before men that 
they might see our good works and glorify the Father in 
heaven. Alas! the Master evidently found but few good 
works, but little glorifying light shining out from his 
earthly representatives in many of these epochs. This 
is represented by his messages, chidings, encouragements, 
etc., given to each of these epoch churches represented 
by the different candlesticks or lampstands. It is to be 



noted that the lampstand represents the nominal 
Church of Christ rather than the true. This is shown 
by the fact that in the Lord's addressing each of these 
lampstands or churches he finds fault with the many 

R3569 : page 169 

and approves the few, especially so in the last, the seventh, 
the Laodicean Church of our day. 

THE APPEARANCE OF CHRIST 

We are not to regard the word-picture of verses 13-16 
as a portrait of our Lord in glory. It is a symbolical 
picture merely. He will not look as here described 
when we see him as he is and behold his glory. 
This symbolical picture, nevertheless, has precious lessons 
for us, more useful than an attempt to describe to 
our minds the appearance of our Lord as a spirit being, 
"dwelling in light which no man can approach unto," 
and which we cannot appreciate until we shall be 
"changed" and be like him and see him as he is. 

His head and hair as white as wool and snow tell 
us of his wisdom, and that he is the "Ancient of Days;" 
they speak also of splendor and purity. His eyes like a 
flame of fire tell us in symbol that our Master is all-seeing, 
omniscient; that he is not deceived by outward 
forms or ceremonies, but can and does read every 
thought and intent of the heart. The contemplation of 
his glance should of itself purge and purify our hearts 
to the extent of ability, to put far from us everything 
which would have his disapproval. 

Having described the head John mentions the 
hands and feet. The remainder of the body was covered 
with a garment which reached from his head to his 
feet. This may possibly represent the fact that the 
glory of Christ was manifested in his own person, in his 
own ministry and in that of his twelve apostles, his representatives, 
and that with their death the body of 
Truth was almost completely veiled throughout the 
eighteen centuries intervening until now, in the end of 
the age, the feet members will be illuminated by the 
Truth and shine forth— not like the Head, but as polished 
brass. When we think of the great advantage 
every way which we of the present age possess, we are 
inclined to say, What manner of persons ought we to 
be in all holiness of living and God-likeness. We who 
have the focused rays of divine inspiration and revelation 
from the past 6,000 years shining upon us with almost 
burning brightness, how it should consume in us 
all the dross of selfishness, how it should purify us, how 
humble it should make us, how we should be even in 
our flesh polished, bright, luminous representatives of 
the glorious Head and members of the Christ! 

"IN HIS RIGHT HAND SEVEN STARS" 



The countenance of the majestic one present 
amongst the candlesticks is represented as being like 
lightning. This reminds us of Daniel's description of 
the holy one who communicated the message of God to 
him upon one occasion; it reminds us of Paul's description 
of the great light that he saw on his way to Damascus, 
which represented to his understanding the glorified 
Lord shining above the brightness of the sun at 
noonday. So great was the splendor that John fell as 
dead when he beheld it, just as Daniel fell prostrated 
and was like a dead man in the presence of the mighty 
one whom he saw, and just as Saul of Tarsus fell down 
before the majesty displayed to him. So symbolically 
with us, when once we get a glimpse of the glories of 
the divine character through the divine plan, 
when once we get a true view with the eyes of our 
understanding of him with whom we have to do, as 
the great heart-searcher and caretaker of his Church, we 
fall before him humbled to the dust, realizing that we 
are imperfect, that we cannot stand before our Master, 
that we are unworthy of his favor and blessing. But 
as he touched John gently, raising him up, so he has 

R3570 : page 169 

spoken to us comfort, peace and love, assuring us that 
we have not an High-Priest that cannot be touched 
with a feeling of our infirmities, but, on the contrary, 
one who is able to sympathize and mercifully to assist, 
one who has bought us with his own precious blood, 
who has accepted us and will number us as his body 
members so long as we abide in him, seeking in our 
hearts to know and to do his will. 

His comforting assurance to us is (1) "Fear not." 
The same message that the Father sent us through the 
prophet Isaiah, saying, "Their fear of me is not of me, 
but is taught by the precepts of men." (Isa. 29:13.) 
This lesson, "Fear not," is one of the first that we must 
learn. We cannot come into close sympathy with our 
Lord and be taught of him respecting other features of 
his plan until we learn this lesson, "Fear not," until we 
learn to have confidence in him as the one who loved 
us and bought us with his precious blood, and whose 
purposes toward us continually are for our welfare and, 
if we submit ourselves to his guidance, to bring us off 
conquerors and more than conquerors. (2) "I am the 
First and the Last." We must recognize our Lord as 
the one who was the beginning of the creation of God 
and the end of it, the one by whom were all things, the 
one who is next to the Father, his very representative 
in everything pertaining to the affairs of the universe. 

(3) We must recognize him as the one who was dead, 
the one who really died for our sins, but who as really 
was raised out of death by the power of the Father. 
(4) We must realize that he is alive for evermore, that 



death has no more dominion over him, that the work 

is finished, that neither sacrifices of the mass nor death 

in any other sense or form has dominion over him nor 

ever will have, nor will ever be needed; his work is 

perfect, and, as he cried on the cross, "It is finished." 

(5) We must recognize that he has the keys, the authority, 

the power over the tomb, to deliver from it all who 

are there imprisoned. We must also realize that he has 

the "key," the power over death, so that those whom 

he liberates from the prison-house of death, the tomb, 

like those who have not yet gone into it but who are 

under the sentence of death, may all be ultimately delivered, 

set free from the dominion of sin and death, 

delivered into the full liberty of the sons of God, righteousness 

and life eternal. 

It is this one whom we thus know, thus recognize 
as the instructor and caretaker of the candlesticks, the 
churches; whom we are to recognize also as having in 
his right hand, in his favor as well as in his power, seven 
stars— the angels or messengers of the seven churches. 
These stars apparently represent special ministers 

R3570 : page 170 

or servants of the Church. In Revelation 12:1 
the Church is pictured as a woman crowned 
with twelve stars. These stars evidently represent 
the twelve apostles as the special lights of the 
Church. Similarly, in the picture before us, the seven 
stars which the Lord holds in his right hand seem 
to represent special light-bearers in the Church— in each 
of the seven phases or developments. That they are 
held in his right hand seems to teach us that these 
should be considered as in some special sense under the 
Master's guidance and protection and care in the interest 
of the churches which they represented. 

It will be noticed that the messages to the various 
churches are all addressed to these stars or messengers or 
angels of the churches, as though he would have us understand 
that the appropriate message for each appropriate 
time or epoch in the Church's experience would be sent 
by the Lord through a particular star or messenger whom 
he would particularly commission as his representative. 
Our Lord himself is represented by the great light of 
the sun, and his special messengers in the Church 
throughout the entire period are consistently enough 
represented as stars. The difference between the figures 
of the star and the candlestick is manifest: the star 
light is the heavenly light, the spiritual enlightenment 
or instruction; the lamp light is the earthly light, representing 
good works, obedience, etc., of those who nominally 
constitute the Lord's Church in the world and who 
are exhorted not to put their light under a bushel, but 
on a candlestick, and to let their light so shine as to glorify 
their Father in heaven. 



A SHARP, TWO-EDGED SWORD 

No part of the description could more thoroughly 
convince us that the description of our Lord here given 
is a symbolical one than does this statement that out 
of his mouth proceeded a two-edged sword. As a symbolic 
picture, however, it is full of meaning to us. It 
speaks of the word of the Lord as the sword of the 
Spirit, "sharper than any two-edged sword." It reminds 
us that our Lord's words are not one-sided, not 
merely directed against sin in one class, that his word is 
sharp and cutting in every direction, that sin is reproved 
by him as much when found in his most earnest followers 
as when found elsewhere. It assures us that none 
need attempt to pluck out the mote from his brother's 
eye without getting rid of the beam in his own eye. It 
assures us that if we do not show mercy to those 
who are our debtors we must not expect mercy from 
him who has proposed to extend his mercy to us. 

How heart-searching is the Word of God when we 
get to understand it— not merely as a compendium of 
rules and regulations, but when we come to catch the 
spirit of it, when we come to see that its requirement is 
love out of a pure heart, first to the Father, secondly to 
our Lord and Head, thirdly to all his brethren, fourthly 
to the world in general, groaning and travailing in pain, 
waiting for the glorious blessings of the coming day, 
and fifthly, sympathetically toward our enemies also, 
realizing that they are warped and twisted and blinded 
through the deceitfulness of sin and through the machinations 
of the great Adversary. 



R3570 : page 170 

THE HEAVENLY JERUSALEM. 

-REVELATION 22:1-11. -JUNE 18.- 

Golden Text:— "To him that overcometh will I 
grant to sit with me in my throne."— Rev. 3:21. 

THOSE who claim that God's Kingdom was set up in 
power at Pentecost, and that it since has been conquering 
the world, and that it will proceed until 
God's will is done on earth as in heaven, and that then 
Christ's second advent will take place and he will say, 
Well done, I could not have done better myself, and that 
then he will proceed to take all the faithful to heaven 
and to burn up the world;— these dear friends have a 
specially hard task before them when they touch upon 
the book of Revelation, as the present International 
Sunday lesson does. They must admit that the first 
three chapters, containing the messages to the churches, 
imply nothing of the kind. Referring to seven different 



epochs in the Church's history, they suggest nothing 
to the effect that the Church is now reigning, but, 
quite to the contrary, that it will be a suffering Church 
down to the very last. It promises a coming reign to 
those who faithfully endure the trials of the present 
time preceding the reign. Each one of the messages 
closes with an exhortation, To him that overcometh, 
I will grant, etc. 

All the intervening chapters between the third and 
the twentieth deal with conflicts between good and 
evil, and evidently cover the entire period of this Gospel 
age; yet in all of these presentations the evil is shown 
to be triumphant, and the people of the saints of the 
Most High God are worn out and cry from under the 
altar, etc. Not much a reign of righteousness that, 
surely! and how thinking people close their minds to 
all this is passing strange. 

It is at the conclusion of this book of symbols, 
from the eighteenth to the twenty-second chapters, that 
the close of this Gospel age and the inauguration of the 
Millennial age is pictured, and the triumph of the Lord 
and of his saints is shown. The introduction of that 
reign of righteousness, Christ's Millennial Kingdom, is 
shown, marked by wonderful events connected with 
our Lord's second advent, the glorification of his Church, 
the binding of Satan, the rising of the Sun of Righteousness, 
the blessing of the world, the scattering of its darkness, 
ignorance, etc. One would think that, even with 
no knowledge of the symbols of Revelation, no thinking 
Christian should have any difficulty in realizing that the 
book portrays trouble for the Church throughout this 
Gospel age and the triumphant Millennial reign at its 
close. 

Our lesson pertains to the New Jerusalem, which 
in the preceding context is described as "coming down 

R3570 :page 171 

from heaven as a Bride prepared for her Husband"— 
beautiful, pure, gorgeous, resplendent. The City represents 
the Church in glory, this being indicated by the 
declaration that it was like unto a bride prepared for 
her husband, and the further demonstration is in the 
fact that the angel who called to John, saying, "Come, 
I will show you the Bride, the Lamb's wife," showed 
him the New Jerusalem descending, etc.— Rev. 21:9,10. 

The words of the Apostle comparing the earthly 
Jerusalem with the heavenly corroborate the angel's 
testimony. The entire Gospel age has been the time 
for the preparation of this New Jerusalem. In one 
figure we are the city, in another we are the people of 
the city. The walls are living stones, such as the Apostle 
Peter describes; the foundation stones are the twelve 
apostles of the Lamb. The city as a whole comprises 
all the saints, from our Lord, the Head, down to and 
including the last member of the Church, which is his 



body. Not until all these have been chosen and found 

R3571 :page 171 

faithful and fitted and prepared for their places, will 
this city descend to earth in power and come into the 
possession or control of the earth. The coming of that 
city to the earth is the symbolical representation of 
the establishment of God's Kingdom in the earth, for 
a city is a symbol representing government, control. 
Thus Washington City represents the United States 
government, St. Petersburg the Russian government, 
Paris the French government, Rome the Italian, Berlin 
the German, London the British, etc. 

"THE RIVER OF THE WATER OF LIFE" 

The throne of God and of the Lamb is represented 
as being in this city. That is to say, the Kingdom, the 
government that will then be established in the world, 
will have as its center of authority the divine law and 
the divine power— every feature of the government will 
be in accord with the divine will. From the throne of 
God will proceed the river of the water of life, of crystalline 
purity, not muddy traditions with false doctrines. 
No impurity of any kind will be in it: it will 
be the pure message of the Lord, going forth from the 
Millennial Kingdom for the blessing, refreshment, rejuvenation 
and eternal life of the whole world of mankind 
or so many of them as will accept the blessed provisions. 
Not only will the message of peace and the 
offer of life thus go forth from the throne to the whole 
world, but, additionally, there will be trees of life on 
both sides of the river, bearing twelve manner of fruits 
and yielding their fruits every month, and the leaves of 
these shall be for the healing of the nations. 

The symbolic picture suggests nourishment and 
healing for the sin-sick, starving world, which then may 
partake freely of all the blessings and privileges thus 
symbolized. No longer will it be necessary to say to 
men, "The weaknesses of your fallen flesh will be with 
you until death, for although the Lord has graciously 
covered your sins because of faith in the Redeemer and 
the desire to walk in his way, nevertheless there is no 
escape from the consequences of sin, there is nothing 
that will absolutely heal." When the new dispensation, 
represented by this symbolical city and its river of the 
water of life and the trees of life with their leaves of 
healing, is made available to men, it will be the beginning 
of the times of restitution spoken by the Lord 
through the mouth of all the holy prophets since the 
world began. (Acts 3:19-21.) The restitution will affect 
all the willing and obedient, not only physically but 
mentally and morally: the uplift will be individual and 
world-wide. This is the very object of providing the 
river of life, the trees of life, their fruits and their leaves. 



"WHOSOEVER WILL MAY COME" 

The call of this Gospel age is a limited one, "He 
that hath an ear, let him hear," and let him come, and, 
coming, be one of the elect. But the majority of our 
race cannot hear the message in the present time, hence 
cannot come, hence cannot be of the elect. The Scriptures 
clearly indicate a reserve in the matter of the 
Lord's grace at the present time, our Lord's word on 
the subject being, "No man can come unto me except 
the Father which sent me draw him." Again, "If I be 
lifted up I will draw all men unto me." This Gospel 
age is the period in which the Father is drawing the 
Church to be the Bride of Christ, but as soon as the 
marriage of the Lamb shall have taken place, as soon 
as the New Jerusalem, the Church in glory, shall have 
been established in the earth, the drawing of all the 
families of the earth will ensue. They will not be drawn, 
however, to the same things to which we have been 
drawn; they will not be drawn to the heavenly things, 
to the joint-heirship with Christ in his Kingdom; they 
will not be invited to become members of his Bride, for 
that Bride class, that Kingdom class, will then be completely 
beyond the possibility of any further additions. 

This river of the water of life represents the blessed 
influence that will proceed to humanity from the glorified 
Christ, Head and body— from the Kingdom of 
God's dear Son. When the blessed opportunities of 
that time are thoroughly open to the world, when the 
Sun of Righteousness shall have scattered all the darkness 
of ignorance and sin, when Satan shall have been 
bound, when the river of the water of life shall flow 
freely, then the invitation that will go forth will no 
longer be a call of the elect, but an invitation to every 
creature, every member of the human race, to partake 
of the blessings and privileges which God has provided 
in Christ, that they may have the everlasting life and 
everlasting joy which is to be the portion of those who 
love righteousness and hate iniquity, and who avail 
themselves of the gracious provision in Christ. 

The statement respecting that glorious time and 
message is, "And the Spirit and the Bride say, Come. 
And let him that heareth say, Come. And let him that 
is athirst, Come. And whosoever will, let him take of 
the water of life freely."— Verse 17. 

There will be a Bride then, but there is no Bride 
now. The Church is espoused, but the marriage of the 
Lamb is still deferred, not yet accomplished. The last 
members of his Church must complete their course, 
must pass their examination and enter into glory with 
him before the marriage be consummated. But after the 
marriage there will be not only the holy city, representing 

R3571 :page 172 



the Church in her official or governing capacity under 
Christ her Head, but there will be also the blessed 
work of the Church, the calling of the world's attention 
to the river of the water of life, to the leaves of healing, 
to the fruits of the Spirit; and the Spirit, the power of 
God, will co-operate with the message that will then be 
promulgated, and the result undoubtedly will be that 
all the world shall hear, and that all who love righteousness 
and hate iniquity will return again to life eternal. 
It will require all the Millennial age for the delivery of 
this message to every creature and for them to avail 
themselves of the privileges. 

It will be remembered that the Scriptures nowhere 
speak of the river of the water of life now. There is 
none, and can be none until the heavenly city descends, 
because the river must flow from the midst of it, from 
the throne. Describing the condition of the Lord's 
saints at the present time very differently, the Lord 
declares that those who are his have in them a well of 
water springing up into life eternal. We know what 
this is, we know in what sense each individual of the 
Church has received of his Spirit, has in him a fountain 
of grace and truth for his refreshment; but there is no 
river of the water of life to which he could go or to 
which he could invite others to go. 

"THE HEALING OF THE NATIONS" 

It should not be overlooked that the healing and 
refreshment mentioned in this symbolization does not 
pertain to the "little flock," the Church, but to the 
world, the nations. The little flock will have been 
glorified, perfected in the first resurrection, before this 
offer of healing and restitution of the world is made. 
Undoubtedly Israel will be the first of the nations to 
be blessed, but subsequently all the families of the 
earth, as God's oath-bound covenant has promised. 

The glorious blessings and favors of that Millennial 
period, set apart by the Lord and declared by the 
mouth of all the holy prophets to be times of restitution 
of all things spoken of, is summed up most completely 
in the declaration, "There shall be no more 
curse." In what more comprehensive language could 
the Lord declare the end of the reign of sin and death 
and the commencement of the reign of righteousness 
unto life eternal. There is a curse upon the world now, 
official, legal. It has been against us as a race for six 
thousand years. It is a curse or sentence of death. 
Although our dear Redeemer has died, the Just for the 
unjust, although he was made a curse for us, nevertheless 
up to the present time release from the curse has 
come to only a small proportion of the race. In the 
Father's plan the only ones released from the curse, 
the only ones who have yet escaped the condemnation 
which is still on the world, is the class which has accepted 
Christ and is trusting in him. 



These are not justified outwardly, actually, but are 
justified in God's sight, justified by faith. The world 
realizes not their justification and can appreciate it 
only by the exercise of faith. By faith they may realize 
that their sins were laid on Jesus and that his righteousness 
is imputed to them. Those who can thus exercise 
the necessary faith have had the opportunity during 
this Gospel age of consecrating their justified lives, to 
have fellowship with Jesus in the sufferings of this present 
time, to have fellowship in his death, to be dead 
with him. The promise to these is that if faithful in 
this matter they shall live and be with their Lord, partakers 
of his glory and sharers in his future work on 
behalf of the world. 

With the end of this age, when the last members 
of the body shall have finished their course and be 
glorified with him, he as the great High Priest and they 
as the under priests, his members, will be prepared to 
bless the world. Then will be presented to the Father 
on behalf of the world the merit which came from our 
dear Redeemer's death on behalf of all, shared by those 
who rejoiced to suffer with him and who are accepted. 
Then divine justice will declare the lifting of the curse 
from all the world of mankind, and then the work of 
graciously blessing and uplifting and helping them out 
of their sinful conditions into life everlasting will be 
possible and will begin. There shall be no more "curse" 
against humanity, but, on the contrary, they may have 
fellowship with the Lord, and the throne of his grace 
and the evidences of his favor will be theirs, and all 
who desire shall have the opportunity to serve him. 
All the night of darkness, ignorance, superstition and 
sin will be past; no longer will the world be dependent 
for light upon the imperfect shining of such little candles 
as the Lord's people now are. 

R3572 : page 172 

All who come into accord with the Lord shall 
see his face— that is, there will be no earth-born cloud 
between, no hindrances to the Father's love and favor, 
and his name shall be in their foreheads. They will 
confess him, they will have his likeness, the various 
elements which go to make up his glorious name and 
character will be theirs and will be manifest in their 
faces. If, even now, under present imperfect conditions, 
the light of grace and truth in the heart transforms 
the outward features and makes them more and 
more bright and glorious, much more, we are sure, will 
this be true of those who at that time shall come under 
the influence of the light of divine favor and have their 
hearts filled with the Lord's spirit and truth. 

"THEY SHALL REIGN" 

The developments of that Millennial age will bring 



the willing and obedient of the human family back to 
the original perfection, the image and likeness of God, 
and once more they will have direct communication 
with the Lord and not merely his written messages 
through apostles and prophets as now. "And they 
shall reign forever and ever." This does not refer to 
the Church, whose reign has been previously described. 
The reference is to the reign of those whom the Millennial 
age shall find worthy of life eternal— all the unworthy 
being then cut off in the second death. The 
account here is in full accord with that of Matthew 25:34 
—the sheep of that age will at its close be received 
into the fullest fellowship with the Lord, the 
goats of that period being destroyed. 
The nature of the reign then to be delivered to the 

R3572 : page 173 

world we have already considered on other occasions, 
and shown that it will be the same reign or kingdom 
which at his creation was bestowed upon father Adam, 
as it is written in Psalm 8:6, "Thou madest him to have 
dominion over the works of thy hands. Thou hast put 
all things under his feet: all sheep and oxen with the 
beasts of the field and fowl of the air and fish of the 
sea." This dominion of earth was part of what father 
Adam lost by his disobedience, and was a part, therefore, 
of what our Lord Jesus purchased by his obedience 
even unto death, and is to be an element of the restitution 
to be accomplished during the Millennial reign of 
Christ. 

At the close of that reign the Kingdom shall be 
delivered up to God, even the Father, by being delivered 
over to those for whom the Father originally intended 
it, and who by that time will have been fully prepared 
to receive it. The whole world of perfect men will be 
a world of kings, though doubtless one of their number 
will serve particularly as general or representative, just 
as in the Republic every individual is a sovereign and 
from their own number they choose a sovereign, a 
servant. 

"SAYINGS FAITHFUL AND TRUE." 

Having pictured the work of restitution down to 
its consummation in the delivery of the kingdom to man, 
in harmony with the Father's intention, the address of 
the revelation changes. We are assured that these wonderful 
promises are faithful and true, that the Lord God 
of the holy prophets sent his angel to show unto his 
servants the things which must shortly come to pass. 
Then the Master speaks to all of his Church who have 
ears to hear, saying, "Behold, I come quickly: Blessed 
is he that keepeth the sayings of the prophecy of this 
book." The intimation seems to be that the book being 
symbolical, none can understand it except as its 



seals are loosed, as its message opens before the Lord's 
people; and that when its sayings, its teachings come 
to be appreciated, it may be recognized by those who 
do understand it as an evidence that the Lord's second 
advent and the establishment of his Kingdom are close 
at hand. 

This thought is further borne out by the statement of 
verse 8. As we have already seen, John the revelator 
represented those favored members of the Church who, 
living in this end of the Gospel age, are granted the 
privilege of seeing and appreciating more and more 
the things which he saw in symbol. The revelation 
being complete, John fell down before the angel who 
had given him the revelation to offer him worship. This 
may signify that in the end of this Gospel age as the 
whole Church, the John class, comes to see the unfolding 
of the divine plan, there might be a spirit or 
disposition amongst them to do too much honor to the one 
used of the Lord in communicating to them the divine 
light now due. 

The proprieties of the case are set forth to us in 
the conduct of the symbolical angel who talked to John 
and who represented some in the end of this age commissioned 
to present God's truths to his people. He 
said, "See thou do it not"— do not worship me, for I 
am not the author of this plan. I am thy fellow servant, 
a brother to all the prophets and all those who keep 
the message of this revelation. God alone should be 
worshiped: he is the Author of the great plan and will 
be the finisher of it. It is brought to our attention now 
by him because it is now "due time" for his people to 
come to an appreciation of his plans. 

"RIGHTEOUS OR FILTHY STILL." 

The same thought continues: At the time that the 
features of this symbolical revelation shall come to be 
understood and appreciated by the Lord's people, they 
may know that the time of the completion is near at 
hand. They are not to feel it necessary to hide the matter. 
"Seal not the sayings of this book, for the time is 
at hand." Furthermore, we are not to expect that the 
telling of this message, the explaining of the divine plan, 
will have the effect of converting the world. It was not 
intended to do this and will not do it. Notwithstanding 
the unfolding of the divine plan, this knowledge will 
only be for a special class for whom it was intended, 
namely, the Lord's people— "None of the wicked shall 
understand, but the wise shall understand." So far as 
the revelations of the divine plan are concerned they are 
not intended to turn the filthy to make them righteous, 
nor will they be inclined contrarywise to turn the righteous 
to sin. So far as these revelations are concerned 
they who are righteous may be righteous still, they who 
are filthy may be filthy still, they who are holy may be 
holy still. 



How true it is that Present Truth, although in 
many respects full of comfort and encouragement to 
the Church in respect to their dear friends who are out 
of Christ, has no effect whatever upon those who love 
sin, who are filthy, who are unrighteous. It appeals 
only to those who are already righteously inclined. 
This does not mean that it appeals only to those who 
are saints, who are holy. There are some who are not 
saints because they have never properly grasped the 
conditions of the divine call of the present time, but 
who are, nevertheless, righteous persons, persons who 
desire to live uprightly, honorably, honestly, who are 
sincere and truthful in their own hearts and in their 
dealings with others so far as their knowledge permits. 
To these lovers of righteousness, of truth, as well as to 
the holy, the revelations of the divine plan now unfolding 
commend themselves, and intensify their love 
for righteousness and appreciation of full consecration 
to the Lord. 

On the other hand the unrighteous and the filthy 
simply ignore this message and are not moved specially 
by it. During the Millennial Kingdom time, however, 
we may expect that the vigorous processes of the kingdom 
will correct many of these filthy and unrighteous, 
and ultimately develop many of them into lovers of 
the Light and the Truth and the Way, bringing many 
of them into full fellowship with the Lord, which will 
secure to them life everlasting. 



R3572 : page 174 

BIBLE STUDIES FOR JUNE. 

BELOW we announce the prepared lessons for June. 

Word reaches us that the dear friends who have 

adopted these studies are growing more and more interested 

in them. They open up so thorough a study of the 

topics and give all opportunity to participate that they 

supply more "meat," more spiritual nourishment, than can 

generally be obtained in the same time. 

We recommend these studies for one of the meetings 
you usually have or for a new meeting if those now held are 
all too good to be displaced. Something of this kind is surely 
needed to refresh the mind along lines already partly 
understood. 

The topic is quite sufficient for one session each on the 
four Sundays of June— say four questions or so each. If 
possible have each one who can and will read distinctly 
take a part. For instance, five could share in the first question, 
three in the second, three in the third, three in the 
fourth, thirteen in all. If there are fewer than thirteen 
willing to take part, give more than one reference to the 
more competent. In no case should an indifferent reader 
be given a lengthy selection or reference. The success of 



the study depends greatly on the wisdom of the leader, who 
should apportion the references the Sunday previous to the 
meeting, and assist the friends every way as a true "under 
shepherd," seeing that ample opportunities are afforded for 
the reverential investigation of each topic. The leader should 
briefly sum up the findings of the class on each question before 
proceeding to the next, and in conclusion should summarize 
briefly all the questions and the Scriptural answers 
found. These are the Sunday evening lessons of the Allegheny 
Church at the Bible House Chapel. 



TEMPERANCE-SELF-CONTROL. 



1. What is the importance of self-control? Prov. 25:28; 
16:32; E.125, par. 1; Z.'0 1-295 (2d col. par. 2,3); Z/01-326 
(1st and 2d cols.) 

R3573 : page 174 

2. Is self-control necessary in the interest of others? 1 Cor. 8:13; 
Z/03-43 (1st col. par. 2) to 45; Z/97-234 (2d 

col. par. 1.) 

3. Are we to be "temperate in all things"? 1 Cor. 9:25; 
Z/97-147, (2d col. par. 2); Z/97-76 (2d col. par. 1 to 4.) 

4. Does self-control imply purification of the thoughts and 
intents of the heart? 1 Jno. 3:3; Z. '99-216 (1st col. 

par. l);Z.'01-324(lstcol. par. 1,2.) 

5. Does temperance or self-control apply to our language? 
Jas. 1:19,26; Col. 4:6; Eccl. 5:2; Z/98-250 (1st 

col. par. 3); Z/99-75 (2d col. par. 1.) 

6. Does self-control extend to business affairs? 1 Tim. 6:10; 
Z/98-250 (2d. col. par. 1.) 

7. Why is temperance necessary in our eating and drinking? 
1 Cor. 10:31; Z/98-250 (2d col. par. 2.) 

8. Should we be temperate in our joys as well as in our 
sorrows? Z/98-251 (1st col. par. 1,2); Z. '05-94 

(1st col. par. 2.) 

9. Is it possible to be intemperate in studying the Scriptures 
and in attending religious meetings? F.319, par. 1; 
F.503,par. 1. 

10. What is the relation of the "new will" toward the control 
of the flesh? 1 Cor. 9:27; F.600, par. 1; F.488, 

par. 2; F.489, par. 1; Z/01-296 (1st col. par. 1,2.) 

11. What is the duty of the Church toward those "new creatures" 
who are lacking in self-control? F.148, 

par. 2; F.149, par. 1; F.150, par. 1; F.289-292. 

1 2. Why is self-control an essential qualification in an Elder? 
Titus 1:7,8; F.251, par. 2; Z/97-156 (2d col. par. 2); 

F.249, par. 2; Z/99-75 (2d col. par. 2); Z/00-195 (1st 
col. par. 3.) 

13. Why is it important that parents exercise self-control? 
Col. 3:21; F.526, par. 1; F.527, par. 1; F.528, par. 1,2; 



F.530, par. 1,2. 

14. How can suggestion be applied in teaching children self-control? 
F.551 (par. 1) to 554. 

15. How can we cultivate self-control? Z. '03-421 (1st col. 
par. 1,2);Z.'98-251 (1st col. par. 4.) 

(a) By prayer, F.149, par. 1,2. 

(b) By study of the Word, Z/02-308 (1st col. par. 1,6; 
2d col. par. 1.) 

(c) By being filled more and more with the Holy 
Spirit, Z/02-264 (2d col. par. 4,5); E.275, par. 1; 
E.283,par. 1,2. 

(d) By fasting, Z/98-45 (1st col. par. 2.) 

16. What other most important grace will naturally be developed 
by attaining a large measure of self-control? 

Z/98-251 (1st col. par. 3); Z/96-222 (1st col. par. 1.) 



R3573 : page 174 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 

page 174 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am seven months old in the Truth. I was one of those 
baptised at the Boston Convention. This blessed Truth was 
brought to me by one of your Colporteurs. For four years 
or more I had been hungering and thirsting for the true 
Gospel of Christ. I had been to several churches of different 
denominations, seeking to satisfy this soul hunger, but 
failed to get what I craved for, so at last I gave up going 
to any church, and went to God and told him I loved him 
and wanted to serve him, and him alone, and if he would 
make known to me the true way to serve him I would sacrifice 
my whole life in service unto him, even unto death; and 
there I left myself in his hands. In three months Sr. Boodry 
came to me with the DAWNS. When I first saw Sr. Boodry 
she was coming out of my neighbor's gate, and the thought 
came to me, if she comes to my door I will invite her in, 
for she may have something I want. 

This was something very unusual for me, as I am generally 
opposed to canvassers of any description, and if I saw 
them first, I would lock the door and not answer them; but 
in this case I could hardly wait till she got in my house, I 
had such a strong desire to know what she had. When she 
came in and sat down she had not spoken a half dozen words 
before I knew my prayer was answered, and I recognized my 
dear Master's voice speaking to me through her. From that 
moment to this, I have never had any doubt as regards 
this blessed Truth, and every time I take up those blessed 
DAWNS tears of rejoicing and thankfulness fill my eyes for 
God's wonderful favor to me at the present time and for 
the future blessings that are coming to all mankind in due 
time. O, praised be God's name ever more through his 
dear son, amen. 



I am going to do some volunteer work, taking my little 
boy with me to help me distribute the tracts, and he is delighted 
to do it. 

I remain ever, your Sister in Christ, 

MARGARET KELLY,-R.I. 



R3573 : page 174 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We have thought for a long time that we ought to express 
our gratitude to you for your service rendered to the 
household of faith in giving out the "meat in due season." 
It is a little over four years now since the light of Present 
Truth reached us, and well do we remember when we first 
received some of your literature, and through it learned 
of our Heavenly Father's plan. How our hearts went out 
to Him and you as His servant, and we are still very 
grateful. 

We are still rejoicing and how we long to tell the good 
news, but with our farming work we felt that there was not 
very much that we could do. But through your encouragement 
and the much advice and encouragement that we received 

R3573 : page 175 

from our dear Brother Owen, wife and I entered the 
colporteur work, feeling that if we could sell four or five 
books each day, we would be satisfied. 

Since that time, we have, by the help of our Heavenly 
Father, succeeded in selling over fourteen thousand DAWNS, 
and we are still rejoicing and have an increasing desire to 
spread the good news. We are settled here with Sister 
Roberts for the winter, as my health will not permit me to 
do much at the work in extreme weather. However, we 
will do some work here as opportunity offers. 

Pray for us that we may continue in this way until 
our Heavenly Father says, "It is enough, come up higher." 
With Christian love to yourself and all the Bible House 
friends, from us both. 

Yours in the one good hope, 

W. H. DICKERSON AND WIFE,-Ind. 



DEAR BRETHREN:-Believing it might be of interest to 
you, I will relate how the Truth as presented in Millennial 
Dawn affected a very rank outspoken Infidel, an old French 
doctor, 85 years old, an admirer of R. G. Ingersoll, of whom I 
was warned repeatedly that he was "poison" to all preachers 
and religious workers. 

Unheeding the warnings, I called upon him. After, as 
a colporteur, stating my business, which seemed to nettle 
him, he asked if the DAWN taught that the Bible was the 
inspired word of God. I told him that it did. He at once 



told me that he wanted nothing further to do with us, and he 
had enough of Christianity, and that its whole foundation was 
a fraud and a fake from beginning to end. 

I asked leave to intrude further upon his time that he 
might point out to me wherein the Bible was a fake, and for 
what purpose. 

After a weak attempt to entangle the Bible account of 
Creation, the Levitical Priesthood, etc., he left the Bible and 
attacked modern theology, and the "so-called Christian 
governments" as he expressed it. 

After being informed that our mission was not to bolster 
up any creed or theory as held by the several Churches, but 
that it was rather to show and prove the harmony of the 
Bible with itself, as in contrast with all man-made theologies, 
which are casting so much reproach upon the Bible, he 
began to give ear attentively, and finally ordered the first 
volume of DAWN. 

I have called upon him several times since, and really, 
words cannot justly describe the wonderful change in the 
spirit and disposition of this man— once haughty and sarcastic, 
he is now friendly and docile. He has become so 
interested in "The Plan of the Ages," that he has solicited 
orders among other free thinkers, and had me leave an extra 
DAWN in his office for him to sell for me. 

Just how he will use this knowledge of the Truth is left 
for time to tell. For my part I am thankful for the privilege 
of scattering a few, at least, of the precious seeds of Truth, 
even though some fall upon stony soil. 

With much Christian love, your brother in Hope, 
THOS. COX,-Missouri. 



DEAR BROTHER:- 

It will interest and gratify you to hear that I have had 
a reading of the six volumes of MILLENNIAL DAWN, which I 
got from a brother who acts as Colporteur in this locality, 
disseminating these works and other tracts and booklets 
from the branch Australian depot in Melbourne. 

I had my early teaching in the U. Presbyterian school, 
but for long years I have severed myself from that teaching, 
and for some time I have been associated with believers 
in "Life in Christ only," known as Conditional Immortality. 
Much of what truth you give we have long found 
and accepted, but I must confess that until I have been led 
to carefully read your works many of the vast problems 
in Scripture remained mysteries. I testify that your modest 
offer of a "helping hand" has been more than affording 
some light, a ray of light, but has come as an opened door, revealing 
a flood of light. Thank God for this. To him be all 
the praise. I am now re-reading these works, and shall apply 
all my intellect and intelligence to grasp this teaching. 
I have circulated quite a number of the DAWNS and created 
much interest in my circle of friends. I am in my 
62nd year and feel situated like one called at the eleventh 
hour. Yours in the faith, 



JOSEPH HEATLEY,-New Zealand. 



page 175 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

The Colporteur service is indeed richly blest to me, in accord 
with your kind prayer in letter of Feb. 23 and the Lord's 
presence does lend much of bliss in the narrow way. 
Through pain and disease I have had to smile with inward 
joy (as who can help doing, no matter how we feel, 
if the Lord smiles on us?) and sing in heart those comforting 
old hymns, "How Firm a Foundation," "Close to 
Thee," "He Justly Claims a Song from Me," "Nearer, My 
God to Thee," and also "Trusting in Jesus" and "I've a 
Message from the Lord." 

I half wondered last Thursday night whether I should 
live till morning, having taken fresh cold Wednesday 
afternoon and being in the greatest physical discomfort. 
But I was never more blissfully happy in my life, in the 
thought of the Lord's glorious presence and favor. How 
absurdly impossible that would seem to anyone outside the 
Church! And next morning your kind letter was received 
and the pain felt better and has been better since. 

But I realize that the earthly life must necessarily fade; 
yet there must be for me a narrow way of assured faith 
even in the matter of health— a path between indolence 
and reckless overwork and exposure. Am tempted sometimes 
to great disappointment that I could do so little for 
the Lord in his harvest this past winter (I am so thankful 
that it is past), yet I surely believe that his blessing 
rests upon the desire and endeavor to serve faithfully just 
as richly as though I had succeeded in my own eyes. He 
may not want this city canvassed in such a hurry as I 
would have enjoyed. His will not mine, be done. I 
praise his name. 

I had a dozen very pleasant little visits yesterday morning 
with DAWN purchasers in delivering my books. There 
are lovely people here. At one place, where they found they 
already had the book but had not read it, I left one of your 
printed sermons and secured a promise to read the "Plan" 
and permission to call after a few months to see if they 
would like the second volume. Another place the lady said 
she was a converted Catholic, had taken "Father O'Connor's" 
paper, and felt she would very much like the DAWN. 

I think I will undertake to canvass only on warm, pleasant 
mornings for a while. Your sister in the faith, 

ALICE L. DARLINGTON, -Conn. 



R3573 : page 175 
HOW THE TRUTH REACHED BRIG. -GENERAL HALL. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

While attending the St. Louis Fair about the middle of 
last September, I went through a car in the Transportation 
Building, and there picked up two tracts, "Sequel to 
Eaton-Russell Debates" and "Criticisms of Millennial Hopes 
and Prospects Examined." I read them after a time, and 
became so much interested in their contents that I procured 
the first volume of MILLENNIAL DAWN and found it 
interesting beyond anything I ever read. I thank God 
that I have found it and after a careful study of the same, 
and reading the other volumes, know that I have a correct 
understanding of many parts of the Scriptures I never had 
before. I also thank the kindly hand that placed those 
tracts in that car, and hope that some of them appealed 
to many others as they have to me. 

Previous to that time I had never heard of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. Now I'm trying with God's help to follow the path 
made so plain and clear therein. The fact that this wonderful 
work of yours appealed so strongly to me at once is a 
great encouragement to me to do the best I can. 

Faithfully yours in Christ, W. P. HALL, U.S.A. 



page 177 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVI. JUNE 15, 1905. No. 12 



CONTENTS. 

Remarkable Chronological Parallels— A Letter 
from Dr. J. Edgar 179 

Three Charts of History 181 

The Two Ministrations 186 

"The Christ, the Son of God" 186 

Messianic Hopes Inspiring 187 

Life Through Believing 188 

Boasters Defeated, Prayers Helped 189 

Spiritual Blessings for Spiritual Israel 189 

Opposition Awakens Faith 190 

A Newspaper View of the Welsh Revival 191 

Public Ministries of the Truth 192 

Niagara Falls Convention 178,192 

The New Volunteer Tracts 178 

page 178 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 



"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

--OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



GENERAL CONVENTION, NIAGARA FALLS, N.Y., JULY 8-11 



The RAILROADS of the New England, Trunk Lines, Central, 
Western and South-Western Associations will sell tickets 
to this Convention at ONE FARE AND ONE-THIRD, plus 25 cents, 
on the "Certificate Plan." You purchase a regular single-fare 
ticket to Niagara Falls, N.Y., telling your ticket-agent at the 
time that you desire a Certificate, that you are going to the 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY'S CONVENTION, and 
which will entitle you to purchase a return ticket at ONE-THIRD 
a regular fare. Hold on to that certificate, as without it you 
would be charged full fare when buying your return ticket. 
The Certificates will need to be signed, but we will publicly 
announce at the Convention the name of the brother who will 
attend to the matter for you and save you all trouble. 

ACCOMMODATIONS should be secured in advance to avoid 
confusion and trouble to yourself and the Entertainment Committee. 
Therefore, if you will attend, write at once, saying 
BRIEFLY (a) how many will be of your party; (b) how many 
of each sex; (c) if colored, so state; (d) married couples desirous 
of rooming together should so state. AS TO RATES.— 
Arrangements can be made for accommodations in boarding 
houses at $1 to $1.25 per day and at hotels at $1.50 per day up. 
These rates include meals. 

Do not write on this subject AT LENGTH. Tell us about 
things at the Convention. Give the information briefly and to 



the point. A postal card will do. Address the WATCH TOWER 
BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 612 Arch St., Allegheny, Pa. 

OTHER EXCURSIONS 

From many points there are other Special Excursions run 
every summer to Niagara Falls. Some of these are at extremely 
low rates. It will be well for each to inquire of the 
railway ticket agents of his own city on this subject, and to 
select the excursion that will suit his convenience best. But take 
our own Excursion mentioned above unless you can do BETTER. 

GET READY PROPERLY 

Prepare your heart for a blessing. Come to the Convention 
in the proper spirit— as a disciple, a learner. Come intent 
also on doing good as well as getting good, of consoling and 
encouraging others, as well as to be yourself comforted. 
Above all, come realizing that the Lord himself is the fountain 
of blessings, and remembering his word— not by might, nor by 
power, but by the Lord's Spirit are we to expect the blessings 
we hope for. In making ready and en route do not forget this 
important item, for on it your share in the Convention's blessing 
greatly depends. 

R3581 :page 178 

THE VOLUNTEER TRACTS 



The Volunteer orders are being filled rapidly now. Those 
who have examined the "ammunition" generally agree that it 
is interesting. It consists of four separate sheets folded together. 
These need not be separated. One or more of the 
four topics discussed is pretty sure to find interested readers in 
every home. 

We again commend the house to house distribution, so 
effective last year. In districts where foreigners predominate 
or where Catholics are numerous it is always best to take up 
our earlier method of distribution near to English-speaking 
Protestant churches. 

This is a work in which almost all can engage every fine 
Sunday. The tracts are supplied free as samples of our literature. 
The great Chief Reaper's words still hold good: "He 
that reapeth receiveth wages and gathereth fruit unto life 
everlasting." 



R3574 : page 179 

REMARKABLE CHRONOLOGICAL PARALLELS. 
BY J. EDGAR, M.D., AN EMINENT SURGEON, OF SCOTLAND 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-The Lord has enabled 

me to see another remarkable confirmation of 

the Parallel Dispensations, teaching that 1914 

A.D. is the date when Christendom will lose its crown, 

will be finally overthrown, and when he, "whose right 

it is," will take his power and reign. 

We recognize that the kingdom of fleshly Israel 
typified Christendom in many respects. Two prominent 
events, the division of the kingdom into Judah and Israel 
and its final overthrow as a kingdom, were undoubtedly 
types, the former of the division of Christendom at the 
time of the Reformation, the latter of its final overthrow. 
The remarkable feature which has now come to light is 
that we have in this a time-parallel. 

Under Saul, David and Solomon, the typical kingdom 
was undivided for the space of 120 years. DAWN 
II., page 50, shows that the whole period of the kings, including 
these three, was 513 years. The length of time, 
therefore, from the division of the typical kingdom on the 
death of Solomon till the removal of the crown from 
Zedekiah was 513 minus 120, equal to 393 years. The date 
of the division of Christendom into Papacy and Protestantism 
was 1521 A.D. Therefore, 393 years later, i.e., 
in 1914 A.D., we should expect the final overthrow of 
"Christendom." 

The evidence that 1521 A.D. is the date when the 
split into Papacy and Protestantism occurred is clear. 
In June, 1520, Luther received from Pope Leo X. the 
first bull of excommunication, commanding him to confess 
his faults within sixty days, or be cast out of the 
Church. On 10th December, 1520 (the third month of 
the year 1521 by the Jewish mode of reckoning), Luther 
publicly burnt this bull with a copy of the Canon Law, 
and on 4th January, 1521, the second bull was issued 
expelling him from the Romish Church. Blackie's 
Modern Cyclopedia states with regard to this: "From 
this time Luther formally separated from the Roman 
Church, and many of the principal German nobles, the 
most eminent scholars, and the University of Wittemberg, 
publicly declared in favor of the reformed doctrines 
and discipline. Luther's bold refusal to recant at 
the Diet of Worms (17th April, 1521) gave him increased 
power, while the Edict of Worms and the ban of the 
Emperor made his cause a political matter." 

THE TIME OF THE END 

MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. III., proves from a study 
of Daniel's prophecy of the 1260 days that the Time of 
the End is a period of 1 15 years, beginning with 1799 and 
ending with 1914 A.D. Wondering whether there might 
be a time-parallel here also, I reckoned back 115 years 
from 606 B.C., and reached the year 721 B.C. as corresponding 
with the year 1799 A.D. This date I found 
to be exactly five years before the death of King Hezekiah. 
Isaiah 38:5 tells us that the date of Hezekiah's 



"sickness unto death," from which he miraculously recovered, 
was fifteen years prior to his death, and was, 
therefore, ten years before the date 721 B.C., or, in 
other words, 125 years before 606 B.C. Reckoning a 
similar period back from 1914 A.D. brings us to 1789 
A.D., the year of the French Revolution, from which 
Christendom recovered, though it must have seemed to be 
a "sickness unto death." 

We are told that, after his recovery, Hezekiah gave 
way once more to his vain-glory and received the Babylonian 
ambassadors, just as France once more favored 
Papacy. We also read that he afterwards led water into 
Jerusalem for the refreshing of the Lord's people. This 
seems to shadow forth the founding of the various Bible 
Societies at the beginning of the last century, mentioned 
in DAWN III., page 51. 

THE SUN-DIAL OF AHAZ 

What struck me in examining the above was that 
the year of the French Revolution, typified by Hezekiah's 
sickness, was ten years back from the end of the 
1260 days of Daniel, the beginning of the Time of the 
End. Can it be that the sign of the sun-dial given to 
Hezekiah (Isa. 38:7,8,22) should be taken as a prophecy 
of this, the ten degrees (or steps, R.V.) representing ten 
years? Did the sign indicate symbolically that, just as 
the shadow on the sun-dial, on account of Hezekiah's 
repentance, was set back ten steps, so the date of the 
French Revolution would be set back ten years, i.e., 
that after this revolution would break out in 1789 A.D., 
ten years would require to elapse before the beginning 
of the Time of the End? The fact that the prophet 
Isaiah immediately proceeds (ch. 40) to refer to this 
Time of the End would seem to support this view. 

R3574 : page 180 

THE 2300 DAYS OF DANIEL 

The year 1846 A.D., which ended the 2300 days of 
Daniel, has been shown in DAWN, Vol. III., to be the date 
of the cleansing of the sanctuary. The corresponding 
date in the typical kingdom was 674 B.C. I cannot find 
this date specified directly in the history of the typical 
kingdom, but it is significant that at this time the wicked 
King Manasseh had reigned 42 out of his total 55 years, 
674 B.C., therefore, probably corresponds to the date 
of his repentance and consequent cleansing of the 
sanctuary. 

KING JOSIAH 

The period of the good King Josiah's activity extended 
from 651 till 641, and consisted of a cleansing 
and reforming work. It ended in 641 with the finding 



of the Book of the Law and the celebration of the Great 

Passover. The parallel period in the Gospel Age was 

from 1869 till 1879, the period when most of your cleansing 

and reforming work was done. So far as I can gather, 

it was about 1869 that you began to inquire into the 

teaching of the creeds and of the Scriptures, and it was 

in 1879 that you founded ZION'S WATCH TOWER, for 

the purpose of upholding the doctrine of the ransom in 

all its fulness against the attacks of Mr. Barbour and 

others, and of announcing the Great Passover, the resurrection 

of the "dead in Christ" in the year 1878 A.D. 

and the passing-over of the feet-members since that date 

at the moment of death. 

THE NUMBER FORTY 

When we turn back to the early history of the 
typical kingdom, we find that Saul, David and Solomon 
each reigned 40 years. It is clear that the reign of Saul 
represents the Jewish Age, that of David the Gospel 
Age, and that of Solomon the Millennial Age. The fact 
that the duration of each reign was 40 years indicates 
that it represented a complete period of testing and 
sifting. This would appear to be the thought underlying 
the number 40 in all the instances in which it is 
used in the Scriptures. For instance, there were the 40 
years' temptation of the children of Israel in the wilderness, 
Christ's 40 days' temptation, etc. They all seem 
to foreshadow the 40 years of harvest at the end of the 
Jewish, of the Gospel, and (possibly) of the Millennial 
Ages. 

THREE DAYS AND THREE NIGHTS 

It is clear from the Scriptures that Jesus rose on the 
first day of the week (Mark 16:2), and also that this was 
"the third day" after his death (Luke 24:21,46; 1 Cor. 15:4; 
also Lev. 23:11). It follows that he must have 
been crucified on a Friday. That this is of importance 
in estimating the dates of Jesus' birth and death, is 
pointed out in DAWN II., p. 60. Some object to this 
that Jesus in saying (Matt. 12:40) that he would be 
three days and three nights in the heart of the earth, 
contradicted the statement by the Apostle Paul that he 
rose on the third day. Those who reason in this way 
have failed to note that the phrase used by Jesus was 
purely idiomatic, and implied that he would be in the 
heart of the earth "till the third day." The proof of 
this is to be found in Esther 4:16; 5:1; Gen. 42:17,18; 
2 Chron. 10:5,12. God is his own interpreter. 

THE YEAR OF JUBILEE 

I had always taken it for granted that the year of 
Jubilee was an ecclesiastical year; but on studying this 
subject recently, I noticed that the trumpet was to 



sound on the day of atonement, the 10th day of the 7th 
month (Lev. 25:9), and presumably, therefore, began 
on that day. Accordingly, the year of Jubilee was not 
an ecclesiastical year, i.e., from Spring to Spring, but 
a civil year from Autumn to Autumn. 

As every 7th year was a Sabbath year, it follows 
that the 49th year was a Sabbath year. It would seem 
as if these were ecclesiastical years. If so, then the 
Jubilee year began in the middle of the 49th year. But 
it was called the 50th year! Should one reason from this 

R3575 : page 180 



TIME-PARALLELS. 

PERIOD OF 393 YEARS FROM THE DIVISION OF THE 
TYPICAL KINGDOM TILL ITS FINAL OVERTHROW. 

B.C. 999 

Division of Kingdom of Fleshly Israel into 
Judah and Ephraim— 2 Chron. 10; 11:1-4. 

PERIOD OF 125 YEARS. 

B.C. 731 

Hezekiah's "sickness unto death," followed by 

(1) Alliance with Babylon; 

(2) Supply of water to Jerusalem.— 
Isa. 38, 39; 2 Chron. 32:30. 

B.C. 606 

Final overthrow of the typical Kingdom. 
-2 Chron. 36:11-21; Ezek. 21:25-27. 

PERIOD OF 393 YEARS FROM THE DIVISION OF 
CHRISTENDOM TILL ITS FINAL OVERTHROW. 

A.D. 1521 

Division of "Christendom" into Protestantism 

and Papacy at Diet of Worms. 

PERIOD OF 125 YEARS. 

A.D. 1789 

The French Revolution, followed by 

(1) Alliance with Papacy. 

(2) Supply of truth through Bible Societies. 

A.D. 1914 

Final overthrow of Nominal Christendom. 



R3574:page 180 



that it was called the 50th year because it was the 50th 
civil year? The entrance into Canaan took place in the 
Springtime at the beginning of an ecclesiastical year. 
Six months afterwards their 2nd civil year began, while 
it was still the middle of their 1 st ecclesiastical year. 
Consequently, their 50th civil year began, while it was 
still the middle of their 49th ecclesiastical year. If this 
be the interpretation, it is evident that the land had rest 
on these occasions, not two years, but only eighteen 
months. 

It would seem as if this were a wise provision of the 
Mosaic Law. It provided that at the beginning of each 

R3576 :page 181 

THREE CHARTS OF HISTORY, SHOWING VARIOUS PARALLELS, 
ALL CONFIRMATORY OF OUR CHRONOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS. 

R3575 :page 182 

year of Jubilee, owing to the suspension of work on the 
land during the previous six months, the restitution of 
all things was rendered easier of accomplishment; and 
also after the Jubilee was over, and each had returned 
to his own land, an opportunity was given to him to 
prepare the land and get his crop ready for the Spring 
harvest and the celebration of the Passover and of 
Pentecost. 

There seem, however, to be some deeper meanings 
in this arrangement. (1) The commencement of the 
Jubilee year on the day of atonement pointed forward 
to the time when the antitypical Jubilee would begin 
on the antitypical day of atonement, the end of the 
Gospel Age. (2) Brother Hemery of London mentioned 
to me some time ago that he had noticed that events 
which occurred in the Spring foreshadowed blessings 
for the Church, while those which occurred in the Autumn 
foreshadowed blessings for the world. This appears to 
me to be a natural arrangement, as Spring is the beginning 
of the ecclesiastical year, whereas Autumn is the 
beginning of the civil year. Applying this thought, we 
find that the Passover and Pentecost, etc., foreshadowed 
blessings for the Church, whereas the Atonement, the 
Feast of Tabernacles and the Jubilee foreshadowed 
blessings for the world. 

I am, with love in the Lord to you and to all the 
dear ones in Christ Jesus, 

Yours faithfully, 

JOHN EDGAR. 



A LATER LETTER 
DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 



The Lord has guided me to the discovery of another 
confirmation of the Chronology as set forth in MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. In studying the Parallel Dispensations, I 
noted that the 70th week of Daniel's prophecy (Dan. 9:24-27) 
from 29 till 36 A.D. had its parallel as regards 
both time and events in the Gospel Age from 1874 till 
1881 A.D. (DAWN II., p.219). Thinking that the events 
at the beginning of the 70 weeks might also have parallels 
in the Gospel Age, I noted your arguments in DAWN 
II., p. 67, proving that the 70 weeks dated from Nehemiah's 
commission to build the walls of Jerusalem in 
the 20th year of Artaxerxes (Neh. 2:1), whereas usually 
they are reckoned as beginning at the time of Ezra's 
commission 13 years earlier (Ezra 7:7). I noted also 
your proofs that the former must have been in the year 
454 B.C. Accordingly the latter must have been in the 
year 467 B.C. 

Rollin, in his Ancient History of the Medes and Persians, 
agrees with this. In Book 6, sect. 18, he says 
that Xerxes died in 473 B.C. and quotes as authorities 
Ctesias, c.ii; Diodorus, Book xi. p. 52; Justin, Book iii., 
ch. 1. He says Xerxes reigned 12 years; and in Book 
7, sect. 1, he states that Artaxerxes was crowned in 
473 B.C., and reigned 49 years. In accordance with this, 
he mentions in sect. 6 of Book 7, that Ezra's commission 
was in 467 B.C., and Nehemiah's in 454 B.C. Regarding 
the latter he states: "Artaxerxes immediately caused 
a decree to be drawn up that the walls and gates of 
Jerusalem should be rebuilt, and Nehemiah as Governor 
of Judea was appointed to put this decree in execution. 
It is from this decree, communicated by Artaxerxes 
in the 20th year of his reign, for the rebuilding of 
the walls of Jerusalem, that we date the beginning of 
the 70 weeks mentioned in the famous prophecy of 
Daniel, after which the Messiah was to appear and to be 
put to death." 

By deducting 490 years from 1881 A.D., we get the 
year 1391 A.D., corresponding with 454 B.C. The year 
1378 A.D., 13 years earlier, will, therefore, correspond 
with 467 B.C. 

I. EZRA'S COMMISSION IN 467 B.C. 

On consulting books on the Reformation, I was not 
long in discovering that the year 1378 A.D., corresponding 
with the year 467 B.C., is a very important 
date indeed. It is the year of the Great Papal Schism, 
when Wycliffe came out as the Reformer. 

Workman in Dawn of the Reformation, p. 172:— 
"Wycliffe's spiritual earnestness was shocked, his theory 
destroyed by the spectacle of two Popes each claiming 
to be the sole head of the Church, each labelling the 
other as Antichrist. To Wycliffe, the year of the Schism, 
1378, was the crucial year of his life. He first urged that 
both Popes should be set aside as having little in common 
with the Church of the Holy God. From this 



position of neutrality he quickly passes into one of antagonism 
to the Papacy itself." 

Archbishop Trench in Medieval Church History:— "Gregory 
XL died on 27th March, 1378, and the Papal Schism 
broke out. The year 1378 marked the turning-point in 
Wycliffe's career. Hitherto he had concerned himself 
with matters of mixed ecclesiastical and political import, 
but henceforth he devoted himself exclusively to 
doctrinal matters and came out as the Reformer. He 
began in earnest the translation of the Bible into English, 
and took the next decisive step by an open attack, 
forced upon him by his studies of the Bible, against 
Transubstantiation. The effect was immediate. The 
University itself turned against him. He was forbidden 
to teach. Ever afterwards he did, in nearly all his writings, 
introduce in some way a statement of his views upon 
Transubstantiation." 

Can anything be more conclusive than that we have 
here a parallel, not only in time, but also in the events 
recorded between Ezra's commission in 467 B.C. and 
Wycliffe's acts in 1378 A.D.? Ezra in leading back from 
Babylon many of the Israelites, and bringing with him 
the vessels for the service of the house of God (Ezra 7:19,20) 
did for the literal temple what Wycliffe by his 
doctrinal reforms, especially by his attack upon the 
doctrine of Transubstantiation, did for the spiritual 
temple. 

II. NEHEMIAH'S COMMISSION IN 454 B.C. 

The year 1391 A.D. corresponds with the year 454 
B.C. when Nehemiah received his commission to rebuild 
the walls of Jerusalem. Wycliffe died in 1384, 
before he could personally carry into effect all that he 
had longed for, but his works followed him. It was John 
Hus of Bohemia who more particularly took up the work 
of reform after Wycliffe's death. Though it was in the 
early years of the 15th century, up till his martyrdom in 
1415 A.D., that his work attracted general notice, yet 
it was in 1391 that Hus might be said to have received 
his commission to rebuild the walls of Spiritual Jerusalem, 
for it was in that year that he became acquainted 
with the works of Wycliffe (Blackie's Modern Cyclopedia, 
Vol. IV., p.483). 

Thatcher and Schwill in Europe in the Middle Ages, 
p. 539:— "Political considerations, the alliance between 

R3577 : page 183 

Henry V. and the Papacy, led to repeated persecutions 
of his followers, and so all of Wycliffe's efforts at Reform 
came to nothing. But the cry for the reform of the 
Church was never again hushed in Europe. Through 
one of his pupils, John Hus of Prague, his teachings 
were carried to Bohemia, where they also caused a 
great uprising." "Hus condemned its (Papacy's) 



worldliness, its right of secular possessions, and objected 
to the supremacy of the Pope. The Bible, according to 
him, ought to be the sole rule of faith." 

Professor Lodge in Close of the Middle Ages, p. 207:— 
"The systematic teaching of Hus was for the most 
part derived from the great English teacher, John 
Wycliffe. It is important to remember that the Hussite 
movement had a secular as well as an ecclesiastical side." 

Burnet in History of the Reformation, p. 9:— "Before 
the end of the 14th century, Wycliffe had extended his 
line of attack to some of the special doctrines of Western 
theology: but the movement which he began, though its 
effects were evanescent in his own country, became in 
the hands of more stimulating advocates a genuine 
national force in Bohemia." 

III. THE SEVEN WEEKS OF DAN. 9:25 

Is there anything in the Gospel Age to explain the 
mysterious division of the 70 weeks into 7 and 62 and 
1? By seven weeks is meant a period of 49 years. As 
the seven weeks date from Nehemiah's commission, the 
year under consideration will be 1440 A.D. This is the 
time that Printing was invented, a very important 
factor in the Reformation. 

Archbishop Trench in Medieval Church History, p. 423:— 
"Then while abuses were never rifer, while the 
lives of the clergy were never fuller of scandal, while the 
Papal Court was never more venal, nor could less endure 
the beating upon it of that fierce light which leaves 
nothing hid,— the invention of Printing (1440) multiplied 
a thousandfold every voice which was raised to 
proclaim an abuse or to denounce a corruption. And 
marching hand in hand with this wondrous invention 
there was the Revival of Learning." 

IV. THE RETURN FROM THE BABYLONIAN CAPTIVITY (536 B.C.) 
AND THE CONSEQUENT LAYING OF THE FOUNDATIONS 
OF THE TEMPLE AT JERUSALEM 

The restoration was not begun, but was finished by 
Ezra in 467 B.C. In accordance with the Edict of Cyrus 
(536 B.C.) many of the Israelites returned from Babylon 
and laid the foundations of the Temple. Ezra 4:24, 
however, states that the work then "ceased unto the 
2nd year of the reign of Darius, king of Persia." The 
length of time from the Edict of Cyrus in 536 B.C. till 
the end of the 70 weeks in 36 A.D. is 572 years. Accordingly, 
the date in the Gospel Age which corresponds with 
536 B.C. is 1881 minus 572, equal to 1309 A.D. This year 
is of importance as marking the first year of what is 
universally known as the "Babylonian Captivity" of the 
Papacy at Avignon, which is generally recognized as 
forming the foundation of the Reformation. It is curious 
that the year 536, which in the Jewish Age concluded the 
Babylonian Captivity of the Israelites, corresponds with 



the year 1309 in the Gospel Age, which began the 
"Babylonian Captivity" of the Papacy. [May we not 
reverse the form of this statement and say that it rather 
marked the first favorable condition for the liberation 
of the Truth, which had long been in bondage to Papacy? 
—Editor.] 

Archbishop Trench in Medieval Church History, p. 275:— 
"Then in 1305 the French king contrived that the 
choice should fall on one who had so sold himself to 
carry out the wishes and policy of France that he did not 
feel anywhere safe from popular indignation except on 
the northern side of the Alps and under the protection 
of him whom he had engaged to serve. After a brief 
residence at Bordeaux and then at Poitiers, Clement 
V. fixed his seat at Avignon. There from 1309 to 1377 
he and six following Popes resided. The 'Babylonish 
Captivity' is the name by which this voluntary exile 
in a foreign land with a servile dependence on a foreign 
power, which this exile entailed, is often designated, the 
name having been suggested by the 70 years or thereabouts 
for which this exile endured. The Popes could no 
longer be regarded as independent umpires and arbiters. 
Nevertheless, they advanced claims to a universal 
monarchy which stood in ridiculous contrast with their 
own absolute dependence on the Court of France, a 
dependence so abject that there were times when the 
Pope dared not give away the smallest preferment without 
permission first obtained of the French king." 

Professor Lodge in Close of the Middle Ages, p. 30:— 
"In 1309 Clement V. fixed his residence at Avignon. 
As long as the Popes continued to live there, they were 
exposed to overwhelming French influence, and could 
hardly escape the charge made both from England and 
from Germany, that they were mere vassals of the King 
of France. It says much for the vitality of the Papal 
System that the 'Babylonian Captivity,' as the next 
70 years have been called, did not result in the complete 
loss not only of the Italian Provinces, but of all spiritual 
authority in Europe." 

Workman in Dawn of the Reformation, Vol. I, p. 16:— 
"The study of the Reformation should always begin with 
Avignon. The greatness of Luther and Calvin, as contrasted 
for instance with Marsiglio, Wycliffe and Gerson, 
does not lie so much in greater zeal, more thorough 
methods, more logical aim, as in their greater opportunity. 
The fulness of the time had come." 

V. THE REBUILDING OF THE TEMPLE IN THE SECOND TO THE 
SIXTH YEARS OF DARIUS 

As already mentioned, it was only the foundations 
of the temple which were laid on the return from Babylon. 
Building operations were not properly begun until 
the second year of the reign of Darius Hystaspes, king 
of Persia, and the temple was finished in the sixth year 
of his reign (Ezra 4:24; 6:15). Ussher's chronology gives 



the second year of Darius as 520 B.C., and the various 
authorities seem to corroborate this by placing the date 
of his accession in the year 521. According to this, the 
rebuilding of the temple began 16 years after the return 
from Babylon. The corresponding date in the Gospel 
Age is 1325 (equals 1309 plus 16). The greatest work 
about this time was the publication of a book against 
the Papacy by Marsiglio of Padua, but all the authorities 
which I consulted were unanimous in stating that the 
year of publication of this book was 1324, not 1325 B.C. 
Accordingly, I was forced to conclude that there was no 
time-parallel here, or, as seemed more likely, that the 
second year of Darius was 521, and not 520 as affirmed. 
I spent several days in searching all the works on 
the history of Persia to which I had access, and at 
length my efforts were rewarded. Professor Rawlinson, 
in his Five Great Monarchies, Vol. 3, p. 404, states that 
Darius mounted the throne on 1st January, 521 B.C., 

R3577 : page 184 

and he then adds in a footnote on page 408, in connection 
with the statements of Ezra 5:2 and Haggai 1:14,15, 
that "according to Jewish modes of reckoning" the 24th 
day of the 6th month of the second year of Darius, 
would be September, 521 B.C., 8-1/2 months after Darius' 
accession." There can be no doubt that this is the true 
explanation, as both Haggai and Ezra would reckon by 
the ecclesiastical year beginning in the Spring. 

The rebuilding of the temple would, therefore, 
occupy the four years from 521 to 517 B.C., and the 
corresponding years in the Gospel Age would be 1324 to 
1328 A.D. It was in 1324 that Marsiglio published his 
famous book, Defensor Pacis (Defender of the Peace), 
and in 1328 he died. In the autumn of the same year 
the Emperor Lewis, who had been induced to attempt 
some of the reforms advocated by Marsiglio, deprived of 
his (Marsiglio's) advice retired from Rome and relinquished 
the attempt. 

Archbishop Trench in his Medieval Church History, 
p. 280, in describing the story of the "Babylonish Captivity," 
says:— "As might easily be supposed, words 
bolder than had ever been uttered before, words striking 
at the root of the Papal system, and leaving none of 
its prerogatives unassailed, had found utterances during 
this time; and more ominous than all the rest, these had 
not come from such as stood avowedly without the 
Church's pale, but from those within. Foremost among 
the threatening births of the first half of the 14th century 
is a book, the "Defensor Pacis," written by a physician 
of Padua, Marsiglio by name (died 1328), in the 
immediate service of Lewis of Bavaria. No later hand 
has traced with a finer historical tact the mundane conditions 
which first made possible, and then favored, the 
upgrowth of the Papal power; none has searched out 
with more unpitiable logic the weak places of the Papal 



armor. An epoch-making book, Neander calls it; 
and certain, for good or for evil, it was far in advance 
of its age; so far, that it is difficult to understand how it 
could very strongly have influenced its age." 

Workman in Dawn of the Reformation, Vol. I, p. 80:— 
"In June, 1324, with the help of his friend, John of 
Jandun,— 'the two pests,' as the Pope called them, 'from 
the abyss of Satan'— he wrote his great work in the incredible 
space of two months. Two years later, in the 
summer of 1326, he joined himself to Lewis. He became 
the leader in a band of visionaries who urged the emperor 
on in his struggle with 'the great dragon and old serpent,' 
John XXII. In treatise after treatise, both Marsiglio 
and Ockham criticised the nature of the Papal power, 
denied its claims and demanded the restoration of 
secular supremacy." Page 85:— "The works of Marsiglio 
give us in clear outline the ideals which now regulate the 
progress of Europe. The bolts which he forged have 
shattered the doctrine of divine right and the temporal 
claims of Papacy. In his emphasis of the value of Scripture, 
though the hand that wrote was the hand of 
Marsiglio, the voice seems the voice of Luther: in his 
call to the laity he foreshadowed Wesley: in his views as 
to the rights of separate congregations, he was a forerunner 
of the Independents." 

Professor Lodge in his work, The Close of the Middle 
Ages, p. 98, speaking about the struggle between the 
Emperor Lewis and Pope John XXII. , says:— "No 
previous contest between the rival heads of Christendom 

R3578 : page 184 

had produced so much literature, or literature of such 
merit and significance. Michael of Cesena, the General 
of the Franciscan Order, John of Jandun, and William 
of Ockham, the Invincible Doctor,' exhausted the subtleties 
of the scholastic philosophy in their championship 
of the imperial position against Papal pretensions. 
Above all, Marsiglio of Padua, in his great work, the 
Defensor Pacis, examined with equal acuteness and insight 
the fundamental relations of the spiritual and 
secular powers, and laid down principles which were 
destined to find, at any rate, partial expression in the 
Reformation. This outburst of literary and philosophical 
activity was due in great part to the fact that for the 
first time in the long strife between Papacy and Empire, 
the struggle involved doctrinal ideas. Hitherto, the contest 
had been between Church and State, and the Church 
had been for the most part united. But on the present 
occasion the Church was profoundly divided. In spite 
of all the advantages on the side of the Emperor, the 
quarrel ended, not exactly in a Papal triumph, yet in the 
complete and humiliating discomfiture of Lewis. Doubtless 
the personal character of the Emperor contributed 
essentially to this result. He could take strenuous 
measures under the influence of a stronger will, but when 



he lost his adviser, Marsiglio, his habitual irresolution 
and his superstitious dread of excommunication returned 
upon him. In January, 1328, he was crowned 
Emperor by two bishops who had been excommunicated. 
In May, Peter di Corvara, a Franciscan friar, nominated 
by the Emperor, and accepted by the acclamations of 
the citizens, assumed the Papal title as Nicholas V. 
Lewis had committed himself to an enterprise which he 
had neither the moral nor the material force to carry 
through. He retired to the Ghibelline strongholds in the 
north, accompanied by his Antipope. The Roman 
populace, with characteristic inconstancy, expelled the 
imperial partisans, and opened their gates to the Orsini 
and the Neapolitan troops." 

The following extract from Poole's Age of Wycliffe, 
p. 28, indicates some of the chief thoughts in Marsiglio's 
teaching. "Marsiglio's chief work, the Defensor Pacis, 
was written in 1324, while he was still at the University 
of Paris. He taught Republicanism. The community 
of all the citizens or their majority, expressing its will 
either by elected representatives or in their assembled 
mass, is the supreme power in the State. The people 
must choose a ruler, but to the hereditary principle he 
will make no concession whatever. The name Church 
belongs to the entire body of Christian men. It is intolerable 
that its prerogatives should be usurped by 
the sacerdotal order. Excommunication, for instance, 
cannot rightly be decreed by any priest or any council 
of priests. The verdict belongs to the community of 
the faithful. The power of the clergy is entirely restricted 
to spiritual affairs; it can only be given effect to by spiritual 
means. Of heresy as such there is but one judge, 
Jesus Christ, and his sentence is in the world to come. 
Errors of opinion lie beyond the cognisance of human 
judicature. In the New Testament, bishop and priest 
are convertible designations of the same persons, and 
the popedom is a later institution of which the historical 
growth is clearly traceable. St. Peter had no 
authority over the other apostles; but even supposing 
he had, it is hazardous to assert that he communicated 
it to his successors in the Roman See, since we cannot 
say for certain that he himself ever visited, far less was 
Bishop of, Rome at all. The Pope in his quality of 
Christian Bishop can claim no right of supreme judgment 

R3578 : page 185 

in human things, even over the clergy. The keys of 

St. Peter open and close the door of forgiveness, but forgiveness 

is the act of God, determined by the repentance 

of the sinner. The Turnkey is not the Judge. Marsiglio 

goes through the standard arguments in favor of the 

Papal assumptions, and rejects them one after another, 

partly by his resolute insistence on a rational interpretation 

of the texts of Scripture, partly by the essential 

distinction between the sacred calling of the priesthood 



and their extrinsic or worldly connections. My kingdom 
is not of this world. The ministers of the Church should 
be supported by those to whom they minister, but only 
in the necessaries of life; but no one of the faithful is 
bound by Scripture to pay them a tenth or any other 



B.C. 536 

Return of the Israelites from the Babylonian Captivity 
to restore the Temple at Jerusalem. Only 
the foundations laid. (Ezra 1:1-3; 3:10.) 

B.C. 521 

Restoration of the Temple in 2d to 6th years of 
Darius (Ezra 4:24; 6:15). 

B.C. 467 

Ezra's commission in the 7th year of Artaxerxes 

to restore vessels to Temple. (Ezra 7:7,19.) 

"Babylonian Captivity" of the Papacy. 

A.D. 1309 

The beginning of what is known as the "Babylonian 
Captivity" of the Papacy at Avignon. Generally 
recognized as the foundation of the Reformation. 

A.D. 1324 

Publication by Marsiglio of Padua of the 

"Defensor Pacis." 

A.D. 1378 

The year of the Great Papal Schism which 

caused Wycliffe in same year 

(1) to come out as the Reformer, 

(2) to translate Bible into English, 

(3) to renounce transubstantiation. 

The Seventy Weeks— 490 Years. 

7 Weeks 

B.C. 454 

Nehemiah's commission in 20th year of Artaxerxes 

to rebuild walls of Jerusalem. (Neh. 2:1.) 

Troublous times. 

A.D. 1391 

Year when Hus became acquainted with Wycliffe's 
writings. He carried Wycliffe's teachings into effect. 
Troublous times. 

62 Weeks 

B.C. 405 

End of the 7 weeks, followed by more favorable times. 



A.D. 1440 

Invention of printing followed by more favorable times. 

70th Week 

A.D. 29 

Advent of Messiah as Prince. 

A.D. 33 

Crucifixion and resurrection of Jesus. 

A.D. 36 

Beginning of the casting off of the Jews 

at end of exclusive favor to Jews. 

A.D. 1874 

Advent of Messiah as King. 

A.D. 1878 

Resurrection of the Saints. 

Beginning at Berlin Congress of return of favor to the Jews. 

Beginning of the casting-off of the Church. 

A.D. 1881 

End of exclusive favor to Church. 

A.D. 69 

Destruction of Jerusalem and of Jews' national polity. 

A.D. 1914 

Full loss of favor to Christianity. 

A.D. 70 

Full loss of favor to the Jews, and anarchy. 

A.D. 1915 

Destruction of nominal Christendom in anarchy. 

Full return of favor to the Jews. 



part of his income. The clergyman might well supply 

his needs by other means, as by handicraft, after the example 

of the apostles. But now that the Church has 

been enriched by ample endowments, the question arises, 

To whom do these belong? Marsiglio replies that the 

property can only belong to the person or persons who 

gave it, or to the State. Nor can the clergyman claim 

the entire use of it: he is the administrator of a Trust, 

and what is left over after his daily food and raiment are 

supplied, must be distributed to the poor. Wycliffe was 

seen by Pope Gregory XL to be the successor of 

Marsiglio." 

I have given this somewhat fully, as it is so much in 
line with our own views, setting them down in the order 
in which they occurred to me in the course of my investigations. 
On reviewing them, I feel more certain than ever 



that the hand of God has been in the affairs of men. 
Such correspondencies could not be due to chance. 

R3579 : page 185 

Prior to 536 B.C. and 1309 A.D., fleshly and Spiritual 

Israel were completely in the power of Babylon, but these 

years marked the turning-point, and then step by step 

the Great Reform went on. The people had been punished 

for their sins, but now God was beginning to bestow 

his favor upon them for a season in order to prepare 

them for the Messiah. Each of the items noted above 

was a distinct step in the reformation of Jews and Christians. 

So much for the beginning of the 70 weeks. The 

events at the end of the 70 weeks are detailed in DAWN II. 

The prophecy of the 70 weeks does not, however, 
indicate when the final overthrow would take place, and, 
except for the reference to the seven weeks, no mention 
is made of any events in the interval between the commission 
of Nehemiah and the 70th week. In line with 
this, we find that the historical canon of the Old Testament 
ends with Ezra and Nehemiah. It is evident that 
God did not intend to indicate the Lutheran movement 
in connection with this prophecy. This might have 
appeared strange to me had I not formerly seen that this 
movement was typified by the division of the Kingdom 
of Israel on the death of Solomon. All the above stages 
of reform were in the Church, but Luther's reform was a 
complete revolt, resulting in a division of the Kingdom, 
and was, therefore, best represented by the division of 
the typical Kingdom of Israel before its final overthrow 
by Nebuchadnezzar. 

Dear Brother, I shall be glad to hear what you 
think of these time-parallels. So far as I can judge at 
present, they seem to me to be very conclusive, and have 
helped to confirm me very strongly in the opinion that 
your views regarding the times are correct. I feel convinced. 
The "Truth is mighty and will prevail." 
Yours in Him, JOHN EDGAR. 

R3579 : page 186 

Below we give an outline chart built upon the Bible chronology 
presented in MILLENNIAL DAWN and embodying our original "Chart of the 
Ages." It presents additionally several new features, "parallels," which no 
doubt will be both interesting and instructive. It is by Bro. U. G. Lee. 

THE TWO MINISTRATIONS 

If the ministration of condemnation be glory, much more doth the 
ministration of righteousness exceed in glory. 2 Cor. 3:9. 



R3579 : page 186 



THE CHRIST, THE SON OF GOD. 

--JOHN 20:31. -JUNE 25.- 

Golden Text:— "But these are written, that ye might 
believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that 
believing ye might have life through his name." 

OUR Golden Text is a very appropriate one for a 
review lesson, preparatory to a new course of 
studies in the Old Testament. We have been considering 
the testimonies of the Evangelists respecting the 
words and mighty works of him who spake as never 
man spake, and who, as the finger of God, as a 
small manifestation of divine power, cast out devils, 
healed the sick, awakened the dead. John sums up the 
object, the purpose, of these records, saying that they 
were written to the intent that we might believe on Jesus 
as the Christ, the Son of God. 

Some in our day, totally misunderstanding the divine 
plan with reference to human salvation, would be inclined 
to say— What difference whether we believe that 
Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, or believe merely 
that he was an ordinary man, a wise and good man, 
the son of Joseph? Would not his conduct and teachings 
be just the same in either event? And is it not the 
teachings of Jesus and their moral influence that we 
seek as a power over men rather than any faith in him? 
What is the value of faith anyway? is it not works that 
we wish? If a man have good works without faith 
would he not be just as acceptable to God as if he had 

R3580 : page 186 

faith? In what way would faith profit or benefit any? 

We answer that this is human reasoning merely, 
and that it ignores the divine plan and record, which is 
to the effect that "without faith it is impossible to please 
God." It seems strange to some— impossible to believe 
this Scriptural declaration— to accept the fact that an 
imperfect man with faith is acceptable to God, while the 
best man in the world without faith would be unacceptable. 
Nevertheless, this is the divine arrangement 
respecting the work of God which he is accomplishing 
during this Gospel age. 

KNOWLEDGE AND WORKS BY AND BY. 

The Scriptures indicate to us that by and by the 
knowledge of the Lord shall be so complete, so fill 

R3580 : page 187 

the earth, that at that time the word faith will have 
practically lost its present meaning, knowledge taking 
the place of what is now termed faith. In that time 



knowledge and works will be what the Lord will require 
of mankind. All the avenues of knowledge will be open 
to the human family, the knowledge of the glory of God 
will fill the whole earth as the waters cover the great 
deep, and with that knowledge obedience will be required 
—obedience to the extent of ability, and increasing 
ability will be the reward of every effort until, at 
the close of the Millennial age, all who will may actually 
have attained full perfection of human nature that was 
lost in Eden. That will be the age of works, as we read 
in Revelation 20:12. The whole world will stand on 
trial for life eternal, and their judgment will be in harmony 
with the principles already enunciated in the Word 
of God, and the decision will be "according to their 
works"— not according to their faith, as it is with us in 
this Gospel age. 

During this Gospel age the Lord is seeking a certain 
class able to exercise faith, a class whose conduct will 
be largely influenced by their faith. It is this class that 
is addressed throughout the Scriptures, and their faith 
is continually appealed to as in our text— "These things 
are written that ye might believe that Jesus is the 
Christ, the Son of God." The Apostle declares that 
God's method of dealing seems foolish to the world— 
"It has pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to 
save them that believe." The world thinks it strange 
that believers should be saved on account of their belief 
rather than from the standpoint of works. But whoever 
wants to avail himself of the present privileges of this 
Gospel dispensation must accept the Lord's terms or 
none. It is he and not the Evangelist who has decided 
that faith is an essential. First, before we can come to 
God, we must believe that he is and that he will reward 
those who seek him, those who desire to come into heart-relationship 
with him. Whoever cannot thus believe 
in advance is barred from coming to God at all in this 
present time. If he exercises faith to this extent he may 
go on to still greater and deeper and broader faith. 

To him who seeks to thus approach God in fellowship, 
the Lord is pleased to point out that sinners can 
have no relationship to him except they come through 
the appointed Mediator who redeemed us with his precious 
blood and made possible our reconciliation with 
the Father. If the believer accepts this as the divine 
provision he may rejoice in the thought that Christ 
died for our sins according to the Scriptures, that he 
rose again on the third day for our justification. If 
he cannot believe this he must stop just where he is— 
he finds no access into divine favor and fellowship. He 
may find access into errors and false doctrines, but he 
can find no fellowship, no assistance from God, no correct 
information respecting the divine plan. If he takes 
this step, accepts Christ through faith, then he may 
have peace with God through Jesus Christ our Lord. 
Still, faith will be necessary if he would go on. To the 
justified believers during this Gospel age God has been 



pleased to make known further riches of his grace, 
namely, the call of the Church to joint-heirship with the 
Lord in his Kingdom, "If so be that we suffer with him 
that we may also be glorified together."— Rom. 8:17. 

But this inspired hope can only be ours to the 
extent that we exercise still further faith in God, in his 
love, and in the messages which he has sent us through 
his Son and through the apostles and prophets. Even 
if these be accepted, and we have thus "access into the 
grace of God wherein we stand, hoping for the glory of 
God," it will be necessary for us to still exercise faith 
in order to make progress in the narrow way thus 
entered and to ultimately attain the glory, honor and 
immortality promised. Thus it is written, "Be thou 
faithful unto death and I will give thee a crown of 
life," and again, "This is the victory that overcometh 
the world, even thy faith." So we see that faith marks 
every step of progress for those who are the called according 
to the divine purpose during this Gospel age. 

PARTICULAR FAITH NECESSARY. 

Another mistake frequently made is to suppose 
that the faith which God requires is a vague and indefinite 
one— anything. On the contrary, the Scriptures 
delineate very particularly the kind of faith acceptable 
to God. We have already shown as a first prerequisite 
a faith in the personality of God and in his 
willingness to be approached by his creatures; second, a 
faith in him, that he is the Way, the Truth and the Life, 
by whom alone we can approach the Father. Our text 
emphasizes this thought of a particular faith, declaring 
that the faith must be that Jesus is the Christ, the Son 
of the living God. What is implied in this thought, the 
Christ the Son of God? It means more, far more than a 
mere belief that Jesus lived and Jesus died, a man of 
Nazareth. The word Christ signifies Messiah and Messiah 
signifies God's anointed king. For four thousand 
years the Lord has been making gradually known to 
mankind through the prophets and apostles that he will 
ultimately establish a Kingdom of righteousness in the 
earth, "under the whole heavens." That through this 
Kingdom for which we pray, "Thy Kingdom come," 
all mankind are ultimately to be blessed and righteousness 
established in the earth upon a sure footing, and all 
sin and iniquity be overthrown, and this Kingdom is to 
be under the control of Messiah, the great King, the 
divinely appointed Ruler. The thought of our text, 
then, is that Jesus must be recognized as more than a 
man who died; he must be recognized as the long-promised 
King of the world and as the Son of the Highest. 

MESSIANIC HOPES INSPIRING. 

To be without any hope of a future would make the 
present existence terrible; to think of death as ending 



all would be to rob life of its chief blessing and hope. 
Fortunately but few of mankind are in this absolutely 
hopeless condition; but to attract attention away from 
the divine plan, and its reasonable and efficient hopes 
and promises respecting the Millennial Kingdom, and 
the blessing under that Kingdom of every nation, 
people, kindred and tongue, seems to have been the 

R3580 : page 188 

object of the Adversary. He has introduced false hopes 
which can never appear to mankind to be thoroughly 
reasonable because they are most unreasonable— the 
hope on the one hand that they do not die and on the 
other hand that they go to heaven when they die, the 
hope that death does not mean death. These fallacious 
hopes are delusions which may satisfy the mind temporarily, 
but which in the end, with all who will reason, 
must prove unsatisfactory. 

The only faith that will stand the test and bring 
us off conquerors over the spirit of the world, the flesh 
and the Adversary, is the hope set before us in the Gospel, 
of which Jesus as the Messiah is the center. That is 
the hope of the world— the hope that Christ having 
redeemed the world with his precious blood will grant, 
in due time, a blessing of opportunity to every creature, 
that whosoever will may come through knowledge and 
obedience to life eternal and that the disobedient shall 
be destroyed in the second death. A further part of 
this hope of which Jesus, the Messiah, is the center, is 
that those who are now called, the obedient through faith, 
shall be joint-heirs with the Master in the great Kingdom 
which shall bless the world. No wonder the Apostle 
said of this Messianic hope, this Kingdom hope, "He 
that hath this hope in him purifieth himself even as he 
is pure." 

LIFE THROUGH BELIEVING. 

The Apostle in the latter part of the text pursues 
this thought of the necessity of faith, saying that the 
believing ones may have life through the name, through 
the power, through the authority of this Messiah— 
by virtue of the work which he has accomplished for 
them and the door of opportunity which he has opened 
to them. The unbelieving have no such door of opportunity 
now. Thank God there will be a glorious opportunity 
of another kind for them in a coming age, 
but they are barred by their unbelief from participation 
in God's favor now, because the present salvation 
is based wholly upon this as a condition— faith in Jesus 
as the Messiah. 

Believing is not only the precedent to the life to 
come, to be attained at the resurrection, but it is also 
precedent to a proper life in the present time. Indeed 
it is a very easily discerned principle that whoever 



would be accounted worthy of a part in the first resurrection 
must begin the new life in the present time and 
have his trial here. In other words, unless we are begotten 
of the Spirit now to newness of life, unless we be 
risen with Christ to walk with him in newness of life, 
unless we develop as new creatures, we will never be 
fit for eternal life, which is offered to us as a reward- 
life with our Lord, glory, honor and immortality. How 
essential then it is that we have faith in Jesus as the 
Christ, the Son of God; how necessary that this faith 
work in us to will and to do God's pleasure, that our 

R3581 :page 188 

faith be so living, so real, that it will influence the entire 
course of life, transforming us by the renewing of our 
minds and sanctifying us to the Lord and to his service, 
changing us from glory to glory, in the likeness of the 
Lord, and generally making us meet, fit, for the Kingdom 
which God hath promised to them that love him. 

The Apostle in the beginning of the Gospel age 
referred to the Jews, and remarked that as a nation they 
had from the Lord much advantage every way over other 
nations and peoples, chiefly in that to them were committed 
the oracles of God, a knowledge of the divine 
plan, even though that knowledge were more or less 
vailed in symbols and scattered in mysterious statements. 
But accepting that as a fact, what can we say 
of Spiritual Israel? Certainly we can say that she enjoys 
much advantage every way, not only advantages 
over and above those possessed by the heathen, but advantages 
over those possessed by the Jews. To us 
the oracles of God are no longer vailed and hidden, but 
open by the grace of God through the holy Spirit. We 
can see a depth of meaning and beauty in the words of 
the Law and the prophets that the Jews never discerned, 
for we are guided into these by the inspired explanations 
of the Lord and the apostles and by the illumination of 
our minds through the holy Spirit. 

And if this be true in respect to the Gospel age in 
general, what shall we say of the special advantages 
and privileges and unfoldings of the divine Word accorded 
to us who are now living in the end of this age- 
to us who now have the convenience of the Word of the 
Lord in printed form, with marginal references, concordances 
and various Bible study helps? What advantage 
have we? Much every way, we reply, even over 
the believers of the early Church. 

If of these early Christians it was required that their 
faith should bring a corresponding life, as of those risen 
from the dead, seeking the things above, much more 
should this be true of us who now with still greater 
knowledge of the divine plan should have a still larger 
and fuller appreciation of the grace of God in Christ, 
and a still fuller desire to live the new life and to ultimately 
be accounted worthy of the new body in the 



resurrection, and that the new life should be made 
everlasting. By the grace of God, dear brethren and 
sisters, let us attain to this which has been placed within 
our grasp. As the Apostle says, let us lay aside every 
weight and every easily besetting sin and let us run with 
patience the race set before us in the Gospel: Looking 
unto Jesus the author of our faith who will also be its 
finisher. We have been studying the various experiences 
of our dear Master, and now we are to remember that 
we are called to walk 
in his steps, to suffer 
with him that we may 
also reign with him. 
Every feature of his 
experiences should be 
profitable to us and 

any victory of his should give us more courage, realizing 
that greater is he that is for us than all they that be 
against us. 



R3581 :page 189 

BOASTERS DEFEATED, PRAYERS HELPED. 

-2 CHRON. 32:9-23.-JULY 2.- 

Golden Text:— "With us is the Lord our God to 
help us, and to fight our battles."— 2 Chron. 32:8. 

THE International Sunday School course of Bible 
studies now changes from the New Testament 
to the Old. The present lesson relates to one of 
the severe experiences that came upon the people of 
Judah under the reign of good King Hezekiah. Hezekiah's 
father, the notoriously wicked king of Judah, 
lacking faith in the true God, had introduced the idolatries 
of Moloch, had closed the Temple against divine 
worship, and in every way endeavored to lead the minds 
of the people into the idolatrous ways of the surrounding 
nations. Doubtless he reasoned that, as Israel was once 
a mighty nation yet had latterly made much less progress 
than the nations round about that were idolatrous, 
this should be understood to mean that idolatrous 
nations would prosper the more. He did not see what 
we see in this matter, namely, that God was not dealing 
with the surrounding nations, the heathen nations, 
but allowing them to take practically their own course, 
interfering with the same only as it impinged upon the 
features of his plan and upon the Jews, his peculiarly 
favored people. He did not realize that the covenant 
entered into between Israel and God meant great blessings 
for them if faithful, and implied corresponding 
tribulations if they were unfaithful, and that their 
measure of unfaithfulness had been the cause of their 



lack of prosperity. 
SPIRITUAL BLESSINGS FOR SPIRITUAL ISRAEL. 

While recognizing this truth respecting natural 
Israel, we should guard our minds against expecting 
temporal blessings as a reward now in respect to Spiritual 
Israel. God's promises to natural Israel were the 
temporal blessings on condition of their hearty obedience 
to his requirements. But the blessings he promises to 
Spiritual Israel are the spiritual kind— not temporalities. 
Hence, when we find that while seeking to serve 
the Lord faithfully we are not prospered in temporal 
matters, we should understand that in some way which 
the Lord sees he is overruling our temporal adversities 
for our profit in spiritual things as his Spiritual Israel, 
his New Creation. The failure to see the differences 
between the promise of earthly blessings, physical 
health, etc., made to natural Israel, and the blessings 
of spiritual favors, spiritual health, made to Spiritual 
Israel, has been the occasion of much confusion and 
stumbling to some of the Lord's people. Let us not so 
stumble. 

Hezekiah, at the death of his father Ahaz, attained 
dominion over a nation already considerably impoverished; 
because Ahaz, failing to have the Lord for his 
counsellor, after making various blunders endeavored 
to enter into a compact with the surrounding nations. 
Toward the north were the Philistines, who had triumphed 
over him on several occasions, taking possession 
of much of his territory. He also feared the Egyptians, 
and for his protection he made an alliance with the 
king of Assyria, becoming a vassal king, paying tribute 
annually to the king of Assyria to protect him from his 
closer neighbors, his enemies. Thus the kingdom not 
only lost much of its independence, but much of its 
wealth and considerable of its territory; and instead of 
the Moloch worship advancing the national interest, 
as had been hoped for, the Lord, true to his covenant, 
had allowed troubles to greatly increase against his 
covenant people. We thus see that Hezekiah and the 
whole nation were greatly handicapped by the idolatrous 
course of Ahaz. 

Shortly after Hezekiah took the reins of government 
and instituted the true worship of God at the 
Temple, abolishing the idolatrous worship of Moloch, 
etc., blessings began to flow upon him and upon the 
nation according to the same divine covenant. He 
longed to rid himself of the exactions of the Assyrian 
compact, and the favorable opportunity seemed to 
arise when Assyria was at war with Babylonia. He 
neglected and refused to send the annual tribute, in this 
going contrary to the counsel of Isaiah the prophet, 
and showing that although loyal to the Lord he was not 
without self-will. No doubt the trouble which speedily 
followed chastened the king and prevented his becoming 



more self-willed, more 
arrogant, less to the 
Lord's pleasement. 

The Assyrian king, 
vanquishing the army 
of Babylonia, turned 
to punish the people 
of Judah and other 
surrounding nations 
which had withheld 
the tribute. The march 
of Sennacherib's army 
meant destruction and 
captivity to many 
small cities and towns 
on his route toward 
Jerusalem. Sennacherib's 
own account of 
this invasion was written 
upon what is commonly 
known as the 
Taylor cylinder, now 
in the British Museum. 

After an account of his triumphs over Syria, Egypt 
and Philistia, 

SENNACHERIB GIVES THIS ACCOUNT. 

"And Hezekiah, the Judaite who had not submitted 
to my yoke— forty-six of his fenced cities and 
fortresses and small towns in their vicinity without 
number. ..I besieged and took, 200,150 persons, 

R3582 : page 189 

small and great, male and female, horses and mules, 
asses, camels, large cattle, small cattle, without number, 
I brought forth from the midst of them, and allotted as 
spoil. As for himself, like a caged bird in Jerusalem his 
capital city, I shut him up. Forts against him I constructed, 
and any who would go out the city gate I 
caused to turn back. ...Fear of the luster of my 
sovereignty overwhelmed him... Thirty talents of 
gold and eight hundred talents of silver,... great 
stores of lapis lazuli, couches of ivory,... an immense 
treasure,... to Nineveh my capital I made 
him bring; and for the rendering of tribute and making 
homage, he sent his ambassador." 

This was the condition of affairs at the juncture 
represented in our lesson. Sennacherib's army had 

R3582 : page 190 

prospered greatly, and Hezekiah at Jerusalem realized 
himself powerless to oppose such an army. The inhabitants 
awaited in dread the storming of the capital city, 



with prospects of a siege, famine, etc., for Jerusalem, 
being hilly and fortified, was prepared to stand a siege 
for some little time. In great haste King Hezekiah 
made up a large sum of money, estimated at about 
$600,000, or, in proportion to the purchasing value of 
the present day, the equivalent of about 6,000,000 
dollars in gold and in silver. This was sent to Sennacherib 
at Lachish as tribute money, hoping thereby to 
turn aside the king's wrath and to restore the conditions 
of peace, and to at least save the capital and the remainder 
of the nation. Sennacherib took the money, 
but slacked not to make preparation for the utter destruction 
of the whole country, purposing, we are informed, 
the carrying away captive of all the people. The coming 
of the Jewish representatives with this treasure money 
to Assyria was represented in bas-relief on the walls of 
his palace at Nineveh, and this portion was cut out 
and transferred to and is on exhibition at the British 
Museum. It is interesting to note the complete harmony 
between these records and those of the Scriptures. The 
Bible, we hold, is the reliable history of the world, 
preserved to us by divine power; but it is pleasant to 
have such corroboration from other sources. 

Although the present was sent to Sennacherib at 
Lachish, that city stood a siege, and Sennacherib himself 
remained with the army besieging it while he sent 
three of his chief generals and some of his principal 
warriors and paraphernalia to Jerusalem to accomplish 
its captivity. Realizing that the city could stand a considerable 
siege, and desiring to hasten matters, especially 
as there were rumors of an Egyptian army coming 
against Assyria, these generals attempted by intimidation, 
boasts, etc., to terrorize the people of Jerusalem, 
so that a sedition would be formed within the walls and 
overcome the king and his faithful and open the gates 
to the invaders, hoping thereby to be spared from the 
terrors of a siege, and from perhaps severer treatment at 
the hands of the captors if the city required to be taken 
by force of arms. 

They did not in those days have rifles or cannon, 
but came to close quarters using arrows, spears, etc. 
Many of the people of Israel gathered upon the wall, 
some of them no doubt soldiers armed with bows and 
arrows, spears, etc., to defend the walls, but in the 
presence of so mighty an army there was evidently a 
fear to attempt to arouse its ire. The generals of Sennacherib 
took advantage of the situation, and sought 
to impress upon the soldiers and others within their 
hearing the uselessness of such destruction of life as 
would be involved in a siege, and assured them that 
other nations round about had succumbed, and that it 
would be foolish to think that they could withstand so 
mighty an army, so great a general. They pointed out 
the fact that other nations had gods in whom they 
trusted also, but that none of these were able to deliver 
them, and that the people of Judah should not be deceived 



and be persuaded by Hezekiah that they had the 

slightest hope of deliverance, nor should they believe 

that their God could accomplish more for them than the 

gods of other nations mightier than they. The Hebrew 

language was used, in order that the people might understand 

the proposition, and undoubtedly a great influence 

was effected; yet the people remained calm and obedient 

to their king, to 

whom Sennacherib's 

representative 

sent a letter expressing 

the same 

sentiments— their 

hope that he was a 

man of sense and 

reason, who would 

not jeopardize the 

kingdom and his 

own life also by 

trusting in foolish 

hopes, railing also 

at Jehovah the God 

of Israel as being no 

mightier, but less mighty, than the gods of the greater 

nations already conquered. 

OPPOSITION AWAKENS FAITH 

Hezekiah had undoubtedly come to deprecate his 
course in ignoring the advice of Isaiah in respect to the 
tribute. He was thoroughly humbled now, and the 
more he heard of the opposition of his enemies to the 
Lord the more sure he seems to have felt that God would 
take vengeance upon those who thus railed at him, and 
so we read, "And for this cause Hezekiah and the prophet 
Isaiah cried to heaven." Their faith grew stronger the 
more the false gods were brought into contrast with the 
true. 

And is not this true with all of the Lord's people 
today? While we are in very different circumstances 
every way as members of the Royal Priesthood, Spiritual 
Israel, nevertheless it is true that our faith is sometimes 
helped to shine the more brightly when it is brought 
into sharp contrast with the errors and falsities around 
us. This is the right effect of love and faith toward 
God, which cast out fear and enable us the more earnestly 
to lay hold upon the exceeding great and precious 
promises of the Lord. The extremity of Hezekiah and 
his people became God's opportunity. The blasphemy 
against God and the comparing him with the gods of 
the nations became the opportunity for the Lord to 
show to the contrary, to avenge his own, to deliver 
his people. In answer to that faith and prayer, yet in 
full accord with his own foreknown plans, the Lord sent 
his angel and cut off in death the mighty ones of the 



R3582:page 191 

army of Assyria, so that he returned to his own land with 

shame. We are not told in what manner this was accomplished 

—here is one of the peculiarities of some parts 

of the divine Word, so much is told in so few words. 

We do not need to think that an angel of the Lord went 

about through the camp of the Assyrians and smote all 

the chief men of the army and demoralized it. We may 

on the contrary very properly remember that the Lord 

could use as his angel or messenger a flame of fire, a 

stroke of lightning or a breath of pestilence. The important 

thing is to recognize that the Lord did it and 

that it was in answer to prayer. This account of Sennacherib's 

terrible defeat is not confined merely to the 

Bible account, which says (2 Kings 19:35) that of 

officers and the bravest of the troops 185,000 perished, 

the remnant fleeing in wild disorder. Geikie remarks 

that the hills over which the Assyrians fled received 

the name of the "mountains of prey," so great was the 

disaster and so great the spoil left in the hands of the 

Jews. The poet Byron has given a vivid picture of this 

Assyrian defeat, from which we cull the following: 

"The Assyrian came down like the wolf on the fold, 
And his cohorts were gleaming in purple and gold. 



Like the leaves of the forest when summer is green 
That host with their banners at sunset were seen. 
Like the leaves of the forest when autumn hath blown, 
That host on the morrow lay withered and strown. 
For the angel of death spread his wings on the blast, 
And breathed in the face of the foe as he passed. 
And the tents were all silent, the banners alone, 
The lances uplifted, the trumpets unblown, 
And the might of the Gentile, unsmote by the sword, 
Has melted like snow in the glance of the Lord." 

Sennacherib later on was slain in the house of his 
god by two of his sons, as is recorded in a vailed form 
in this lesson. Thus did the Lord bring eventually a 
blessing to Hezekiah and the Jewish nation because 
of their faithfulness to him, at the same time permitting 
a chastisement because of temporary neglect of his 
commands. The Lord's victory doubtless became 
known as that of Hezekiah, and as a consequence he 
was honored in the sight of all the nations henceforth. 

What a lesson is here for all of the Lord's people 
of Spiritual Israel to-day! When our proudest, strongest 
foes seem triumphing over us the most, when they are 
loudest in their denunciations of the Lord and his 
promises, is the very time when we should lay hold on 
the Lord's promises with the greatest confidence. Indeed 
we give it as our experience that those who are 



most thoroughly rooted and grounded, whose hopes 
are most surely anchored within the vail, are those 
who have been attested through very trying experiences, 
and have had occasion to call mightily upon the Lord 
for help, when there was no earthly arm to lean upon. 
How many have found that the breaking of earthly 
ties has meant the strengthening of the heavenly ones, 
that the opposition of the world and the Adversary has 
meant increase of spiritual favor, because, "Greater 
is he that is for us than all they that be against us." 



R3583 :page 191 

A NEWSPAPER VIEW OF THE WELSH REVIVAL. 

Dear Brother Russell:— 

Enclosed find a newspaper clipping that may interest 
you. It is from the March "Review of Reviews," and throws 
a little clearer light than anything I have yet seen on the 
"Great Welsh Revival." The statement that it is more a 
movement toward community reform than individual regeneration, 
is in line with the wholesale methods of the 
"New Christianity." The emotionalism which characterizes 
the movement is, it seems to me, indicative of Satanic influence 
rather than of that of Holy Spirit, which is peaceable 
and sane and quiet. Satan's effort among those who are 
reaching out after truth and godliness at this time, is not, 
apparently to openly thwart and oppose, but to mislead- 
to carry to an excess of emotion where reason is lost sight of. 
That this is being accomplished by this movement is evident— 
and not only among those directly concerned, but throughout 
nominal Christianity— whose members are pointing to this 
as an evidence that "the Holy Spirit" is still working in 
"the churches." Jeremiah foretells (2:35) "Yet thou saidst, 
I am innocent; surely his anger is turned away from me!— 
Behold, I will enter into judgment with thee, because thou 
sayest I have not sinned!'" 

If I am uncharitable, I want to be corrected— if right in 
above view, I thought the clipping might strengthen the 
faith of some (as it has mine) regarding something hard to 
understand— the apparent success of some nominal church 
movements— and so submit it to you for use as you see fit. 

With Christian love to yourself and all the Bible House 
friends, I remain, 

Yours in the King's service, 

HORACE E. HOLLISTER. 



SOME RESULTS OF THE WELSH REVIVAL 

The weekly edition of the Times, of London, finds the 
whole movement finely characteristic of the Welsh people, 
with their emotional temperament, love for music and 



oratory, and warm-hearted impulsive lives. Summing up 
his impressions of the results of the revival, the writer in 
question says: 

Suppose we first hear the critic. "Remember," he tells 
you,— and I well remember,— "the revival of 1858-59. It 
was as great in fire and extent as this. The chief figure in 
that revival himself soon lapsed into an unbroken callousness, 
and his name was not held in honor, while in Cardiganshire, 
the cradle and center of the movement, a few months revealed 
a trail of immorality left by the revival, and showed 
how closely kin are sympathy and sensuality, emotion and 
lust. Then, as now, the excitement threw many off their 
balance, and condemned them to end their days in rayless 
mania. The net result was bad— the people, strung up by 
an untrustworthy fanaticism, soon fell back into an immovable 
indifference, and dissent itself was left enfeebled and 
palsied." Such criticism is in the air. There is some truth, 
but not all the truth, in such an estimate of the revival, 
and those who know intimately the mining valleys of South 
Wales, and, alas, the squalid, brutal lives of many of the 
toilers, must be profoundly thankful for any influence that 
can awaken and startle them to the thought and the hope 
of better things. The weariness of well-doing is the strain 
under which so many fail. That strain is increased by the 
unwisdom that confounds innocent amusement with wrongdoing, 
and regards football and lying as equally heinous. 
The revival does give an impulse to better things. If its 
influence wanes and fails, it will be for the lack of that sustained 
nurture and spiritual discipline which are essential 
to moral growth. But in spite of all the inevitable failures 
and lapses, a revival which makes men sunk in ignorance 
and depravity feel even for one short week the spell and 
power of a noble ideal cannot and must not be condemned. 

The Saturday Review says of it:— 

It is clear that a religious conception directs the present 
movement to which the men of the earlier revivals were 
strangers. Their minds were fixed on the idea of individual 
conversion. They rushed to the chapels and field preachings 
to hang on the lips of a great orator who proclaimed salvation. 
In the movement of to-day the underlying idea seems 
to be the public confession of sin, and the salvation not so 
much of the individual as of the community. In a word 
this remarkable revival is a protest against an individualistic 
and sectarian conception of religion, and a struggle to return 
to a corporate and positive Christianity. 



page 193 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVI. JULY 1, 1905. No. 13 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 195 

Rev. E. L. Eaton, D.D., on the Church of Todayl95 

The Westminster Confession— Will our 

Presbyterian Friends Repudiate It? 196 

Berean Bible Study for July— "Patience" 196 

Make Sure of Winning in God's Election 197 

Ignorance Respecting God's Election 198 

Other Scripture References to Election 199 

A Good Man's Prayer Answered 200 

Hezekiah's Fear of Death 202 

Hezekiah's Praise for Deliverance 203 

The World's Redeemer Pictured 204 

"By His Stripes We are Healed" 205 

The Chattanooga Convention 207 

page 194 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



GENERAL CONVENTION, NIAGARA FALLS, N.Y. JULY 8-11 



The RAILROADS of the New England, Trunk Lines, Central, 
Western and South-Western Associations, the C.P.R. and 
G.T.R. in Ontario, and the Richelieu & Ontario Navigation Co. 
will sell tickets to this Convention at ONE FARE AND ONE-THIRD, 
plus 25 cents, on the "Certificate Plan." You purchase a regular 
single-fare ticket to Niagara Falls, N.Y., telling your ticket-agent 
at the time that you are going to the WATCH TOWER BIBLE & 
TRACT SOCIETY'S CONVENTION, that you desire a Certificate, and 
which will entitle you to purchase a return ticket at ONE -THIRD 
a regular fare. Hold on to that certificate, as without it you 
would be charged full fare when buying your return ticket. 
The Certificates will need to be signed, but we will publicly 
announce at the Convention the name of the brother who will 
attend to the matter for you and save you all trouble. 

ACCOMMODATIONS should be secured in advance to avoid 
confusion and trouble to yourself and the Entertainment Committee. 
Therefore, if you will attend, write at once, saying 
BRIEFLY (a) how many will be of your party; (b) how many 
of each sex; (c) if colored, so state; (d) married couples desirous 
of rooming together should so state. AS TO RATES.— 
Arrangements can be made for accommodations in boarding 
houses at $1 to $1.25 per day and at hotels at $1.50 per day up. 
These rates include meals. 

Do not write on this subject AT LENGTH. Tell us about 
things at the Convention. Give the information briefly and to 
the point. A postal card will do. Address the WATCH TOWER 
BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 612 Arch St., Allegheny, Pa. 

OTHER EXCURSIONS 

From many points there are other Special Excursions run 
every summer to Niagara Falls. Some of these are at extremely 
low rates. It will be well for each to inquire of the 
railway ticket agents of his own city on this subject, and to 
select the excursion that will suit his convenience best. But take 
our own Excursion mentioned above unless you can do BETTER. 

GET READY PROPERLY 

Prepare your heart for a blessing. Come to the Convention 
in the proper spirit— as a disciple, a learner. Come intent 
also on doing good as well as getting good, of consoling and 
encouraging others, as well as to be yourself comforted. 
Above all, come realizing that the Lord himself is the fountain 
of blessings, and remembering his word— not by might, nor by 
power, but by the Lord's Spirit are we to expect the blessings 
we hope for. In making ready and en route do not forget this 
important item, for on it your share in the Convention's blessing 
greatly depends. 



THE VOLUNTEER LITERATURE 



This year's "ammunition," consisting of four short tracts 
folded together as one, seems to please all. We advise that it 
be not divided up, but given out as you receive it. On the 
other hand we find that some dear friends give out too many 
tracts, etc., at once. They get from us all the various kinds 
and make up packages of one each and give them thus to their 
friends. This is a mistake. We send freely what you request, 
but with the understanding that you will select for your friends 
the most suitable to their conditions. It is a mistake to send 
such bundles of tracts. The person who might read one tract 
is likely to discard all if he receives a bundle. Use plenty of 
tracts, but use them wisely. Ten tracts sent separately at intervals 
are apt to do a thousand times as much good as those 
sent all at once. 



R3583 : page 195 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
REV. E. L. EATON, D.D., ON THE CHURCH OF TODAY 



WE feel a keen interest in Dr. Eaton, with whom, it 

will be remembered, we had a friendly debate 

about two years ago. We keep hoping to note 

some influence from our Scriptural arguments showing 

that not the reformation and conversion of the world is 

the Lord's program for this Gospel age, but rather the 

selection or election of a "little flock," the Church, the 

Royal Priesthood, through whom under Jesus their High 

Priest all the world shall be mentally, morally and physically 

assisted out of present degradation and death 

conditions to life-everlasting privileges. 

We see little sign that Dr. Eaton has fully accepted 
our position, but in a recent sermon he seemed to have 
a clear view of the nominal church, as separate and distinct 
from the true Church composed only of "the few precious 
and godly men and women that can be found in all 
churches," so that we may not yet abandon hope for a 
further opening of the eyes of his understanding. He 
certainly cannot hope that the nominal mass of "Christendom" 
can ever "save the world" to any higher 
standard than its own. Yet here are his own words 
describing Churchianity, exactly reproduced:— 

"What is the exact state of the Church? I do not mean 
North Avenue church. I do not mean the few precious and 
godly men and women that can be found in all churches. 
I mean the entire Christian establishment in these United 
States. What is its condition to-day? From what I have 



seen during the last dozen years, and from what I constantly 
read, I am persuaded that the Church, with all its 
wealth and culture and prestige, is not leading the procession. 
It is not advancing as fast as our population is 
advancing. It is in a state of moral dearth, a spiritual dry-rot 
prevails all too generally. It is not winning the unsaved 
in great numbers. It has not seen a sweeping revival in 
thirty years. Its ministry— probably more than half of them 
—are willing to admit that the days of revivals are past, 
and that our only hope now is to try to save the children; 
that there is not power enough in the Church, the preaching, 
nor in the Gospel to save a grown-up sinner any more. We 
are not looking for great and all-inundating revivals as of 
yore. 

"The Church has generally become a social club, so nice 
and respectable and so fine that the poor do not feel at home 
in it, and the working men have turned their backs upon it 
almost from one end of the country to the other. And, next 
to the quarter of a million of America's licensed saloons, the 
saddest fact in America to-day is the alienation of the poor 
and the laboring classes from the Church! The climax of the 
catalogue of Gospel blessings which our Lord sent to John 
the Baptist in prison to comfort his sore heart was "To the 
poor the Gospel is preached!" But the Church is not reaching 
the poor, nor the rich in great numbers, not the submerged 
one-tenth, nor the criminals, nor the fast young men and 
women that swarm in saloons and club rooms, crowding them 
to suffocation these Sunday afternoons and nights. 

R3584 : page 195 

"But this state of things does not greatly disturb the 
Church. The majority of it is satisfied, apathetic, indifferent. 
It has not moral earnestness nor spiritual vim enough to 
attend Church, if at all, but once a day on Sunday, and prayer-meetings 
never. It has no testimony except a daily life that 
is exactly on the plane of the world. It has not fervency. 
It is cold. Its sentiments upon every question of morals is 
exactly the sentiment of the world about it. Its Bible is the 
daily newspapers. Its Sunday reading is the Sunday press. 
It is not looking for a revival. It does not want one. It 
don't enjoy that kind of entertainment. It prefers generally 
to spend its long winter evenings in the theatre. It prefers 
to see the half-dressed ballet dancers than to witness the 
wrestling of a lost soul at the altar of the Church. It prefers 
opera music to the song of Moses and the Lamb, and wants 
it brought into the Church on Sundays to crowd out the old 
fervent soul-stirring melodies that used to take our fathers 
and mothers by the hand and lead them up to the very gates 
of glory. That is the mental and moral state of the Church as 
it is represented by more than half of its members to-day. 
Revivals! The last thing on earth that it is thinking of, 
looking for, or desiring. 

"But this is not all. The Church has not seriously 
attacked a moral reform in forty years ! The social evil is 
spreading beyond anything ever before known. The Lord's 



day is desecrated until in some parts of the country it is 
entirely wiped out. Civic crime and municipal corruption 
are engulfing our cities, until every great city in this country 
is a cess-pool of political rottenness and crime. And the increase 
of saloons, drink and drunkenness for the past thirty 
years is appalling and phenomenal. Yet with all this, the 
Church utterly disclaims any responsibility, and is either 
indifferent or utterly unwilling to raise a protesting voice, 
or even to vote against it. Probably not five per cent, of the 
voting church will register its protest on next Tuesday against 
the saloon, which is the center, source, inspiration and procuring 
cause of seven-eighths of all this moral devastation and 
retrogression. The Church of Jesus Christ must wake up and 

R3584 : page 196 

attack these problems and lift this country out of the stark 
heathenism toward which we are fast drifting, as the early 
Church lifted the old Roman civilization out of its social 
wickedness and its national sins, or we are gone without hope 
and without remedy." 

THE WESTMINSTER CONFESSION-WILL OUR PRESBYTERIAN 
FRIENDS REPUDIATE IT? 



The General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church, which 
met a few weeks ago at Winona Lake, Ind., discussed 
the overtures made by the presbytery of Nassau, L.I., 
to drop the Westminster confession of faith and substitute 
therefor the brief statement of the reformed faith. Between 
the conservatives and radicals there occurred a very lively 
discussion. 

This was recently adopted by the General Assembly as a 
brief statement, but not as a creed of the Church, the old confession, 
known as the Westminster confession, which contains 
many doctrines that have caused sharp controversies between 
clergymen, being retained. 

PLEADS FOR REFORM 

The Rev. Dr. Samuel T. Carter, New York City, last 
September sent an open letter to the presbytery at Nassau 
which attracted wide attention. He assailed certain doctrines 
"received by the Church, but not generally believed." The 
reading of the letter at the Presbyterian meeting at Oyster 
Bay precipitated a discussion over the statements it 
contained. 

The controversy continued until the next meeting, 
held in December. It was believed that Dr. Carter might be 
tried for heresy, but after appearing before the presbytery 
at Nassau and making an eloquent appeal for the truth and 
the dropping of misstatements, however, time honored, he 
triumphed in that instead of trying him for heresy the 
presbytery voted to make overtures to the General Assembly 



to drop the Westminster confession. 

DR. CARTER'S STATEMENT 

A statement has been given out by Dr. Carter, in which 
he says: 

"The General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church 
meets in the month of May. The presbytery of Nassau asks 
it to take the necessary steps towards dropping the Westminster 
confession and adopting the brief statement of the 
reformed faith, the simple and kindlier creed which has 
already been indorsed by the Church. 

"The General Assembly can reject the petition more or 
less courteously. But can it afford to do so? It is important 
to rid the Church of bad creed, but still more important to 
dispel from the minds of men the gloomy ideas of religion 
which go with the old creeds and most of all the dreadful 
dogma of endless torment which has caused such intense 
suffering. 

CONDEMNS BEFORE BIRTH 

"The secular press has thus far treated the matter so 
courteously and sympathetically that I feel it to be a privilege 
to present my appeal before the public through it. The Westminster 
confession presents for the worship and allegiance 
of man a God who, according to the good pleasure of his will, 
has assigned millions of the human race to endless torment 
before they were born or had done good or ill. 

"Of this number a large proportion died in infancy and 
committed no personal transgression. The whole heathen 
world formed another large company. By the teachings of 
the confession Homer and Virgil, Plato and Socrates, Cato 
and Antonius, Confucius and Gautama are at this moment 
roasting in the literal flames of hell fire and shall so burn 
forever and ever. 

"Has the Presbyterian Church the face to make this 
declaration to men in this generation? The Westminster 
confession, in fact, says that God is a monster; modern 
theology says he is not. In this sentence lies the whole gist 
of the confession. 

REJECTS GOD OF CONFESSION 

"Every fibre of my moral being rises up against this 
God who dishonors theology; with the utmost fervor in my 
soul I reject this God of the confession, and as fully as I 
reject this God, so gladly do I receive the God of the gospel, 
Jesus Christ. 

"The father in the great parable, who runs forth to meet 
his wretched, but repenting son, falls upon his neck and kisses 
him. Sham theology is sure to make sham religion, and sham 
religion is sure to lead to the horrors of the Roman empire 
and the French revolution, to the eruption of the human 
volcano. 

"It has been well said, 'Repelled light becomes lightning.' 



Of such a state of affairs as this, Martineau sadly says: 
'Will not bad creed, then, be got rid of? Not a bit; and year 
after year thousands of clergymen will solemnly profess 
before tens of thousands of assenting people a creed which is 
false to the heart of them all.' 

"This is what they are doing in the Presbyterian Church 
to-day. The General Assembly will do nothing so good as 
to make an end of it. It is more seriously important than 
sending missionaries to China. There is no use of sending 
truth abroad if we live a lie at home." 



R3584 : page 196 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDY FOR JULY. 
--(SEE PREFACE OF WATCH TOWER BIBLES)- 
PATIENCE 

1 . What is the importance of Patience as an element of 
Christian character? Jas. 1:4; Z.'02-308 (1st col. 

par. 2); Z/02-247, (2nd col. par. 2); Z.'01-l 19 (2nd col. 
par. 2). 

2. What is the common significance of this word? See 
Webster's Dictionary; also Z. '01-1 15 (1st col. par. 2). 

3. What is the deeper significance of this word as used in 
Scripture, especially in Rev. 3:10 and Luke 8:15? 
Z.'01-115 (1st and 2nd cols.) 

4. Why is "patient-endurance" so necessary? Z. '01-1 16 
(2nd col. par. 1,2). 

5. What is the relation between patient-endurance and 
self-control? 2 Pet. 1:6; Z/96-222 (1st col. par. 1). 

6. How should we endure our trials and thus "possess our 
souls"? Luke 21:19; Z.'01-116 (1st col. par. 2,3). 

7. What is the relation between faith and patient-endurance? 
Jas. l:3;Z.'01-117(2ndcol. par. 1);Z.'03-361 

(1st col. par. 3) Z/03-362 (2nd col. par. 2). 

8. Why should we "glory in tribulation"? Rom. 5:3; 
Z/00-364 (2nd col. par. 1,2); Z/02-380 (2nd col. 
par. 2); Z/03-439 (2nd col. par. 1,2). 

9. What particular thoughts constantly kept in mind will 
enable us to be "patient in tribulation"? Rom. 12:12; 
Z/97-265 (2nd col. par. 1); Z/98-41 (1st col. 

par. 1,2); F.632, (par. 2) to 634, (par. 2). 

10. Does faithfulness to our covenant of self-sacrifice demand 
patience? Z. '03-408 (1st col. par. 3). 

11. How should we meet persecution and opposition? 
1 Pet. 2:20-23; Z/03-164 (2nd col. par. 2); Z/96-83 
(2nd col. par. 2). 

12. How can we be "patient toward all"? 1 Thess. 5:14; 
Z/03-24, (1st col. par. 2); F.306,307. 

13. Why is there special need of patience in the Harvest 
of the Gospel age? Z/97-148 (1st col. par. 2); Z/01-119 
(1st and 2nd cols.) 



14. Is it possible to pervert the grace of patience? Eph. 5:11; 
Z.'97-148(lstcol. par. 1). 

R3585 : page 197 

15. Why does the Apostle rank patient-endurance above 
even Love? Titus 2:2; 2 Tim. 3:10; Z/00-332 

(1st and 2nd cols.); Z/01-116 (2nd col. par. 3); Z/01-117 
(1st col. par. 2,3). 

16. What is the relation between patience and "enduring 
hardness as good soldiers of Jesus Christ"? 1 Pet. 5:10; 
Z.'95-202 (2nd col. par. 1). 

17. How are we to run the race for "the prize of our high 
calling of God in Christ Jesus"? Heb. 12:1; 6:12; 
Z/01-117 (2nd col. par. 3); Z/03-54 (1st col. par. 4). 

18. Why is patient-endurance the final test? Heb. 10:36; 
C.212, par. 1; Z/01-115 (2nd col. par. 1); 116 (1st 

col. par. 1); 1 17 (2nd col. par. 1). 

19. How is God's promise to those who "keep the word of 
his patience" now fulfilled? Rev. 3:10; Z/01-118 

(1st and 2nd cols.) 

20. What lessons do we learn from Jesus' example of 
patience? Heb. 12:3; Z/98-160 (2nd col. par. 3); 
Z/01-298 (1st col. par. 1,2); Z.'00-l 19 (1st col. 

par. 1); Z/05-120 (1st col. par. 3). 

21. What other notable examples of patience are recorded 
in Scripture? Jas. 5:10,11; 2 Cor. 6:4-10; 

2 Cor. 12:12. 

22. Is patience an essential quality in an Elder? 1 Tim. 3:3; 
F.251,par. 2; F.298, par. 1,2. 

23. How can we cultivate patient-endurance? 

a. By prayer, Z. '96-163 (1st and 2nd cols.) 

b. By growing in knowledge, Z. '03-24 (1st col. 
par. 2). 

c. By increasing our faith, Z. '03-361 (1st col. 
par. 3). 

d. By recognizing the time-element in God's plans. 
Z/97-147 (2nd col. par. 3); Z/01-118 (2nd col. 
par. 2). 

24. What additional thoughts are suggested by reference 
to the Topical Indexes of "Heavenly Manna" and 

the "Watch Tower Bible"? 



R3585 : page 197 

MAKE SURE OF WINNING IN GOD'S ELECTION. 

"Brethren, give diligence to make your 
calling and election sure."— 2 Pet. 1:10. 

INTEREST in the recent election of a President of 

the United States has been general throughout 

the whole world, and especially amongst English-speaking 

peoples: in fact, the exercise of the 



franchise by the public, whenever and wherever, is 
generally a matter of absorbing interest to "the children 
of this world"— whether the office be a high one, 
as that of President of the United States, or Member 
of Congress, or Member of Parliament, or whether it 
be a lower one, for some petty office of ward magistrate 
or constable. The candidates for these offices 
and their friends, in proportion to the dignity of the 
office, do not hesitate to spend money for printing, 
brass bands, banners, flags, banquets, traveling speakers, 
etc. And this is looked upon as thoroughly reasonable, 
and engaged in by the reputedly more intelligent 
and sane of all nations. But there is another 
election in progress— an election of a hundred and 
forty-four thousand to a higher position than that of 
any earthly magistrate or potentate; and for not a few 
years merely, for the elect are promised this highest 
of all honors for all eternity. 

Does the world know about this election? We 
answer, No. True, many have heard something about 
an election— that God is "taking out of the nations a 
people for his name," a "little flock," who, as joint-heirs 
with Jesus Christ their Lord, will be given the 
Kingdom which God hath promised to them that love 
him,— the Kingdom for which we pray, "Thy Kingdom 
come; thy will be done on earth as it is done in 
heaven." But though they have heard of this Kingdom 
and the election now in progress, to make up the 
foreordained number of its kings and priests, they do 
not really believe it, but regard it as a fantasy, "as a 
tale that is told," a fairy story, which none but the 
simple-minded and children would take seriously. Ah, 
yes! and so the Redeemer-King informed us it would 
be; and so he prayed to the Father, saying, "I thank 
thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because 
thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent 
and revealed them unto babes; even so, Father, for 
so it seemed good in thy sight."— Matt. 11:25,26. 

If the wise and prudent, the keen and the shrewd, 
the learned and the great, really comprehended the 
situation,— if they really believed in this election 
which is in progress under divine direction, according 
to the divine Word, what haste there would be amongst 
them to "make their calling and election sure," as 
the Apostle exhorts. It is not that people are not 
appreciative of such honors and dignities of power 
and influence as this Kingdom offers, that they pass 
by God's election and treat it with indifference; for 
their love of power, their love of influence, their love 
of position and prestige, is abundantly in evidence in 
connection, not only with the governments of this 
world, but also in connection with even the trifling 
offices in the nominal churches. The spirit of "Which 
shall be greatest?" has apparently not died out. 

But while those who seek for earthly offices of a 
brief tenure and comparatively small dignity are willing 



to sacrifice time, energy, money, etc., to attain 
these petty offices and honors, and while they can 
arouse enthusiasm among their friends and neighbors, 
leading to the expenditure of time, money and 
energy to an astounding degree, and though they think 
it strange that we "run not with them to the same 
excess of riot, speaking evil of us" (1 Pet. 4:4), 
nevertheless, they affect to think it remarkable that 
we who are candidates for the superlatively high office 
for which God has nominated us should spend time, 
influence and means in making our calling and election 
sure, and in assisting "brethren" in their election 
work; they consider our time wasted. Although they 
spend millions of dollars in speeches, brass bands, 
editorials, parades, etc., to determine which of two 
men should hold the most honorable office of this 
nation for four years, they consider it remarkably 
strange that we should spend a fragment of the amount 
or make the one-thousandth part of the commotion 
to secure for ourselves and to all of the "elect" the 
great "prize of our high calling." 

DIFFERENT STANDPOINT-DIFFERENT VIEW 

All this only illustrates the two very different 
standpoints from which matters may be viewed. From 
the world's standpoint the Lord's consecrated people 
who seek to make their calling and election sure to 
the heavenly Kingdom are counted fools, because to 

R3585 : page 198 

attain that they are willing to sacrifice present temporal 
interests; and this sentiment of the public is the 
same today that it was in the Apostle's time, when 
he wrote, "If any man among you seemeth to be wise, 
in this world, let him become a fool that he may be 
wise." (1 Cor. 3:18; 4:10.) From our standpoint, 
seeing the eternal things and the glories attaching to 
them, we cannot avoid the feeling that it is "the children 
of this world" who are foolish, in that they expend 
so much breath and energy upon things which, 
if attained, last but a short time, and bring with them 
large measures of perplexity and trouble and criticism 
of opponents to their election: and sometimes 
untellable injury to themselves, the ruled. 

But why this difference of opinion? Which party 
is sane, and which is lacking in sanity? We answer, 
that the difference is that the one class sees what the 
other class does not see, and that because God has 
specially revealed it unto the one. As it is written, 
"Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it 
entered into the heart of man [the natural man, unilluminated 
by the holy Spirit] the things which God 
hath in reservation for them that love him; but God 
hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit,... which 



searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God."— 
1 Cor. 2:9,10. 

The fact, then, is that the Lord's consecrated 
people, through faith and by God's holy Spirit, have 
inside information respecting "the things not seen as 
yet." Hence we see that the two parties— the one 
seeking earthly honors and advantages, for themselves 
and each other, the other seeking the heavenly 
advantages, or election, for themselves and each other 
—are both laboring for what they see, for what they 
consider to be the most valuable thing they see and 
may attain. O, how precious, then, is the eye of 
faith, which the Lord's consecrated people have! No 
wonder our Lord said to some of his disciples, "Blessed 
are your eyes for they see, and your ears, for they 
hear." Other eyes do not see and other ears do not 
hear these heavenly things. And in that sense of the 
word comparatively few even in civilized lands have 
been called or nominated of the Lord for his election 
—comparatively few know anything about it or the 
terms which must be understood and obeyed in order 
to make the calling and election sure. 

IGNORANCE RESPECTING GOD'S ELECTION 

Even amongst professing Protestant Christians 
the majority do not know that there is an election. 
The leading denomination, Methodists, positively deny 
that there is an election; and even the large denominations 
which hold that an election is in progress 
(Presbyterians and Baptists, etc.) have totally false 
conceptions of its character. They regard God's call 
or nomination as being the election itself, and hence 
the words of the Apostle in our text confuse rather 
than help them. They think of the matter from the 
standpoint of divine foreknowledge and predestination; 
they consider the election as something done by 
the Almighty wholly regardless of the character and 
works of the elect, saying in their Confessions of Faith 
that it takes place without consideration of any worthiness 
or merit on the part of the elect, but solely of 
divine grace. They thus make void the Word of God 

R3586 : page 198 

and the election inducements which it holds out- 
confusing their own minds, and in the end traducing 
the character of the divine ruler and his law. 

Would that they could see what is so plainly set 
forth in the divine Word, viz.: (1) That the predestination 
on God's part was that he would choose a 
Church,— from amongst those whom his grace would 
redeem from the curse of death through the precious 
blood of Christ. (2) That he predestinated that this 
Church should be of a fixed, positive, limited number; 
—we believe literally 144,000— of whom the nucleus 



was found in the remnant of Israel which accepted of 
Christ at and after Pentecost— the number being constantly 
added to throughout the Gospel age, and to 
be fully completed with the end of this age. (3) That 
he predestinated what must be the fixed character of 
each one whom he would recognize as a member of 
this elect Church, the body of Christ— as the Apostle 
says, he "predestinated that we should be conformed 
to the likeness of his Son." (Rom. 8:29.) Consequently 
the predestination meant that none could be 
of the elect Kingdom class (however plainly they 
heard the call or nomination) unless they made their 
calling and election sure by cultivating the graces of 
the Spirit and thus coming into heart-likeness of our 
Lord Jesus Christ— copies of him who set us an example, 
that we should walk in his steps.— 1 Pet. 2:21. 

Here we have an election which accords with 
every definition of the Scriptures and the Scriptural 
facts relating to the divine plan of the ages. It is 
this election which we feel justified in securing at any 
cost, at any self-denial, at any self-sacrifice; and these 
self-denials and self-sacrifices are works which must 
be performed if we would be of the elect; as the 
Apostle says, we must "work out our own salvation 
with fear and trembling." (Phil. 2:12; Jas. 2:22.) 
Yet these works are not ours (as men) but as "new 
creatures," members of the body of Christ. And 
they are God's works, in the sense that they are incited 
by his Word and Spirit, for "it is God that 
worketh in you to will and to do."— Phil. 2:13; 
Eph. 3:20. 

Let us not be misunderstood, however. Our justification, 
the basis of our call or nomination to this 
high position in the Kingdom was secured, not by 
works, but by simple faith without works. We were 
justified by faith, and had peace with God, before it 
was possible for us to do any works which would be 
acceptable in his sight. But when we were accepted 
in the Beloved, having made full consecration of our 
mortal bodies, and every interest pertaining thereto, 
then the works began, the sacrificing began, the 
self-denials began, the overcoming of the world began, 
the battle with the world, the flesh and the devil 
began. This battle must be won in our hearts (even 
though we will not attain perfection in the flesh) else 
we will not make our election sure and receive the 
crown of glory, the symbol of our joint-heirship with 
him who bought us with his own precious blood. 

So, then, we see (a) that only those who have 
heard something at least of the grace of God in Christ 
have been in the remotest sense in contact with the 
privileges of this election— because "faith cometh by 
hearing." And (b) faith, the result of hearing, rightly 
received, brings justification from the sins that are 
past, and peace with God. And (c) only those who 
are at peace with God (being justified by faith) are 



R3586 : page 199 

called to joint-heirship with Christ in his sacrifice, 
walking in his footsteps and thus attaining to joint-heirship 
with him in his Kingdom. And (d) only 
those thus called or nominated by God have the remotest 
opportunity of becoming the elect. And then 
mark, (e) the Lord's own declaration, "Many are 
called; few are chosen [elected— from the same Greek 
word]. "-Matt. 22:14. 

Let us not only assure ourselves of the fact that 
there is an elect class being selected during the Gospel 
age, to a special position of honor and service with 
the Lord, but let us at the same time note the lessons 
enjoined upon this class of called or nominated 
ones— the instructions given them of the Lord whereby 
they may make their calling and election sure. 

OTHER SCRIPTURE REFERENCES TO THE ELECT 

"I endure all things for the elect's sake," writes 
the Apostle Paul. (2 Tim. 2:10.) The Apostle's 
sufferings whereby, as he said, he sought to "fill up 
that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ 
[were] for his body's sake, which is the Church" 
(Col. 1:24)— not for the world. The reason for this 
is evident: The Apostle knew the Lord's plan to be 
to call and to elect during this Gospel age a little 
flock of overcomers of the world, faithful even unto 
death, as a Royal Priesthood, to share with the 
Lord Jesus in the Millennial Kingdom. He knew, 
therefore, that labor on behalf of the world before 
the world's day of trial or judgment would come, 
would be to a large extent at least love's labor lost; 
and hence he was not of those who would "beat the 
air" in the service of the Lord, accomplishing nothing; 
he would work according to the divine direction 
and thus be a co-worker together with God, that in 
due time as a member of the elect company, faithful 
to the Lord's call, he would be granted a share in 
the Kingdom which is to bless all the families of the 
earth. 

ELECTION ACCORDING TO GRACE 

"Even so, at this present time there is an election 
according to grace. ...Israel hath not obtained 
that which he seeketh for, but the election hath obtained 
it and the rest were blinded." (Rom. 11:5,7.) 
Here the Apostle is speaking of this same elect 
Church, and is referring to the Jewish remnant out 
of all the tribes with which this elect Church was 
started, and to which, after Israel's national rejection 
of the Lord, the special invitation went forth to the 
Gentiles, to "take out of them a people for his name 



[to bear the name of Christ]" to complete the predestinated 
number of the elect 144,000 (twelve 
thousand accredited to each of the twelve tribes of 
Israel). Thus we who are being called from amongst 
the Gentiles are invited to fill up the deficiency in the 
elect number of Israel, and will be, so to speak, 
divided amongst the twelve tribes, tho according to 
what rule of distinction the Scriptures do not show. 

GOD'S ELECT, HOLY AND BELOVED 

"Put on, therefore, as God's elect, holy and beloved, 
a heart of compassion, kindness, humility, 
meekness, long suffering, forbearing one another and 
forgiving one another." (Col. 3:12,13.) Here we 
have an intimation of the character-likeness to God's 
dear Son which the same writer tells us God has predestinated 
respecting everyone who will make his 
calling and election sure.— Rom. 8:29. 

God has called us with his high calling, and from 
the time we accept the call and make requisite full 
consecration of ourselves to him he gives us the earnest 
of our inheritance, viz., the spirit of adoption, the 
spirit of sonship: it remains, however, for us to be 
tested,— to prove the depth of our consecration, the 
sincerity of our professed love. If we love the Lord 
with all our hearts we will seek to do these things 
which are pleasing to him, and these the Apostle is 
specifying in this Scripture, showing us that God's 
requirements are all in harmony with his holy spirit 
of love; that "Love is the fulfilling of the Law," and 
that we must attain to this condition of perfect love 
in our hearts if we desire to finish our course with 
joy, and make our calling and election sure— making 
sure a share in the inheritance to the spiritual body 
and the Kingdom glories of which our spirit of begetting 
is but the earnest or foretaste. 

THE FAITH OF GOD'S ELECT 

"Paul, a servant of God, and an Apostle of Jesus 
Christ, according to the faith of God's elect." (Titus 1:1.) 
Here the Apostle not only reiterates that there 
is an elect class, but he specifically points out that this 
class has a special faith, a peculiar faith, that is not 
shared by others, neither can others know it, for "it 
is spiritually discerned."— 1 Cor. 2:14. 

AVENGE HIS OWN ELECT 

Shall not God avenge his own elect, tho they 
cry day and night unto him?" (Luke 18:7.) Here 
our Lord himself testifies respecting this elect class. 
He gave a parable of an unjust judge, who, tho careless 
respecting the doing of justice to a poor widow, 
nevertheless was so careful of his own convenience 



that he would give her justice, lest by her continual 

coming she would annoy him. And our Lord's inquiry 

is, if an unjust judge would thus render justice 

from a selfish motive, could we expect less from the 

all-wise, all-loving and all -just Heavenly Father? 

Verily, God shall avenge the cause of his elect, altho 

he has permitted them to be maligned, slandered, misrepresented, 

for over eighteen centuries; the time will 

come when he will give them justice, when he will 

exalt them; and when those who have wilfully and 

maliciously injured them shall certainly be punished 

—in the great time of retribution in which every such 

evil deed of mankind shall be rendered a recompense, 

and every good deed receive its reward— in the Millennial 

day. 

GATHER TOGETHER HIS ELECT 

"He shall send forth his angels [messengers] and 
shall gather together his elect from the four winds of 
heaven." (Matt. 24:31.) Here our Lord not only 
testifies to the fact that there is an elect class, but he 
assures us that he himself will gather this elect class 
in due time; in the end of this age when he is ready to 
establish his Kingdom, in which, as the overcomers, 
the elect of God, they will be joint heirs and sharers, 
as in the present life they have been sharers in the 
sufferings of Christ.— Rom. 8:17; 2 Tim. 2:12; 
Matt. 13:43. 

FOR THE ELECT'S SAKE 

Those days shall be shortened." (Matt. 24:22.) 
Our Lord here refers to the great time of trouble 

R3587 : page 200 

with which this age shall end, "the day of 

vengeance," the time of retribution, the day of 

avenging his elect; and he assures us that the 

trouble then coming upon the world, and which will 

largely, we see, be brought about by the world's own 

course, would, if not interrupted by the Kingdom and 

its intervention with power from on high, mean the 

utter obliteration of the race at the hand of its own 

selfishness. But for the elect's sake those days should 

be shortened, and the time of trouble will not be permitted 

to run the length which otherwise it would 

run. As at first, "He shall speak to them in his wrath 

and vex them in his sore displeasure," so afterward 

he shall not permit their utter destruction: his Kingdom 

will stay the trouble, for "He shall speak peace 

to the heathen [peoples];" he shall say unto them, 

"Be still and know that I am God; I will be exalted 

among the nations; I will be exalted in the earth."— 

Psa. 46:10. 



THE ELECT ARE UNCONDEMNED 

"Who shall lay anything to the charge of God's 
elect?" (Rom. 8:33.) The Apostle is here pointing 
out that altho this called class accepted of God to be 
his elect, and to run with patience the race set before 
them, and make their calling and election sure, have 
weaknesses of the flesh, in the overcoming of which 
they, as new creatures, are not always wholly successful, 
nevertheless, God looks upon the heart, and their 
judgment is not according to the flesh, but according 
to the spirit, the will. Lest such should fear failure 
after all, he points out that in the great heavenly 
court there would be none to condemn them;— because 
God the judge who once condemned us in Adam has 
himself justified us in Christ,— accepting on behalf 
of the Adamic sin and the resultant weaknesses the 
sacrifice of Christ. He then points out that Satan, 
our Adversary, will have no hearing before the heavenly 
Court, and that there will be none to appear 
against us, and that on the contrary our Lord and 
Master, who redeemed us with his precious blood, 
will be our Advocate. Who then could lay anything 
to the charge of God's elect?— those whom God has 
justified, whom God has called, whom God has accepted, 
and who, according to the divine arrangement, 
make their calling and election sure. Who 
would they be who could find fault with these whom 
God accepts on his own terms? Surely none! "Yea, 
we are more than conquerors, through him who loved 
us and bought us with his own precious blood!" 

THE ELECT FOREKNOWN 

"Elect, according to the foreknowledge of God 
the Father... through sanctification of the spirit 
unto obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus 
Christ." (1 Pet. 1:2.) The Apostle here marks out 
the terms of our election; none can remain in this elect 
company, nor make his calling and election sure, without 
being under the sprinkling of the blood— justification 
through faith in the great sacrifice; nor can 
any attain it without sanctification, a setting apart 
to God; and such a sanctification as will lead to 
obedience to God— to the full submission of his will 
to the will of the Father in heaven. 

Such must be the character of those who will be 
of the elect, and this class of which we are seeking 
to become members was predetermined, foreordained 
by God; it was not a new thing, but the carrying out 
of the original divine purpose, in which also our Lord 
Jesus shared. This the same Apostle shows (1 Pet. 2:4-6), 
declaring that our Lord Jesus himself was the 
elect of God, and that we who are now being chosen 
from amongst men to be "members of the body of 



Christ," members of the elect class, are chosen in 

him, chosen as members of his body, and as such 

must be conformed to the likeness of his character. 

He says: "To whom coming, as unto a living stone, 

disallowed indeed of men, but chosen [elect] of God 

and precious, ye also, as living stones, are built up, 

a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up sacrifices* 

acceptable to God by Jesus Christ." 

"Wherefore also it is contained in the Scripture, 
Behold I lay in Zion a chief corner stone, elect, precious, 
and he that believeth in him shall not be confounded." 
(1 Pet. 2:6.) Thus the Church of Christ, the 
elect little flock, are now being shaped, fitted and prepared 
for positions in the Temple of God, of which 
the dear Redeemer himself is the chief cornerstone, 
the foundation. 

"They that are with him are called and chosen 
[elect— the same word in the Greek] and faithful." 
(Rev. 17:14.) Here in symbol our Lord Jesus tells 
John, and us through him, of the glorious exaltation 
of the elect in the Kingdom, when they shall be with 
him and share his glory as the Apostle declares, and 
with him judge the world;— granting trial, with gracious 
opportunities to every member of Adam's race 
to return to full harmony with God through the merit 
and by the assistance of him who redeemed the race. 

GOD DELIGHTS IN HIS ELECT 

"Behold my servant, whom I uphold; mine elect, 
in whom my soul delighteth: I have put my spirit 
upon him. He shall bring forth judgment to the 
Gentiles." "I will bring forth a seed out of Jacob 
and out of Judah, an inheritor of my mountain: and 
mine elect shall inherit it." "They shall not build 
and another inhabit; they shall not plant and another 
eat; for as the days of a tree are the days of my people, 
and mine elect shall make them continue long." 
— Isa. 42:1; 65:9,22, margin. 

Here our Lord Jesus, the Head, and the Church, 
"members in particular of the body of Christ," are 
unitedly declared to be God's elect, in whom he is 
well pleased. The Father was well pleased in the 
Son, who came not to do his own will but the will of 
him that sent him, and by his obedience won all the 
gracious things promised under the Law Covenant, 
and redeemed Adam and his race; and the Father is 
well pleased also in us, whom, tho "we were children 
of wrath even as others," he has accepted in Christ, 
justified and sanctified by his Word and spirit, and 
who, if we abide in Christ, faithful unto death, will 
be fitted and prepared for his promised Kingdom. 

In these statements of the Prophet reference evidently 
is made to the work of the Lord's anointed 
(Head and Body) in conferring restitution blessings 
upon the world of mankind during the Millennial age; 



and this in full accord with all the New Testament 
declarations respecting the work of the elect. 



*The word spiritual is omitted in this verse as spurious by 
old MSS. The flesh is sacrificed, not the new creature. 

R3587 : page 201 

STRIVE FOR YOUR ELECTION 

"Brethren give diligence to make your calling 
and election sure." This our text is one of the most 
forceful of the many references to God's elect, and is 
particularly clear in marking out the conditions upon 
which election may be surely attained by each one 
whom the Lord our God shall call or nominate to this 
grand office— the Royal Priesthood. The Apostle has 
been mentioning the various graces of the Lord's spirit 
which those who are seeking to be of his royal and 
priestly class must develop in their characters. He 
shows us that there is more or less of an addition 
in the matter: we put on one grace and add to it another, 
and to that another, and so on; and do this repeatedly 
in respect to all the graces, which keep growing, 
developing in us and rounding out and deepening 
and broadening us as spiritual new creatures. And 
he shows that those who do not have such experiences 
of growth in grace and in knowledge are deficient, 
and cannot hope to make their calling and election 
sure. 

But seeming to understand that some would question 
the possibility of their gaining so great a prize, 
the holy Spirit, through the Apostle, gives to this 
called and chosen class a word of special encouragement, 
saying, "For if ye do these things ye shall never 
fall." There may be more or less stumbling on the 
part of the elect, not through weakness of the spirit, 
the heart, the new mind, but "through manifold temptations" 
of the flesh, the earthen vessel, in which 
temporarily resides the new creature, begotten of the 
spirit, the elect. 

The Apostle proceeds to give further assurances, 
saying, "For so an entrance shall be ministered unto 
you abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our 
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ." The elect will not be 
received of the Lord with chidings and upbraidings 
for the imperfections of the flesh, which were unwillingly 
theirs, but on the contrary all the weaknesses 
of the flesh will be ignored, and the intents of the 
heart alone will be judged, and the heart-character 
formed will alone be tested and approved; and this 
will determine whether or not we shall stand the 
Lord's approval and be granted the glorious things 
which he has promised to them that love him— 



"glory, honor and immortality" and a share in the 
Kingdom and its work of blessing. 

THE ELECTION HOPE PURIFYING 

"He that hath this [election] hope in him purifieth 
himself even as he [the Lord] is pure." But 
how is it with those who have not this hope, and who 
are totally ignorant of this election,— even though they 
be Christians, in the sense of believing in the Lord 
Jesus Christ as their Redeemer? Surely they are at a 
great disadvantage, lacking as they do the proper conception 
of the exceeding great and precious promises 
which are the channel of the power of God working 
in the elect both to will and to do of his good pleasure. 

If we have seen that there is an elect class, it follows 
that there must be a non-elect class— those who 
are not making their calling and election sure, and it 
is proper in this connection that we see something respecting 
this class, and what provision God has made 
for them. This phase of the subject is treated 
elsewhere.* 



*See pamphlet, Hope for the Innumerable Non-elect, 
sample free, this office. 



R3588 : page 201 

A GOOD MAN'S PRAYER ANSWERED. 

-ISAIAH 38: 1-8. -JULY 9.- 

Golden Text: "God is our refuge and strength, 
a very present help in trouble."— Psa. 46:1. 

HEZEKIAH, known as the good king amongst 
King David's successors, took sick. A carbuncle 
or other malignant ulcer threatened his life, 
and the prophet Isaiah was sent to him by the Lord with 
the message, "Set thine house in order, for thou shalt 
die." There are some who are inclined to claim that 
all sickness is of the devil, that no good person could be 
sick, etc., but we find nothing in the Scriptures to this 
effect. We do indeed find that all sickness and all death 
are indirectly the results of Satan's work. It was his 
deception of our first parents in Eden that brought 
upon them the death penalty, with its adjuncts of sorrow 
and pain, all of which is continued in us their 
children. We are not to forget that some of the Lord's 
most earnest saints have been sick, and that thus it is 
written, "He whom thou lovest is sick," and again, 
"Whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth." 



Regarding the whole race as under the divine 
sentence of death, we realize that as a result of our 
sharing in this penalty some of us are debilitated in one 
particular and some in another. All are imperfect 
mentally, morally and physically, but these imperfections 
take different forms according to different circumstances, 
heredities, etc. We are, therefore, to consider 
sickness in general as operating along the lines of 
cause and effect rather than as direct inflictions either 
of God or of Satan. It is well, however, to keep in mind 
the fact that the Jews under their covenant were subjects 
of special divine protection to the extent that they 
lived in harmony with the Lord, just as the Spiritual 
Israelites of this Gospel age are under special divine 
protection and guidance, only that the promises and 
blessings to the natural Israelites were of the earthly, 
temporal kind, while the blessings and care promised 
to the Spiritual Israelites are in respect to their spiritual 
welfare, their heavenly interests, their spiritual health, 
etc. 

"SET THINE HOUSE IN ORDER." 

Assuming then that Hezekiah's sickness was neither 
of divine nor satanic inflictions (as in the case of 
Job), and assuming that it was the natural effect from 
some natural cause, we see Hezekiah sick unto death but 
not without hope of recovery up to the time he received 
the message from the Lord at the mouth of Isaiah, "Set 
thine house in order, for thou shalt die." By this 
evidently was meant, Make such preparations in respect 
to the interests of the kingdom, the disposition of your 
property, arrangements for your funeral and for your 
successor in the throne as would be proper. We may 
each stop here to draw a practical lesson in respect to 
our affairs. We are not kings, as Hezekiah was, but we 
have, nevertheless, stewardships great or small received 

R3588 : page 202 

from the Lord in respect to which we should be faithful. 
The message has come to every one of us that we shall 
die— every member of the body of Christ is consecrated 
to death— "Be ye faithful unto death and I will give thee 
a crown of life." "Ye shall all die like men." 

Realizing this, it is incumbent upon us as a part of 
our stewardship to order the affairs of our lives, our 
homes, our business or whatever we may have as a 
stewardship in such a manner as will redound to the 
Lord's praise and for the good of his cause. This is 
setting the house in order, straightening out all the affairs 
of life, so that those who take up the lines where we drop 
them will be able to do so properly, intelligently— so 
that whatever we have of the Lord's goods may be disposed 
of as we believe would be his will, so that our 
stewardship faithfully carried out through life may 



faithfully end in death. A great many of the Lord's 
dear people need counsel on this subject. Many die 
without having set their houses in order, without having 
arranged their affairs financially and otherwise as 
stewards of the Lord's goods. 

HEZEKIAH'S FEAR OF DEATH. 

Nothing in Hezekiah's conduct indicated that he 
had any fear that in dying he would pass into an eternity 
of torment. He had not so learned respecting the 
divine plan— neither the Law nor the prophets had 
given such an intimation. But, on the other hand, he 
did not exultingly cry, "O, now I shall soon be with 
God and the holy angels and know ten thousand times 
as much as I now know." He did not rejoice in the 
thought of death. On the contrary, he was sad and 
dejected, fearful, and pleaded with the Lord that he 
might continue to live. In all this he conducted himself 
in much the same way as other people do whose minds 
are not warped and twisted and tangled with false 
theologies— with the thought that if they were dead they 
would be more alive than they ever were when they 
were alive, etc. 

Hezekiah on his sick bed turned his face to the wall, 
as though he would seek the more private communion 
with the Lord, and prayed, "Remember now, O Lord, 
I beseech thee, that I have walked before thee in truth 
and with a perfect heart and have done that which is 
good in thy sight." This is a brief summary or digest 
of his prayer, which was accompanied with sore weeping. 
It was not a boastful prayer, for he freely acknowledged 
his sins (v. 17.) He did claim, however, as all should 
be able to claim, that he walked before the Lord with a 
perfect heart, with a perfect will, with thoroughly good 
intentions; that there was no desire in his heart to go 
contrary to the divine will. The history of his times 
bears out all that King Hezekiah claimed for himself 
respecting his good reign as the Lord's representative 
in the throne. See 2 Kings 18:3-6; 2 Chron. 29:2; 
31:20,21. 

The Lord was merciful to Hezekiah, hearing and 
answering his prayer. Isaiah had not gotten out of the 
king's house on his homeward way until a message from 
the Lord came to him directing him to return to Hezekiah's 
sick chamber to tell him that the Lord had heard 
his prayer and seen his tears and had added to his life 
fifteen years, directing him through the prophet to the 
medicine, the poultice which would bring relief— a 
poultice of figs. There is a lesson here: not that we should 
never use remedial agencies in connection with our 
troubles and ailments, but that we should recognize 
as behind the remedial agents the will of the Lord. The 
fig poultice would not have brought relief in this case 
aside from the divine interposition of divine power, 
but on the other hand the divine power preferred to 



operate through the poultice of figs rather than without 
it. It is not for us to dictate to the Lord how our blessings 
should come, but to seek to learn from these and 
other illustrations he has given us what would probably 
be his will respecting us and our afflictions. 

The question arises, Did God change his plan and 
arrangements because of Hezekiah's prayer, and does 
he do so whenever a prayer is answered? We reply 
that in certain matters it evidently is as easy for the 
Lord to arrange them one way as another without any 
interference with his general plans. To our understanding 
the Lord would have allowed Hezekiah to die if 
he had not prayed. In other words, the Lord merely 
informed the king of what would have been the natural 
consequence of his case, and informed him for the very 
purpose of giving him an opportunity to ask in faith for 
his recovery. Thus the Lord waited to be gracious to 
him. 

ALL CASES NOT ALIKE. 

We are not in this wishing to imply that Hezekiah's 
conduct and prayers should be a sample and a lesson to 
all of the Lord's people under similar circumstances, 
that when ourselves or our dear ones are ill we should 
make specific request for the prolongation of their lives 
and recovery from their illness. There is a difference 
between our condition and our relationship to the Lord 
and that of Hezekiah. Although the king was a good 
man he lived before the Gospel call began. He was, 
therefore, not one of the spirit-begotten ones, for the 
holy Spirit was not yet given, because Jesus had not yet 
suffered and had not yet been glorified. (John 7:39; 
1 Pet. 1:11.) Those who are the Lord's consecrated 
people now, the "saints," should realize that they have 
entered into a new special relationship to the Lord, 
different from that of other men; that the Lord has 
agreed with them that their surrender of earthly life 
and all their earthly interests shall bring to them instead 
special spiritual favors, privileges, safe guardings, 
etc. 

From this standpoint it would be unwise to ask the 
Lord for earthly privileges and advantages of any kind, 
since this might work to their disadvantage as New 
Creatures. Rather they are to remember the words of 
our Lord, that all mankind are seeking after the earthly 
things, but that the Father knoweth the things we have 
need of before we ask him, without our asking him. The 
preferable attitude of heart for the Lord's consecrated 
people therefore is— O, Lord, thou knowest far better 
than I what would be for my highest welfare, my highest 
spiritual interest. Thou hast promised that all things 
shall work together for good to me because I am thine, 
because I have been called according to thy purpose. 
I entreat of thee give what is best in all of life's affairs 
and withhold whatever seems unto thee best— "Thy 



will be done." For the Lord's consecrated people to 
undertake to move Jehovah's arm in respect to their 
affairs would seem to be the taking of the rudder out of 
his hands— would seem to be more or less of self-will, 
which we have pledged to the Lord shall be dead that his 
will may be done in us. 

The Lord granted Hezekiah a sign that he would 
recover and that he would live fifteen years. Elsewhere 

R3589 : page 203 

we learn (2 Kings 20:8) that Hezekiah requested the 

sign. This brings up the general question of the propriety 

of asking the Lord for signs. We find that the 

Lord gave Gideon a sign in answer to prayer— a choice 

of signs; and similarly in this case the Lord gave Hezekiah 

a choice of two signs, either that the shadow on the dial 

should advance ten degrees or that it should recede ten degrees. 

Hezekiah chose the latter as being the more difficult 

to be accounted for and therefore the surer test. On the 

other hand the Lord spoke disrespectfully of the Jews 

of his day saying, "This faithless generation seeketh 

after a sign," etc. The thought would seem to be that 

a sign may be desired for one of two reasons. Disbelief 

may ask a sign, thoroughly doubting the possibility 

of one; on the other hand true belief may ask one 

for confirmation of faith. The latter seems to have been 

the case with Gideon and also with Hezekiah. We 

recommend that the Lord's people of the New Creation 

avoid putting the Lord to tests and signs, for we remember 

that the Lord has called us to a special high calling, 

the test for which is faith, and that this is one reason 

why throughout this Gospel age he gives few if any 

outward signs, desiring his people to walk by faith and 

not by sight. 

THE DIAL OF AHAZ. 

Hezekiah's father, King Ahaz, had erected a stone 
dial, the latest design up to that time for measuring the 
hours of the day. It was formed of a succession of steps 
on two sides and a crest in the center, and was so oriented 
that the rising sun would so strike the top as to cast its 
shadow on the lowest step on the western side of the 
dial. As the sun rose higher and higher the shadow crept 
up and up, step by step, until at noonday there was no 
shadow, for the sun was directly overhead. In the afternoon, 
the sun having passed to the westward, the shadows 
would begin to lengthen out upon the eastward side 
of the monument or dial, covering gradually one side at 
a time until the last, each step representing approximately 
half an hour. 

The turning back of the shadow ten degrees or ten 
steps on the dial would be a very noticeable matter, 
not only to the king, who looked for it, but to his entire 
household and to the people of Israel in general, who 



would be informed of the event, the king's business 
being very generally public property in such matters. 
It was a miracle probably very similar to that wrought 
in Joshua's day, when the sunlight was made to linger 
in the valley of Ajalon. We have no thought that God 
either stopped the earth on its axis or that he moved the 
sun backward in its course. In either of these cases 
the miracles as we may call them could be much easier 
performed, and we think that undoubtedly the Lord 
would take the easier way in any such matter. Prof. 
Garbett declares that he had a practical illustration of 
this miracle, and describes the modus operandi to the 
astronomer Richard A. Proctor, as follows:— 

THE MIRACLE'S POSSIBLE PROCESS. 

"The shiftings of the shadows on the dial that 
Isaiah predicted to sick Hezekiah are liable to occur at 
any time when these two circumstances concur: (1) that 
the upper atmosphere is in that condition which causes 
two bright parhelia or mock suns to appear on opposite 
sides of the sun; and (2) that the air contains drifting 
clouds, massive enough to hide often two of the three. 
When the real sun and the eastern mock sun are hidden, 
there is only the western to cast shadows, which then 
coincides with that the sun will cast an hour and a half 
later; but if the clouds shift so as to hide the west 
parhelion, and disclose the eastern, the shadows instantly 
become such as the sun casts an hour and a half earlier. 
The parhelia being always caused by rays refracted 
through two faces of equilateral triangular prisms or 
fibers of ice, their angular distance from the sun is always 
the minimum deviation that such a prism of ice produces 
on the brightest or yellow rays, which is very nearly a 
fourth of a right angle; so that if Hezekiah's dialers 
divided the quadrant into forty, than which no number 
is more likely, considering how constantly it recurs in 
the Hebrew laws and history (oftener, indeed, than any 
number above ten), the advance or recession of the 
shadow would have to be ten of these parts. On March 
28, 1848, these effects occurred, had any one been looking, 
on every dial in the Isle of Portsea, and very probably 
of much of Hampshire besides. The parhelia were 
present and bright enough at about 1 1 a.m. and still 
better at 1 p.m." 

The fact that the method of God's operations might 
be learned by us would not disprove them. For instance, 
some day we shall know just what process turned 
the water into wine at Cana of Galilee, but our knowledge 
of the process thus used by our Lord will not in any 
measure detract from the miracle which was certainly 
beyond human power— just as in the miracle now under 
consideration, all the laws of nature are subject to the 
God of all creation, and this is sufficient for the eye and 
ear and heart of faith. 



HEZEKIAH'S PRAISE FOR DELIVERANCE. 

On his recovery from his illness Hezekiah wrote a 
poem of thanksgiving, praising the Lord for his deliverance 
from the jaw of death— from the grave. In it he 
describes his feelings as he thought of death and his 
rejoicing at his recovery. He said, "In the cutting off 
of my days I shall go into the gates of the grave [sheol, 
hades, the tomb]. I am deprived of the residue of my 
years. ...Like a crane or a swallow, so did I chatter: 
I did mourn as a dove: my eyes fail with looking upward: 
O, Lord, I am oppressed; undertake for me. What shall 
I say? He hath spoken unto me and himself hath done 
it." [I freely acknowledge that it was not the lump of 
figs, but the Lord who had produced the recovery.] 
Then, speaking of the effect this should have upon him 
for the remaining years, he added, "I shall go softly 
all my years because of the bitterness of my soul.... 
Behold it was for my peace that I had great bitterness, 
but thou hast in love for my soul delivered it from the 
body of corruption; for thou hast cast all my sins behind 
thy back. For the grave [sheol, hades] cannot praise 
thee, death cannot celebrate thee, they that go down 
into the pit cannot hope for thy truth. The living, the 
living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day."— 
Verses 9-19. 

Hezekiah's proper desires were to live and serve 
and praise the Lord. He well knew that these things 
would be impossible in death, that the only hope in 
death is in the resurrection. The case of the Lord's 
people even during this Gospel age, even since redeemed 
with the precious blood, has been very similar. They 
have properly no desire to be unclothed but rather to 
be clothed upon with the heavenly conditions. But now 
in the close of the age matters are different from what 
they ever were before. Living as we are in the presence 
of the Son of man, we realize that although all must die, 

R3589 : page 204 

yet the overcomers will not sleep, but will be changed 
in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye— in the moment 
of dying— changed to the glorious spirit condition which 
the Lord has promised to them that love him. From our 
standpoint, then, not only has death lost its terrors, 
because Christ has redeemed us from the power of the 
tomb and will by and by bring forth all from it that are 
in it, that they may have an opportunity for coming into 
harmony with him and attainment to eternal life, but 
to us death has lost its dread in another sense, namely, 
that we shall not need to sleep— ours is the blessed 
time of the change. Let us wait for our change and seek 
by the Lord's grace to be so prepared for it in heart and 
character development that we shall welcome it with joy. 

"Unanswered yet!— the prayers your lips have pleaded 



In agony of heart these many years;— 
Does faith begin to fail? Is hope departing? 

And think you all in vain those falling tears? 
Say not the Father hath not heard your prayer: 

He'll answer yet your right desire— sometime, somewhere. 



R3589 : page 204 

THE WORLD'S REDEEMER PICTURED. 

-ISAIAH 52:13-53:12.-JULY 16.- 

Golden Text:— "The Lord hath laid 
upon him the iniquity of us all." 

THIS little section of Isaiah's great prophecy is a very 
striking one. The original prophecy, as is well 
known, was without division into chapters and 
verses. 

The preceding context points us clearly and distinctly 
to the second advent of our Lord and his gathering 
of his people to himself. It describes the present 
time, therefore, the harvest of this Gospel age, telling 
how the Lord's people would now know his name- 
understand and appreciate his true character, announce 
the presence of the King and the beginning of his reign. 
(Vs. 6-8.) It also tells of the beginning of favor upon 
natural Israel, and, looking into the future, points to 
the Lord's glorification through that people. (Vs. 9-10.) 
It also shows the separating work of this harvest time, 
the gathering of the good fish into the vessels, the gathering 
of the wheat into the barn. 

Then, pointing to the Millennial reign of Christ, 
the first three verses of our lesson (13-15) picture the 
high exaltation and honor of Jehovah's servant Son, our 
Lord Jesus, saying, "He shall deal prudently, he shall 
be exalted and honored and shall be very high." The 
whole earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory 
of the Lord, which will then shine forth through the 
blessed and wise government of Immanuel, as has been 
declared, "The Desire of all Nations shall come:" they 
shall see that the way of righteousness is the desirable 
way, the blessed way, the way of true wisdom and happiness, 

R3590 : page 204 

and all who will refuse to come into this attitude 
shall be cut off from amongst the people in the second 
death. -Acts 3:23. 

Next a contrast is instituted between how our Lord 
was humiliated and how by and by he shall be exalted. 
The prophet, so to speak, takes his seat at the cross, 
and beholds the Lord sadly distorted in his crucifixion, 
torn in an inhuman manner, his features drawn with 



pain. The picture of this, as given in Cheyne's translation, 
is written in poetic form, as was the original. 
It reads as follows:— 

"Deeply marred was his appearance, out of all human 
likeness, 
And his form out of all semblance to sons of men; 
But as deep will be the obeisance of many. 
Before him kings shall be awestruck in silence." 

The thought evidently is that his glory and honor, 
influence and power, will be proportionate to the sufferings 
and ignominy which he experienced. And this is 
the thought everywhere held out in the Scriptures, not 
only as respects our Redeemer but also as respects his 
Church. "If we suffer with him we shall also reign with 
him." Present trials and sufferings work out for us a 
"far more and exceeding weight of glory." So in speaking 
of our Lord the Apostle declares that "he humbled 
himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death 
of the cross. Wherefore God also hath highly exalted 
him, and given him a name above every name: that at 
the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in 
heaven and things in earth."— Phil. 2:8. 

We cannot claim that it is a divine law that glory 
and honor must be preceded by sufferings and humiliations. 
Our heavenly Father and the holy angels, highly 
honored, have never been humiliated. Nevertheless 
we are assured that so far as God's dealings with the 
Church of this present Gospel age are concerned, they 
are along these lines. The suffering is not compulsory 
but granted us as a privilege, and the exaltation is held 
out as a reward, marking the degree of divine approval. 
With this thought before us how it helps us to appreciate 
the sentiments of the Apostle, "Gladly, therefore, 
will I glory in tribulation." We glory not in the 
tribulations themselves, for sometimes they seem to the 
flesh to be grievous; but our hearts can glory in tribulations, 
since we know that under the divine arrangement 
governing our call as the Church of Christ these tribulations 
are working in us those elements of character 
pleasing and acceptable in the Father's sight, which 
eventually he will reward with a share in the exaltation 
of our Redeemer, our Bridegroom. 

So grand, so glorious will be the demonstration of 
divine power and blessing in the Messiah that no word of 
dissent will be heard— unto him every knee shall bow 
and every tongue confess. This will be true not only of 
the common people, the world in general, but true also 
of the greatest, the princes, the kings of earth, intellectual 
kings, financial kings, political kings. All eyes shall 
be opened, all ears shall be unstopped, to the knowledge 
of divine goodness and mercy, justice and truth, as it 
will then be revealed in the Messiah. 

"WHO HATH BELIEVED OUR TEACHING?" 



In the fifty-third chapter the Prophet looks backward 
from our day and the coming glory, and intimates 
that until the glory of the Lord shall be revealed his 
cause will make comparatively little headway in the 
world. The true teaching respecting him and his mission 
will not be generally received— various false teachings, 
false gospels will have the preference. The inquiry, 
"Who hath believed our report?" our teaching, our 
presentations, implies the answer, Few. And so it has 
been. There were few who had the hearing ears and 
understanding hearts at the time of our Lord's first 

R3590 : page 205 

advent, and only a few all down throughout the Gospel 
age have really and truly appreciated the message. 

True, there are large numbers to-day who are 
nominally Christians, who with their lips draw nigh to 
the Lord occasionally one day in the seven for an hour, 
but who are at heart far from him. The vast majority, 
even in the pulpits of Christendom, seem not to have 
given heed to the report, the doctrines, the teaching 
of the Lord's Word in respect to Messiah, his sufferings 
of this present time and his glories to follow, but rather 
to have hearkened to false doctrines misrepresenting 
the divine plan of the ages, substituting therefor many 
"doctrines of devils," in which a little truth is mixed 
with much error, to the discomfiture and spiritual sickness 
and weakness of many of the Lord's truly begotten 
ones, and to the total confusion of the world, 
"Christendom." 

"To whom hath the arm of the Lord been revealed?" 
cried the prophet. Alas, it is so that few, very few, 
see in our Lord Jesus the powerful arm, the omnipotence 
of Jehovah, stretched down for the aid of our fallen 
race. Few realize that the work finished at Calvary is 
the foundation, the basis, upon which the great Jehovah 
will ultimately establish the Millennial Kingdom for 
the blessing and uplifting of all the families of the earth. 
The majority see Jesus as merely the finger of the Lord, 
doing a comparatively small work for a comparatively 
small class. As our eyes open we behold to our joy that 
Messiah, Head and body, will yet constitute the arm 
of Jehovah, that all-powerful force which shall overthrow 
evil and establish righteousness and bless all the 
families of the earth through the seed of Abraham. "If 
ye be Christ's then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs 
according to the promise."— Gal. 3:29. 

GOD'S WAYS NOT MAN'S WAYS. 

The prophet proceeds to point out why the report, 
the teaching, of God's Word and the power of his omnipotent 
arm for man's salvation have not been discerned 
by mankind. It is largely because the Lord's way of 



accomplishing matters is the very reverse of what mankind 
would have naturally expected. With our mental 
tendencies, our natural expectations would have been 
that the Son of the Highest at his first advent would 
have been manifested in glory and not in humiliation— 
that the heavenly Father would have sent him in glory 
and not in humiliation. Even in his taking of the human 
form and nature we would have expected it to be under 
such conditions and with such environments as would 
have shown forth strikingly and forcefully amongst the 
members of the human race. 

It was a disappointment, especially to the Jews, 
who were expecting a glorious and powerful king, that 
our Lord came as the man of sorrows and acquainted 
with grief. To them he appeared too tender a plant to 
ever prosper. They acknowledged him to be of the 
Davidic line, but esteemed him to be from one of the 
roots of David which had lost its virility, its life. They 
thought him a root out of dry ground, from which they 
could never hope for a sprout of power and glory and 
dignity and honor such as they had anticipated Messiah 
would have. In him they saw not the form of the soldier, 
the general, which to their conception was the grand, the 
comely form that Messiah would have, boasting of his 
power, his strength, his divine support, etc. 

No wonder the poor Jews were disappointed, no 
wonder they considered him undesirable as material 
for a king, no wonder that they had no hope that he 
would ever be the great Messiah, the great deliverer. 
We sympathize with them deeply in their disappointments 
and in their failure to recognize him as Immanuel. 
He was despised and rejected of men, even of the men of 
his own nation, who for sixteen centuries had hoped 
and waited for his coming. They were ashamed of him, 
hid their faces from him. He was despised of the Romans 
and counted unworthy of particular notice, whether 
he claimed to be king of the Jews or what not, and the 
Jews esteemed him not— except the few who, because 
they were Israelites indeed, were guided to an appreciation 
of him with a wisdom from on high. 

What meant all this? Why should the King of 
glory, the Sent of God, the heir of all the promises, be 
thus the man of sorrows and acquainted with grief? Ah! 
says the prophet, I perceive surely that it was our 
griefs that he bore, our sorrows that he carried, not his 
own. We thought that he was stricken of God, that 
he was afflicted by the Almighty, and that this was an 
evidence that he was not in divine favor. We misunderstood 
the entire matter. Now we see that his wounds 
were for our transgressions, that his bruises were for 
our iniquities, that our peace with God was secured by 
the stripes, the chastisements, the penalties of the divine 
law inflicted upon him. We perceive that by his stripes 
we are healed,— that the punishment or stripes due to 
us were laid upon him, that the death sentence that was 
against us he bore, dying the Just for the unjust that he 



might bring us to God. 

"BY HIS STRIPES WE ARE HEALED" 

Yes, yes, continues the prophet, we all went astray 
like sheep, following one another into wrong paths. 
We, even of the seed of Abraham, brought nigh to God's 
favor through the Law Covenant under Moses, have 
failed to retain our position as proper sheep of his fold, 
and the penalty of divine justice has been borne by the 
Shepherd for his sheep, Jehovah hath laid on him— 
charged up to him, accepted of him— the iniquity of us 
all. How gracious is this message! Those who received 
it first from Isaiah, having the guidance and enlightenment 
of the holy Spirit, could not appreciate his words 
to the full, but, nevertheless, must have to some extent 
appreciated them— must have drawn some blessing and 
hope from them. But now, we of this Gospel age, living 
since the redemption price was paid, and since it was 
accepted by the Father on our behalf when our Master 
ascended on high, and since the Pentecostal blessing 
evidencing our forgiveness has reached every member of 
the consecrated class to enlighten the eyes of our understanding 
to enable us to see the deep things of God and 
his gracious promises, we may now rejoice in these things 
so hard for the Jew to understand, and equally impossible 
for the natural man of the Gentiles to comprehend. 
Truly our Lord's words are refreshing and explanatory— 
"To you it is given to know of the mysteries of the 
Kingdom of God;" to all others these things are "spoken 
in parables and dark sayings."— Luke 8:10; 
Mat. 13:10-15,35. 

"HE OPENED NOT HIS MOUTH" 

He was oppressed, as a lamb he was led to the 
slaughter, and as a sheep that before her shearers is 
dumb; yet he opened not his mouth. The fulfilment of 
this we see in the case of our Lord. Had he chosen to 
open his mouth, to argue his case, to defend himself, 
we may well suppose that the Scribes and Pharisees, high 

R3591 : page 206 

priests and doctors of the Law, Pilate and his soldiers 
and the Jewish rabble, would have succumbed to the 
eloquence of him who spoke as never man spoke. Thus 
he might merely have defended himself with his tongue, 
and righteously, too, without ever moving a finger in 
his own defence or exercising any of the divine powers 
deposited in him, or calling for any of the legions of 
angels who would have responded to his prayer. He did 
indeed reply to a question of the High Priest and also 
to a question by Pilate, but he was dumb so far as 
making any plea or endeavoring in any manner to deliver 
himself from the death which he perceived was upon 



him and which he knew was permitted of the Father. 
As he himself expressed it— "The cup which the Father 
hath poured for me, shall I not drink it?" 

We must not lose sight of the fact that our dear 
Redeemer is also our pattern and that we are to walk 
in his steps. The lesson to us, then, is full submission to 
divine providence in respect to all of our affairs— those 
which we see clearly and understand and those also 
which are obscure to us, some of which at times may 
seem unnecessary. Our faith must triumph; we must 
learn that our Father is too wise to err, and that he loves 
us too much to cause a needless tear, a needless pang. 
But if he permitted severe afflictions to come upon his Son, 
his well beloved and only one, that he might be tested 
and proven in respect to his loyalty to the last degree, 
shall we wonder that in calling us to be associates of 
that Son in glory, he should require of us also that we 
should learn obedience by the things we suffer? Gladly 
then, says the Apostle, will we suffer; gladly will we take 
this as an evidence that we are in the hands of the Lord 
and that he is shaping and fashioning us according to 
the glorious pattern, that we may ultimately be participants 
also of the heavenly glories and joys and immortality 
promised to his faithful. 

"By oppression and judgment he was taken away," 
cut off from life— oppression or injustice so far as those 
who condemned him were concerned, by divine justice 
and judgment so far as God was concerned, because he 
had consecrated himself unto death as man's Redeemer, 
and the Father had accepted him as such. 

"WITH THE WICKED AND THE RICH" 

"And who shall declare his generation, for he was 
cut off out of the land of the living." Who could suppose 
that he would have offspring, children— that he 
would be ultimately the Everlasting Father to the 
world of mankind? Who could have seen any prospect, 
any hope, for the race through his death? Who could 
have foreseen that as all in Adam die, even so all in Christ 
shall be made alive? To have discerned these things 
would have been impossible, and the poor Jews and 
the world in general are not to be blamed for not discerning 
them. Rather those who have come into relationship 
to the Lord through faith and through obedience 
unto consecration, and who have been begotten of the 
Spirit to newness of nature, and through the Spirit's 
enlightenment are able to comprehend these wonderful 
things of the divine plan— these highly favored of God 
may rejoice in their blessings without condemning those 
who do not enjoy to the full the same blessings and 
opportunities in this present time. Yes, the entire 
secret of the matter lies in our perception that Jesus 
was the Redeemer, the one who bought the world with 
his own precious blood, the one who was stricken by 
the Father, not for his own sins but for our transgressions 



—for the transgressions of the people, "for the sins 
of the whole world." 

Although he had done no violence he was numbered 
with the transgressors, with the wicked, in his death, 
being crucified between two thieves, although there was 
no deceit in his mouth and he had gained no riches by 
deceiving or overreaching his neighbor; yet he was 
buried in the tomb of the rich Joseph of Arimathea. 
Thus does the prophet mark certain incidents connected 
with our Lord's death, that our Redeemer's identity 
might be the more clearly established. 

"IT PLEASED JEHOVAH" 

All these things, apparently so unjust and so unreasonable 
and so contrary to anything mankind could 
have expected, Jehovah was pleased to permit. To 
have exacted such sufferings from Jesus as our penalty 
would have been an injustice, and this would have been 
an impossibility to God; but it did please him to allow 
his only-begotten one to demonstrate his loyalty and 
faith even unto death, even the death of the cross. It 
pleased him that the Son should thus be temporarily 
injured and put to grief because he foresaw the glorious 
results both to Jesus and to mankind. To his Son he 
would give more than compensating honor and glory 
and dignity and power, yea, eternal life, when to his 
hands would be committed all the remaining features 
of the divine plan. 

Well did the Father know that his Son's faith and 
obedience would be abundantly rewarded. Well did 
he know that the soul of Jesus, his being, would constitute 
the sin offering for Adam and his race, and well 
he knew that ultimately the Son should see a reward 
from this travail of his soul which would satisfy him, 
which would more than compensate every trial, every 
tear, every pain. And is it not wonderful that in God's 
providence the called ones of this Gospel age may apply 
these same consolations and assurances each to his 
own heart, and know that all things are working together 
for good to them that love God— to the called 
ones according to his purpose? Is it not wonderful that 
we also have the assurance that if we suffer with him we 
shall also reign with him, that if we experience travail 
of soul in following in the footsteps of our Redeemer we 
shall have more than compensating satisfaction, and that 
the Word of the Lord so guarantees it? To all who accept 
the Lord's promises in faith, the matter becomes a 
certainty— "Faith can firmly trust him, come what 
may." 

Although when he was cut off from the land of the 
living none could have declared his generation, his seed, 
his posterity, yet he shall see his seed— the redeemed 
and restored of mankind, who at the close of the Millennial 
age shall be privileged to inherit all the earthly 
things lost by father Adam, redeemed by Jesus, restored 



by the Second Adam. 

THE IMPORTANCE OF KNOWLEDGE 

The declaration that it was by his knowledge that 
our Lord Jesus, as the righteous servant of Jehovah, 
justified many and bore their iniquities, is an important 
item in this lesson. We see that it was from lack of 
knowledge of God that the first Adam in his perfection 
was weak. Not knowing the power of God, not realizing 
his gracious and merciful character, father Adam 
considered that all hope of comfort, joy and pleasure in 
life had gone from him when mother Eve transgressed 
the divine regulation respecting the forbidden fruit and 

R3591 : page 207 

came under the divine sentence of death. Being unacquainted 

with the divine character he was without 

hope respecting her recovery and his own future happiness, 

and therefore deliberately shared the death penalty 

with his wife— suicided, so to speak. On the contrary 

our Lord Jesus, knowing the Father, remembering the 

glory he had with him before the world was, trusting 

the Father implicitly, was able to be obedient to the 

Father's requirements, even unto death, even the death 

of the cross. 

Thus did knowledge serve him in good stead and 
enable him to pass through the most trying experiences 
victoriously. It was his knowledge, then, in conjunction 
with his mental and moral and physical perfection, 
that enabled our Lord Jesus to fully meet all the requirements 
of his consecration and thus enabled him to 
justify many, to redeem Adam and his race— enabled 
him to bear their iniquities cheerfully, joyfully, delighting 
to do the Father's will, and for the joy that was 
set before him enduring the cross, despising the shame. 

No wonder, then, that the Scriptures everywhere 
set forth the thought that knowledge is important to 
the followers of Jesus; no wonder that they urge upon us 
that we grow in grace and in knowledge, assuring us 
that to know God is eternal life. To attain to that 
relationship to God which will permit us to fully know 
him and appreciate his just and reasonable and loving 
commands would signify that we were in the condition 
which he would be pleased to bless everlastingly, and 
signify also that, possessing this knowledge, we should 
be able to fulfil all the reasonable requirements imposed 
upon us. Let none of us, then, despise knowledge. 

Nevertheless, while heartily appreciating it, let 
us not forget that it is not merely knowledge about his 
plan, nor knowledge of the various so-called earthly 
sciences, but the knowledge or acquaintanceship of 
God himself. Thus the Apostle also declares of our Lord 
Jesus, "that we may know him," be acquainted with 
him, be intimate with him. Whoever has this intimate 



relationship with the Father and the Son has therein 
the power of God, which will work in him to will and to 
do the Lord's good pleasure, and ultimately bring him 
to a glorious inheritance under the divine arrangement. 
But, as the Apostle points out, to have knowledge of 
earthly things or of the divine plan without having the 
heart obedience and the heart acquaintanceship with the 
Lord, might leave us still poor and wretched and miserable, 
sounding brass and tinkling cymbals. 

THE "GREAT" AND THE "STRONG" 

Therefore, because of his faithfulness as God's 
righteous servant, because guided by his knowledge in 
his obedience to the Father, because faithful in bearing 

R3592 : page 207 

the iniquities of the many, therefore "God will divide 
him a portion with the great." How great a portion is 
not here stated. Other Scriptures inform us that the 
Father has given him a portion with himself— he overcame 
and sat down with the Father in his throne. He 
has indeed been granted a portion with the great— the 
great Jehovah. In turn he shall divide the spoil with 
the strong, the spoil of his great conquest over sin and 
death at the cost of his own life, the spoil of victory, 
the reward of his own high exaltation far above angels, 
principalities and powers, and every name that is 
named— the reward of his high relationship with the 
Father, the reward of his Millennial Kingdom and its 
opportunities and privileges of blessing the whole groaning 
creation, the reward of the Father's smile and 
favor eternally. 

This "spoil," which all came to the dear Redeemer 
as the one who kept the Law and redeemed the world 
with his own precious blood, this spoil he proposes to 
share with the faithful of his followers, the overcomers, 
here called "the strong." O, what a thought! In all 
our weaknesses and imperfections we are by the Lord's 
grace enabled to come off conquerors and more than conquerors 
through him who loved us and bought us with 
his precious blood. 

With the Apostle we can say, "When I am weak, 
then am I strong;" when I realize my own imperfections 
and shortcomings then, by faith realizing the 
strength and perfection of my dear Redeemer and his 
provision for all who are his, I can be strong in faith 
and trust and love, and realize that the exceeding great 
and precious promises of God's Word are yea and amen 
to me. In the present life, then, by faith we have a 
portion with the Lord, and may reckon ourselves as 
having passed from death unto life, as heirs of God and 
joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord. But the attainment 
of all these things, their fulness and completeness, 
lies beyond the grave, beyond the resurrection, when all 



the faithful shall be with him and, like him, share his 
glory, for "he will divide the spoil with the strong." 

THE CAUSE OF THE MATTER 

Our lesson closes with a reiteration of the general 
facts stated. All of this greatness given to our Lord 
and shared with his faithful followers is because he poured 
out his soul unto death, and was numbered with the 
transgressors, and bore the sins of many, and made 
intercession for the transgressors. How emphatically 
the Scriptures point out to us that without the shedding 
of blood there is no remission of sins, that without the 
ransom price being paid there could have been no release 
of Adam and his race from the sentence of death, 
no hope of any of them attaining life everlasting. As 
we appreciate this great central thought of the divine 
plan, let us reverence our dear Master the more as the 
author of our faith, who, by and by, will be the finisher 
of it, and let us seek more and more to be faithful to 
him and to walk in his steps and to lay down our lives 
for the brethren. 



R3592 : page 207 

THE CHATTANOOGA CONVENTION. 



Although we were unfortunate in the selection of the date of 
this Convention, June being a very busy time for the Southern 
farmer, nevertheless we had a delightful season of fellowship. 
The gathering numbered about 150 from every quarter of the 
South land, with a fair representation from more northerly 
States. The Sunday afternoon session was for the public and 
had an attendance of between 500 and 600. We have reason to 
hope that some true Israelites profited by the discourse on The 
Oath-bound Covenant, "In thy Seed shall all the families of 
the earth be blessed." The dear friends of the Chattanooga 
Church managed the arrangements so well that we heard not a 
single murmur. Everybody looked happy with a holy joy that 
lit all faces. The testimonies, too, corroborated this. Nearly 
all told of a share of the opposition promised to all who seek 
to closely follow the Savior, and of joys from the Truth which 
made oppositions seem light afflictions in view of the hopes of 
future glory with our Lord. Two Baptist ministers were in attendance 
at nearly all of the sessions, and one of these at the 
close of the Love Feast, told the writer of his proposed methods 
for extending the knowledge of the "good tidings of great 
joy for all people" to many whom he has been serving hitherto 
as a Baptist. Eleven brethren and ten sisters symbolized 
their consecration by water immersion. It is our hope that all 
present were richly repaid for their expenditure of time and 
money and that the blessing of the Lord poured upon their hearts 
will extend to their friends and brethren at their various homes. 



page 209 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVI. JULY 15, 1905. No. 14 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 211 

Lutheran View of Baptism 211 

Rising of Russian Peasantry 21 1 

Crazed by City Life 212 

A Form and "Yell" of Godliness 212 

"Because the Days are Evil" 212 

Love the Law of the Spirit 213 

Follow the Lord's Way 214 

Slanderers are Thieves 215 

Fight the Good Fight 216 

God's Ways Higher than Man's Ways 217 

A Dishonor to His Father 219 

The Temple God is Building 221 

Some Interesting Questions Answered 221 

page 210 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 



SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R3593 : page 210 

DO NOT URGE THE UNREADY TO COME OUT OF 
BABYLON 



Preach the Word, tell the good tidings, loan, sell or give 
the literature, and by word and example commend it to your 
friends. Let it take effect before urging your friends to quit 
Babylon, etc. Remember that it is the Truth that makes us 
free, and that it took time in your own case to grow strong and 
free and obedient to the Truth. If you urge the matter too 
strongly and too soon it may result in one or other of two bad 
effects: (1) It may deter your friend before the nutriment of 
the Truth has given the necessary grace and strength, or (2) 
It may bring "out" one too weak to stand the oppositions sure 
to follow, and by defeat may make him timid everyway for the 
remainder of life. 

page 210 

MISSIONARY ENVELOPES 



These are now in stock in large quantity. Every letter you 
send through the mail may be a more or less potent messenger 
of the Truth, even on its outside, by the use of these envelopes. 
They catch the attention not only of those to whom they are 
addressed, but postmen and others have an opportunity, and 
sometimes the curiosity, to read their message of peace— the 
gospel in condensed form. Price, 25c per 100, postpaid. 



R3592: page 211 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
LUTHERAN VIEW OF BAPTISM 



THE clipping below from The Young Lutheran is not, 
as some might suppose, from a couple of centuries 
back, but from the January, 1905, issue: 

"Often we are asked questions concerning Baptism, 
the proper time and place for it, who should be the 
sponsors, etc. It may be well to explain at this place: 

"Baptism is that act, commanded by God and 
promised his blessing, by which we are forgiven our 



sins (Mark 1:4; Luke 3:3) and are made children of 
God. A person who wilfully neglects baptism is surely 
lost, as we read John 3:5: 'Except a man be born of 
water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter the kingdom of 
God.' 

"This may seem hard, but God simply says: 'If 
you wish to enter my kingdom you must enter the way 
I want you to by being baptized,' just as any society 
can say: 'If you wish to belong to this society you 
must go through the order adopted by us to become a 
full member.' Surely all would say they have a right 
to do that; just so God has a right to say how he 
wants us to enter his kingdom. 

"So we see that it is very important for every one 
to be baptized. Neglecting to have our children baptized 
as early as possible is taking a risk which none of 
us can afford." 



Some have thought that in treating the subject of 
Baptism in MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. VI., chapter 10, we 
were rather severe in our strictures upon the views of 
"Christendom" which make a child liable to eternal torment 
because its parents neglected to have some drops 
of water put on its head with a formula of words. The 
above shows that we were quite within the truth, however 
strange it may seem that seemingly safe and sane 
people can so believe and teach. Would that all might 
see the true meaning of this important ordinance! How 
much it would assist them to an understanding of 
the divine character and plan. Get your friends in all 
denominations to read that one chapter. 

RISING OF RUSSIAN PEASANTRY 



The Russian landowners are alarmed at last. All 
over the great middle belt the peasants are murdering 
the landlords, pillaging and burning houses and refineries. 
The inhabitants of the country towns who belong 
to the reactionary little bourgeoisie are frightened for 
their own safety and that of their property. Even in 
Moscow and Nijni Novgorod there is great uneasiness. 
One result has been the demand of the nobles who met 
at the old capital that some small concessions in the 
way of popular representation should be made in order 
that the rising flood of disorder may be stemmed in 
time. 

As long as the outbreaks were confined to the big 
cities there was not much to fear. There the trouble 
was as much industrial as political. But many of the 
workmen have gone back to their villages as political 
propagandists. These persons act as agents for the 
revolutionists. They are successful, however, because 



they found the conditions favorable.... 

This dangerous Jacquerie, or peasant uprising, is 
called pugachevshchina in Russia, after the eighteenth 
century rebel leader, Pugachey, who championed the 
autocracy against the officials and the landlords. In 
the same way the peasants of today have no grievance 
against the Emperor. To the mujiks he is still the 
"Little Father." It is the Tchvnorniks who, in the opinion 
of the peasants brought on the war, who precipitated 
the strikes, who attacked the people. The official class 
is blamed for supporting the landlords against the cultivators 
and the manufacturers against the workpeople. 

When the decree of the Holy Synod called on the 
loyal population to combat the enemies of the Czar and 
the government the ignorant peasants were told that it 
was directed against the nobles and the landed proprietors. 
Mysterious leaflets were circulated, stating that 
Nicholas was in danger and had been deposed and 
thrown into prison by the nobles. The appeal continued: 
"Hasten to help him, plunder the landlords, slay 
the enemies of the Czar and the Fatherland."... 

The situation in certain details suggests the early 
stages of the French Revolution. The Paris mob that 
went to Versailles, when it started back with the King, 
Queen and Dauphin, said: "We are bringing the baker 

R3593 : page 212 

the baker's wife and the baker's little boy." In the 
provinces popular hatred was vented on the good-for-nothing 
nobility. It was only later in the uprising 
that the popular leaders determined to get rid of the 
sovereign in the most radical way. 

The most conservative Russian newspapers say that 
the growing domestic disorders are as serious as the repeated 
defeats of the army in Manchuria. So the empire 
now fairly stands between two fires.— New York 
Evening Sun. 



Poor Russia! All things seem to be working together 
for evil to her of late. Nevertheless the retribution 
seems to be well deserved. For long centuries human 
rights have been trampled upon by those in power. 
Practical slavery has long held the place of brotherhood, 
and now those so long kept in ignorance and superstition 
can be expected to do nothing less than take vengeance 
to the extent of their ability. By and by all 
will discern the wisdom as well as the justice of the 
divine law— "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with 
all thy mind, being and strength, and thy neighbor as 
thyself." 

CRAZED BY CITY LIFE. 



Chicago, 111.— Dr. H. N. Moyer, one of the most 
noted experts in mental diseases in the city, has made 
an answer to the charge that "Chicago is going crazy." 
He shows that the other big cities are going crazy as 
fast as Chicago. He says: 

"The fact is that the insanity ratio in both New 
York and Boston is increasing faster than in Chicago. 
New York's proportion is 1 out of every 340; Boston 
and New England 1 out of every 320, while Chicago has 
only one out of every 400." 



The above, brought out by a desire to free Chicago 
from the charge of being the most crazy city is a sad 
commentary on the so-called Evolution that has lifted 
man to almost the plane of gods. Alas! How much 
the poor world needs the times of restitution of all 
things spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets 
since the world began. Restitution would not land 
then in monkeyhood either, but in the safe and sane 
condition of father Adam, who lived 930 years without 
doctors, pills and plasters, and had no need of an asylum. 
Let God be true and let men know of it, even 
though it requires that our race pass through terrible 
experiences to learn of its own unwisdom and of God's 
grace in Christ. 

A FORM AND "YELL" OF GODLINESS. 



Before his regular meeting last night, Evangelist 
Tilman Hobson at Olivet Congregational Church, spoke 
to the "Sunbeam Society," composed of boys and girls 
of the Sunday School of Olivet Church. 

"You know, boys and girls," said the speaker, "that 
it is quite the thing nowadays for the schools to have a 
'yell.' I have a 'yell' for you to learn to-night. It is 
this: 

'"Rah, 'rah, 'rah, have you seen Second Timothy, 
two fifteen'? 

"The words of that particular verse are these: 
'Study to show thyself approved unto God, a workman 
that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the 
word of truth." 



How peculiar it does seem to teach the little ones 
such formalistic piety of which they can know really 
nothing, and at the same time to send their older brothers 
and sisters to schools where they will be systematically 
taught by higher critics that the Bible is not the 



Word of Truth. 

Alas! how little studying of the Word there is today. 
The possession of a Bible and the committing 
to memory of a few texts is all that is thought necessary. 
What wonder that it has no "power" to keep 
in the present time of falling. 

PREPARING FOR THE "TARE" HARVEST. 



"Did Adam and Eve ever live? If so, how did they 
originate?" 

With these and similar questions University of 
Chicago medical students are in a perplexing frenzy. 
A hundred prospective physicians gathered in the physiological 
lecturing room yesterday and heard Dr. A. P. 
Mathews, professor of physiological chemistry, declare 
that there was no such thing as divine creation.— Des 
Moines Capitol. 



R3593 : page 212 

"BECAUSE THE DAYS ARE EVIL." 

"See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools but as 
wise, redeeming the time, because the days are evil." 
-Eph. 5:15,16.- 

THE WORD "circumspect" is from circum, signifying 

around, and spectus, signifying to look, to 

watch. The true Christian pathway is so narrow, 

so beset with tests and pitfalls and wiles of the evil 

one, that, if we walk carelessly even (not to say wickedly), 

we will be in great danger of mishap. It requires 

not only that we look all around at every step, 

but, more than this, it requires that we be wise,— wiser 

than our fellow creatures of earth,— wise with the wisdom 

that cometh from above, which is pure, peaceable, 

loving; yet first of all loyal to the Lord and his Word. 

At a centre to which flow by mail the records of 
the trials and difficulties through which many of the 
Lord's people are called to pass, we are in position to 
know that their trials are now more numerous and more 
severe than for a long time at least. Appeals for prayer 
on their behalf and for counsel respecting the way of 
the Lord come by nearly every mail from tried 
ones who are anxious to "walk circumspectly." These 
are gladly answered, to the best of our ability,— pointing 
out the Scriptural lines that must guide all who 
would walk with the Lord. 

We now wish to call attention to some general 
principles, applicable to every member of the body of 
Christ, at every time; and especially necessary to be 



remembered and practiced at the present time, because 

R3593 : page 213 

of the special activity of our Adversary;— "because 
the days are evil." For it would appear that, as 
in the "harvest" of the Jewish age, so in the present 
"harvest" of the Gospel age, opposition prevails not 
only in the synagogues, from the Scribes and Pharisees, 
but in the home circle— between parents and children, 
and husbands and wives— and among the Lord's people. 
And in proportion as the Adversary seeks to stir up 
strife, let each of the consecrated be the more on guard 
to give no avoidable offense either in word or deed. 
"Walk circumspectly, ...because the days are evil," 
—days of special trial and testing. 

HELPFUL RULES FOR DAILY LIFE. 

The rules we have to suggest are as follows:— 

I. Let each resolve to mind his own business. 
The Scriptural injunctions along this line caution 

us not to be busy-bodies in other people's affairs. Everyone 
of experience in life has learned that this is a good 
rule; yet few walk by this rule, circumspectly. If we 
have not sufficient of our own business and of the Lord's 
service to fill our hands and moments and mouths, 
there is something wrong with us that needs careful 
prayer and study of the divine Word to set right. 

This does not mean that we should be indifferent 
to the welfare of others under our care, or for whom 
we are in any degree responsible; but, even in doing 
for these we should be careful to recognize their rights 
and the rights of others, and specially careful not to 
exceed our own rights. Let us never forget that justice 
must govern in our interferences with the affairs of 
others, though we may not require full justice in respect 
to our own interests, but exercise mercy. 

II. We should exercise great patience with others 
and their faults— more than in dealing with ourselves 
and our own short-comings. 

When we remember that the whole world is mentally 
as well as physically and morally unsound through 
the fall, it should make us very considerate for their 
failings. Since the Lord is graciously willing to cover 
our blemishes with the merit of the precious blood, we 

R3594 : page 213 

cannot do less than be "very pitiful" and of tender 
compassion towards others;— even though their failings be 
greater or different from our own. This general rule is 
specially applicable to your own children. Their defects 
to some extent came from you or through you; 
hence, in dealing with their faults, you should do just 
as in correcting your own faults,— earnestly, rigorously, 



for their correction in righteousness, but sympathetically, 
mercifully, lovingly. 

III. Do not be touchy and easily offended. Take 
a kindly, charitable view of the words and acts of others. 
A trifling slight or rebuff could well be passed 
unnoticed— covered with the mantle of generosity and 
love. A serious offense should be assumed to be unintentional, 
and inquiry should be kindly made in words 
that would not stir up anger, but in "speech seasoned 
with grace." In a majority of cases it will prove that 
no offense was meant. 

This rule in the Scriptures comes under the instructions 
not to indulge in "evil surmisings,"— imagining 
evil intentions and motives behind the words and 
acts of others. "Evil surmisings" is ranked by the 
Apostle as contrary to the words of our Lord Jesus, 
opposed to godliness, and of the same spirit as envy 
and strife— of a corrupt mind, works of the flesh and 
the devil.- 1 Tim. 6:3-5; Gal. 5:19-21. 

LOVE THE LAW OF THE SPIRIT. 

The other side of this subject is brought out by 
the Apostle's injunction respecting the elements of the 
spirit of love, of which God's people are begotten and 
which they are to cultivate daily,— the development 
of which is one of the chief proofs of their being "overcomers." 
He says, "Love suffereth long and is kind, 
...is not easily offended, thinketh no evil,...beareth 
all things, believeth all things [favorably], hopeth all 
things, endureth all things." 

It may be urged that such a disposition would be 
imposed upon frequently, by the evilly disposed. We 
reply that those who possess this spirit of love are not 
necessarily obtuse nor soft: their experiences in cultivating 
this degree of love have served to develop them 
and make them of "quick understanding in the fear of 
the Lord." They will be cautious where there is even 
the appearance of evil, even while avoiding the imputation 
of evil intentions until forced to concede them by 
indisputable evidence. Besides, it would be better far 
to take some trifling risks and suffer some slight losses, 
many times, than to accuse even one innocent person. 
And the Lord who has directed this course is abundantly 
able to compensate us for any losses experienced 
in following his counsel. He is both able and willing to 
make all such experiences work together for good to 
those who love him. He places obedience to his arrangements 
first (even before sacrifice) saying, "Ye are my 
disciples, if ye do whatsoever I command you." 

Whoever neglects the Lord's commands along this 
line of "evil surmisings" weaves a web for his own ensnarement, 
however "circumspectly" he may walk as 
respects other matters; for a heart impregnated with 
doubt and suspicion toward fellow creatures is more 
than half prepared to doubt God; the spirit of sourness 



and bitterness implied is at war with the spirit of the 
Lord, the spirit of love. Either the one or the other 
will conquer. The wrong spirit must be gotten rid of, 
or it will defile the new creature and make of him a 
"castaway." On the contrary, if the new nature conquer, 
as an "overcomer," it will be along this line: if 
evil surmisings are overcome, half the battle against 
present difficulties and besetments is won. The surmisings 
are from the heart, and lead us either to good 
words and acts, or to evil words and acts. 

IV. If you have been slandered, you may explain, 
to set yourself right, either publicly or privately; 
but surely avoid doing more than this. If you slander 
in return you make two wrongs out of one. Let no 
man render evil for evil to any one;— no, not even if 
what you should tell be the truth, while what your 
neighbor told was falsehood. And in contradicting and 
explaining false charges, remember not to go beyond 
this to make counter-charges against your defamer; 
for thus you also would become a slanderer. 

THE GOLDEN RULE. 

This is the Scriptural rule. We are to do unto 
others as we would that they should do unto us, and 
not as they do unto us. The wrongs done toward us 
will never justify wrong doing on our part. God's true 
children are to have no sympathy with Satan's delusion 
—"Do evil that good may result." But while no 
Scripture forbids our explaining away the errors and 
false statements of slanderers, experience proves that, 
if we followed Satan and his deluded servants of unrighteousness 
around, to contradict every adverse criticism 

R3594 : page 214 

and evil report, we should be kept more than busy. 
And if Satan found us willing to do so, he would no 
doubt lead us such a chase as would prevent our having 
any time to tell forth the good tidings of great joy; 
thus he would gain a victory, and we should lose one. 

Rather let us commit our reputation to the Lord, 
as a part of the sacrifice we laid at his feet when we 
surrendered all in obedience to the "call" to run the 
race for the great prize of our high calling. If thus 
we suffer some loss of reputation, by reason of our 
resolution not to neglect the King's business to fight 
for our own tinsel, we may be sure that it will count 
with him as so much endured for Christ's sake; and so 
much the more will be our reward in heaven, when the 
battle is over and the victors are crowned. 

Meantime, however, it behooves each of the Lord's 
people to be as circumspect as possible at every step 
of the way. Remember that in proportion to faithfulness 
and zeal in letting the light shine we will have 
the malignant opposition of our great Adversary, who 



seeks to turn and twist and maliciously distort and discolor 
our every word and act;— because the accuser of 
the brethren can find no real charges; and because he 
is exceeding mad against the humble servants of the 
truth, as he was against the Chief Servant— our Lord. 
He, let us remember, was crucified as a law-breaker, 
at the instance of the prominent ones of the church, 
and betrayed to them by one of his own disciples. 

"Consider him who endured such contradiction of 
sinners against himself, lest ye be weary and faint in 
your minds" when attacked by the Adversary,— whoever 
may be his agents and whatever their missiles. 
He cannot harm but will only increase our reputation 
in the Lord's sight, if we endure faithfully; and he can 
do no outward harm that God cannot overrule for the 
good of his cause— though that good may sometimes mean 
"sittings" of chaff and tares from the wheat. 

V. Evil speaking, backbiting and slandering are 
strictly forbidden to God's people, as wholly contrary 
to his spirit of love— even if the evil thing be true. As 
a preventive of anything of the nature of slander, the 
Scriptures very carefully mark out one only way of redress 
of grievances, in Matt. 18:15-17. 

Even advanced Christians seem to be utterly in 
ignorance of this divine ruling, and hence professed 
Christians are often the most pronounced scandal-mongers. 
Yet this is one of the few special, specific commandments 
given by our Lord; and considered in connection 
with the statement, Ye are my disciples if ye 
do whatever I command you, its constant violation 
proves that many are not far advanced in discipleship. 

FOLLOW THE LORD'S WAY. 

Let us look carefully at this rule, which, if followed, 
would prevent gossip, "evil-speaking," "backbiting." 

Its first provision, for a conference between the 
principals alone, implies candor on the part of the accuser 
who thinks that he has suffered; and whom here 
we will call A. It implies his thinking no evil of the 
accused, whom we will style B. They meet as 
"brethren," each thinking his own course the right 
one, to discuss the matter; to see whether they can 
come to the same view. If they agree, all is well; the 
matter is settled; peace prevails; the threatened break 
has been averted, and no one is the wiser. 

If they cannot agree, A may not start a scandal 
by relating his version;— not even to confidential friends 
may he disclose the matter, saying, "Don't mention it; 
and especially don't say I told you." No; the matter 
is still "between thee and him [A and B] alone." If 
A considers the matter important, so as to wish to 
prosecute the subject further, he has but one way open 
to him, namely, to ask two or three others to go with 
him to B and hear the case from both sides and give 
their judgment respecting its right and wrong sides. 



These should be chosen (1) as persons in whose Christian 
character and good sense and spirit of a sound 
mind A himself would have confidence, peradventure 
they should favor B's view of the matter. (2) They 
should be chosen as with a view to B's appreciation of 
their advice, if they should give their judgment of the 
matter in A's favor. 

It would, however, be wholly contrary to the spirit 
of justice as well as contrary to the spirit of the Master's 
instructions here, for A to "talk it over" with 
several friends from whom he desired to select these 
"two or three witnesses," to make sure that they favored 
his story (without hearing the other side) and 
would go to the conference prejudiced,— with their 
minds already determined against B. No; the matter 
is between A and B alone, until the two or three friends 
are brought in to hear both sides of the dispute in the 
presence of both parties. 

TO ASSIST, NOT TO INJURE. 

If the judgment of the "brethren" is against B, 
he should hear them, should accept their view of the 
matter as the just, reasonable one;— unless it involves 

R3595 : page 214 

some principle in which he cannot conscientiously acquiesce. 
If the "brethren" see the matter from B's 
standpoint, A should conclude that in all probability 
he had erred; and, unless conscience hindered, should 
accept the position and apologize to B and the brethren 
for the annoyance caused by his poor judgment. But 
none of the parties are at liberty to turn scandal-mongers 
and tell the matter, "confidentially," to others. 

If the decision went against A, and he still felt 
that he was injured and had failed to get justice through 
a poor choice of advisers, he might (without violence 
to the principles laid down by our Lord) call other advisers 
and proceed as before. If their decision were 
against him, or if he felt that he could not trust to the 
judgment of any, fearing that all would favor B, he 
should realize that part at least of his trouble is self-conceit, 
and would do well to fast and pray and study 
lines and principles of justice more carefully. But A 
has gained no right to tell anything to the Church nor 
to anyone, either publicly or privately. If he does so, 
it marks him at once as disobedient to the Lord and 
exercised by a bad spirit, a carnal spirit,— contrary to 
the spirit of the truth, the spirit of love. 

If the committee decide partly against B, and only 
partly in favor of A, the brethren (A and B) should 
endeavor to see the matter thus, and to arrange matters 
amicably. In this case there would be nothing respecting 
the matter to tell;— nothing that is anybody's 
business. 



If the committee decide wholly against B and 
wholly in favor of A, and if B will not heed them and 
make reparation for the wrong or cease from injuring 
A, the latter is still not at liberty to become a scandal-monger; 
nor are the brethren of the committee. If 

R3595 : page 215 

A considers the matter of sufficient importance to justify 
further action, there is just one course open to him: 
he with the committee may lay the matter before the 
Church. Then the Church shall hear the matter, both 
sides, and whichever (A or B) shall refuse to recognize 
the advice of the Church shall be thereafter considered 
and treated by all as an outsider— as not of the Church, 
not to be fellowshipped; as dead, until such time as he 
may repent and reform. 

The duties of one member cannot be undertaken by 
another,— each must act for himself according to the 
Lord's rule. But if in violation of the Lord's command 
a matter become a scandal and be troubling the Church 
and disgracing it as a whole, then the properly chosen 
representatives of the company should take the matter 
up. They should not only investigate the principals in 
the difficulty, but with equal diligence they should 
investigate the real troublers who had circulated the 
scandal and should reprove them. 

But all reproofs should be in love, remembering that 
all are imperfect in some particulars. The object in 
every case should be to correct not to punish. The Lord 
alone has the authority to punish. At very most the 
Church may for a time withdraw fellowship with the 
unrepentant, and must as publicly restore it when 
repentance is manifest. Our love, joy, peace are the 
ends sought by the Lord, and these we must follow as 
his disciples. Any other course will surely work injury. 

Thus did the Lord guard his true disciples from 
the insidious sin of slander, which leads onward to 
other and grosser works of the flesh and the devil, and 
stops growth in the truth and its spirit of love. And 
let us note, too, that those who hear slanders and thus 
encourage slanderers in their wrong course, are partakers 
of their evil deeds; guilty partners in the violation 
of the Master's commands. God's true people should refuse 
to listen to slanders and should point the offender to 
the Lord's Word and the only method therein authorized. 
"Are we wiser than God?" Experience teaches 
us that we cannot trust to our own judgments and are 
on safe ground only when following the voice of the 
Shepherd implicitly. 

RATHER REPROVE THEM IN LOVE. 

If any Brother or Sister begins to you an evil report 
of others, stop him at once, kindly, but firmly. 
"Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness 



but rather reprove them." Refuse to have any 
share in this violation of our Master's commands, which 
does great mischief in the Church. Supposing the 
Brother or Sister to be only a "babe" in spiritual matters, 
call attention to the Lord's ruling on the subject, 
Matt. 18:15, and 1 Tim. 5:19. If the conversation 
is not directed to you but merely in your hearing, 
promptly show your disapproval by withdrawing. 
If, after having his attention called to the Lord's 
command on this subject, the slanderer still persists in 
"evil-speaking," "back-biting" and telling you his 
"evil surmisings," reprove him more sharply, saying 
as you go,— I cannot, must not hear you; for if I did, 
I would be as criminal in the matter as you are— violating 
the Lord's command. And even if I were to 
hear your story, I could not believe it; for the Christian 
who does not respect the Lord's Word and follow 
his plan of redress for grievances, shows so little of the 
Lord's spirit that his word can not be trusted. He 
who twists and dodges the Lord's words would not 
hesitate to twist and misrepresent the words and deeds 
of fellow-disciples. If to any extent you listen to such 
conversation or express "sympathy" with it or with the 
gossiper or slanderer, you are a partner in the sin and 
in all its consequences; and if a "root of bitterness" is 
thus developed, you are more than likely to be one of 
those "defiled" by it.-Heb. 12:15. 

SLANDERERS ARE THIEVES. 

A slanderer is a thief according to worldly standard: 
as Shakespeare wrote: 

He who steals my purse steals trash; 

But he who filches from me my good name 
Takes that which not enriches him, 
And makes me poor indeed. 

According to the Christian standard, still higher, 
as voiced by the Great Teacher, slanderers are 
murderers. (See Matt. 5:22; 1 John 3:15, Revised Version.) 
Thus seen, the very suggestion to slander is to be 
shunned, as of the spirit of Satan.— Jno. 8:44. 

VI. God's people should beware of pride as they 
would avoid the most deadly plague. 

This rule, always good, and well backed by Scripture, 
seems doubly needful to those who are blessed 
with the light of present truth. This may seem strange: 
it may be reasoned that the receiving of so much grander 
views of God's character and plan would make his people 
feel the more insignificant and humble, the more dependent 
on divine goodness, the more trustful of 
God and the less trustful of themselves. And this 
should be the effect, always and ever: but alas, with 
very many it is not so. 

Many get to feel that the knowledge of the plan 
of the ages proves them specially wise or great or good: 
they seem to forget that God hides the truth from the 



wise and great— that no flesh should glory in his sight. 

They love the truth selfishly, as dealers love their merchandise, 

for the sake of what they can get for it. If 

they cannot hope for wealth in exchange for the truth 

they can hope for small notoriety— to appear wiser 

than others, that they may dole it out in fragments 

and thus perpetuate their notoriety for wisdom, and 

gratify their pride or vanity. Such people do little to 

help circulate the present truth. If they cannot avoid 

it, they may mention MILLENNIAL DAWN or ZION'S 

WATCH TOWER or Tabernacle Shadows or Food for 

Thinking Christians or About Hell or About Spiritism; 

but when they do so it is usually with some disparaging 

remark; as for instance, that they "disagree in a 

good many things;" or that "they pin their faith to no 

man's coat sleeve, but go to the Word of God direct." 

GRACE FOR THE HUMBLE. 

Beware of all such people; sooner or later, unless 
they reform, they will fly the track entirely, and injure 
more than they ever helped. God does not wish such 
people to serve his cause, and will surely permit their 
vanity to stumble them,— however much their natural 
ability— and it is generally people of real or fancied 
ability who are thus afflicted with the spirit of pride and 
vanity. God opposeth the proud, but showeth his 
favor to the humble. We call every reader of our publications 
to witness that the author has never boasted of 
his wisdom or originality, either publicly or privately. 
We have boasted in the truth, and shall continue to 
boast of it— that no human philosophies can hold a 
candle to its brilliant electric ray; but we have never 
boasted of being its originator. On the contrary, it is 

R3595 : page 216 

because we did not manufacture it, but because God has 
revealed it "in due time" as "meat in due season," 
and because it is so much more wonderful than we or 
any other human being could originate or concoct, that 
we have confidence that none other than God is its 
Author and its Revealer. 

If by the grace of God we have in any degree been 
used by him in serving present harvest truths to others, 
we rejoice in the service, and will continue to strive to 
be faithful to our stewardship: but as for vanity on this 
account, we see no room or reason for it. We are well 
aware that our Master could readily have found many 
others as fit and worthy of the service, and many more 
capable naturally: we can only suppose, therefore, that 
herein as previously— "God hath chosen the foolish 
things of the world to confound the wise; and God hath 
chosen the weak things of this world to confound the 
things that are mighty,. ..and the things that are 
despised. ..to bring to naught things that are; that 



no flesh should glory in his presence."— 1 Cor. 1:27-29. 

R3596 : page 216 

We therefore caution all who by the grace of God 
have been translated out of darkness into God's marvelous 
light, that they walk proportionately the more 
humbly before the Lord: because, if the light received 
should become darkness, how great would be the darkness, 
and how hopeless the condition! It would, as 
the Apostle declares, be better for such never to have 
known the way of life. If salt lose its flavor it is good 
for nothing more than sand. 

"BLESSED ARE THE PURE IN HEART." 

VII. Be pure: maintain a conscience void of offense 
toward God and men. Begin with the heart— the 
thoughts: harbor no thoughts that in any sense of the 
word would be evil. To make sure of this, have Christ 
Jesus as your pattern, well and much before your mind. 
When evil is obtruded upon you, either from without 
or from within, lift your heart to him in prayer for 

the grace promised to help in every time of need. 
Keep constantly near you the thought and prayer, "Let 
the words of my mouth and the meditations of my 
heart be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my strength 
and my Redeemer." 

VIII. While treasuring and seeking to follow the 
various specific commands of Scripture, let us seek 
more and more to understand and come into sympathy 
with the principles which underlie the divine law: this 
will enable us to judge of the right and the wrong of 
such of our words, thoughts and acts as may not be 
particularly specified in the Lord's Word. Indeed, as 
we get to understand and sympathize with the principles 
of divine law, to that extent we are getting at the 

spirit of the divine Word.-See Psa. 1 19:97-105. 

IX. Shun a contentious and fault-finding disposition 
as contrary to the spirit or disposition of Christ- 
contrary to love. 

A certain amount of combative courage is demanded 
in overcoming the world, the flesh and the devil and 
their various snares, and this fighting disposition 
may become a valuable aid to ourselves and the Master's 
cause if rightly and wisely directed;— against sin, first 
in ourselves and secondly in others; if used for the Lord 
and his people, and against Satan and all his powers 
of darkness and superstition. This in the Scriptures is 
called fighting the good fight: and we all should be 
gallant soldiers in this battle for right and truth, lovingly 
defending our Captain's honor and his people's 
liberties. 

FIGHT THE GOOD FIGHT. 



But such a good use of combativeness is not pleasing 
to the Prince of this world, and he will seek to pervert 
what he cannot directly use. Consequently he 
attempts with some to make combativeness appear a 
chief virtue: he encourages them to fight everything 
and everybody;— the brethren more than the powers 
of darkness;— nominal churchmen more than the errors 
and ignorance which blind them and make them 
such. Indeed his desire is to get us to "fight against 
God." 

Let us be on guard on this point. Let us first of 
all judge ourselves lest we cast a stumbling block before 
others: let us fight down in our own hearts the 
wrong spirit which seeks to make mountains out of 
trifles and disposes us to be captious and contentious 
over littles and nonessentials. "Greater is he that 
ruleth his own spirit than he that taketh a city." Let 
us guard ourselves that our defense of the truth be not 
from motives of self glorification; but from love for 
the truth, love for the Lord and love for his people, 
the brethren. If love be the impelling spirit or motive, 
it will show itself accordingly, in loving, gentle, patient, 
humble efforts toward the fellow-servants; and 
let us be "gentle toward all." Let "the sword of the 
spirit, the Word of God," which is quick and powerful, 
do all the cutting. 

X. Beware of all thoughts, feelings and conditions 
directly or remotely connected with malice, envy, 
strife, hatred. Give these no place in your heart even 
for a moment; for they will surely do you great injury, 
aside from leading to the injury of others. Keep your 
heart, your will, your intentions and desires full of 
love toward God and all his creatures,— the most fervent 
toward God, and proportionately toward all who 
have his spirit and walk in his directed way. 

XL Do not trust your conscience. If it were a 
sufficient guide you would have no need of the Scriptures. 
The majority of people have as good as no conscience; 
for they are blind to the principles and laws 
of God given to guide conscience. And still worse off 
than these are those mentioned in 1 Tim. 4:2. Hence 
the imperative necessity for carefully heeding the 
Lord's Word, and walking circumspectly according to 
its light. 

XII. Do not be bold, except for the right, the 
truth. So far as yourself is concerned preserve a reverential 
fear— of sin, and of displeasing the Master, 
and of losing the great reward— "the prize of our high 
calling." Nearly all who "fall away" first lose all 
fear and become self-confident. They forget that it is 
only "If ye do these things ye shall never fall." (2 Pet. 1:5-10.) 
"Let us fear, lest a promise being left us of 
entering into his rest, any of us should seem to come 
short of it." (Heb. 4:1.) Partly because of the loss 
of this proper fear, "It is impossible to renew them 
again unto repentance." 



R3596 : page 217 

GOD'S WAYS HIGHER THAN MAN'S WAYS. 

--ISAIAH 55: 1-13.-JULY 23.- 

Golden Text:— "Seek ye the Lord while he may be found." 

TODAY'S lesson is often seriously misapplied. 
It is supposed to be a picture of the blessings of 
the Lord upon the Israelites returning from the 
Babylonian captivity. But whoever will examine the 
whole matter in the context will clearly discern that if 
it were a prophecy of that event it signally failed of 
fulfilment. So far from Israel's return from Babylon 
being accompanied by the running of nations to them 
and the Lord's glorification in them, the very reverse 
was true— they had a very struggling existence for years 
under very adverse conditions, and never secured their 
national independence, let alone authority over other 
nations. Verses 12,13, representing the hills and trees 
and the pouring forth of blessings do not fit the return 
of Israel nor their experiences at that time.— See the 
accounts given in Nehemiah and Ezra. 

The proper application of this prophecy is in line 
with the interpretation already given in chapters 52 
and 53. Chapter 52 describes our time, the awakening 
of Zion and the putting on of the beautiful garments 
in the resurrection morning. It describes the harvest 
time, when the watchmen lift up the voice together and 
the feet of the Church are seen to be beautiful upon the 
mountains, bringing the message, "Thy king reigneth," 
and the further message that the Lord's people should 
depart out of Babylon. (Vs. 11,12. Compare Revelation 18:2-5.) 
Then follows a description of how highly exalted 
Messiah will be during his Millennial reign. Chapter 53 
calls attention to the fact that the report, the teachings 
of the Lord through various mouthpieces, has not been 
regarded, has not been "heard," not been "believed," 
and the arm of Jehovah has not been appreciated during 
this Gospel age, and an account of why this was— 
because of the ignominy and suffering under which it 
pleased the Father to develop the New Creation, Head 
and body. Chapter 54 continues the thought saying, 
"Sing, O barren, thou that didst not bear," etc. This 
the Apostle applies to the Gospel Church, or rather to 
the original Abrahamic Covenant. (Gal. 4:27.) The 
prosperity of this original covenant as superior to the 
Law Covenant which temporarily succeeded it is shown, 
and the result is pictured, namely, that ultimately the 
fruitage of this Covenant shall be great. The Church is 
pictured as the glorious New Jerusalem built of precious 
stones, and the declaration is made that "no weapon 



formed against it shall prosper." 

"WHOSOEVER WILL MAY COME" 

Then Chapter 55 describes the condition that shall 
obtain after the Gospel Church shall have been selected 
from the world and glorified. Hence the lesson before 
us pictures the Millennial age and its blessing upon the 
world of mankind through the glorified Church. "Ho, 
everyone that thirsteth, come ye to the waters, and he 
that hath no money; come ye, buy and eat; yea, come, 
buy wine and milk, without money and without price." 
This verse is in close agreement with the picture of the 
Millennial blessings given us in Revelation 22:1,17. 

We have already pointed out that according to 
the Scriptures there is no river of life flowing at the 
present time— nor will there be until the Church is glorified, 
the Kingdom established, and that then the river 
of life will flow from the throne, from the Millennial 
Kingdom power and authority established in the earth, 
and then it will be the glorified Bride with the Spirit that 
will give the invitation to the world of mankind in 
general. We have already pointed out the Lord's 
words to the effect that now whoever has the water of 
life receives it not from a fountain or river or pool but 
from the Lord, "a well of water springing up in you." 
Since there is no water to which to invite any at the 
present time, the invitation of this lesson must belong 
to the time when there will be such a flow of living 
waters. 

There is a certain sense in which now any who thirst 
may come to Christ and find him a fountain of life, and 
all of the Lord's people are thus refreshed in the present 

R3597 : page 217 

time by partaking of Christ and thus having formed in 
them the well of water that will spring up into everlasting 
life. The statement of our lesson, however, seems to 
be a more general one, an invitation to every one such 
as the Millennial invitation will be, for the invitation 
of the present time has limitations. 

The water of life which our dear Redeemer offers 
us now is not without price, for he himself stipulates 
that none can be his disciple except he take up his cross 
and follow him— he who loves father or mother or lands, 
etc., more than me cannot be my disciple. The cost 
of the water of life in this present time is self-denial, 
self-sacrifice, a walk in the narrow way and baptism into 
Christ's death. Who shall say, then, that the present 
offer is without price, without conditions, without cost? 
The Master said that those desirous of being his disciples 
should sit down first and count the cost. The 
meaning of all this is that the Lord is selecting during this 
Gospel age a peculiar people, a special class, those who 
would be copies of the Son of God and count it all joy 



to lay down their little all in the divine service because 
of their appreciation of the wonderful words of life, the 
exceeding great and precious promises coming to us 
through our relationship with Jesus. 

"A WELL OF WATER IN YOU" 

On the contrary, with the end of this Gospel age 
there will be no more suffering for righteousness' sake, 
the narrow way will no longer be. It will give place to 
the highway of holiness upon which all the redeemed of 
the Lord, during the Millennial age, may go up to life, 
restitution, perfection. We are glad for the world and 
for the favorable opportunity which will then come to 
all mankind through the merit of the precious blood. 
We are glad that the way shall then be so clear that a 
wayfaring man may not err therein; we are glad that 
then the knowledge of the Lord will fill the whole earth 
as the waters cover the great deep. But, on the other 
hand, we are glad also for the narrow way and for the 
high calling which is ours, preferring it with all its 
difficulties because of the exceeding great and precious 
promises connected therewith— promises of association 
with our dear Redeemer in his Kingdom and its glorious 
work for the world of mankind— promises of glory, 
honor and immortality, if so be that we suffer with him 
that we may also be glorified together. 

HIS MERCY ENDURETH FOREVER 

Many seem confused to think that the opportunities 
of the future will be so much greater than those of the 
present time. The reason for this distinction can only 

R3597 : page 218 

be seen by those who recognize the Scriptural teaching 

that the Bride of Christ now being God selected is a very 

peculiar class in the Lord's estimation, and that it is a 

special favor toward them that they are now counted 

worthy to suffer for Christ's sake, to be sharers in his 

death and sharers also "in his resurrection"— the first 

resurrection. Once the difference is seen between the 

reward of the Church and that of the world it will be 

easy to account for the difference between the fiery 

trials which shall try you and the more favorable environments 

of the world in the next age. The world 

will indeed be called to come to the waters of the river 

of life and to partake thereof freely, without money and 

without price, without our walking in the narrow way 

or taking up a cross of self-denial and suffering for 

righteousness' sake. All that will be required of the 

world at that time will be that they shall be thirsty, 

shall be desirous of the life offered, that they shall be 

hungry for the Bread of Life. All such may indeed 

delight themselves in the fatness, the fulness, the glorious 



provision which the Lord has made for them and which 
will then be opened before them. 

In the third verse we have the representation of 
the Master's gracious invitation as it will soon reach 
the world of mankind through the glorified Church, 
"Incline your ear unto me: Hear and your soul shall 
live." This testimony is in full harmony with Peter's 
statement of the conditions of the Millennial age. (Acts 3:22,23.) 
"A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise 
up unto you of your brethren, like unto me [Moses]; 
him ye shall hear in all things whatsoever he shall say 
unto you. And it will come to pass that every soul that 
will not hear [obey] that Prophet, shall be destroyed 
from amongst the people." "Hear [obey] and your soul 
shall live," shall be the watch-word of the Millennial 
Kingdom. 

The New Covenant, the everlasting Covenant, the 
sure mercies of David [the beloved], is to be proffered 
to all. That New Covenant, as the Apostle points out, 
is the divine agreement to be merciful— to forgive, to 
cancel sins that are past— "I will put my law in their 
minds and write them in their hearts: and I will be to 
them a God and they shall be to me a people.... 
I will be merciful to their unrighteousness and their 
sins and iniquities I will remember no more." (Heb. 8:8-13; 
Jer. 31:29-34.) "The sure mercies of David" are the 
mercies guaranteed to Israel and the world through 
his greater Son, our Lord. The real David (the real 
Beloved) shall be the divine channel for the outpouring 
of the blessings and mercies of the Abrahamic Covenant. 

DAVID, "BELOVED OF THE LORD" 

Of this antitypical David it is written, "Behold I 
have given him for a witness to the people, a leader and 
commander to the people." This is the great Prophet, 
the great Priest, the great King, typified by Moses and 
Melchizedek and the kings of the line of David. Behold 
he shall call a nation not previously known— the new 
nation called during this Gospel age, a holy nation, a 
peculiar people, a Royal Priesthood, to show forth the 
praises of him who hath called us out of darkness into 
his marvelous light. (1 Pet. 2:9.) And ultimately as 
a result of this calling of spiritual Israel as a holy nation 
and as a result of the establishment of the Kingdom and 
the glorification of this holy nation with himself at its 
head, because the Lord, the holy one of Israel, will 
glorify these, therefore many nations that previously 
knew him not shall run unto him because of his being 
glorified. 

Throughout the Millennial age there will be a grand 
opportunity for every member of Adam's race to seek 
the Lord while he may be found, to call upon him while 
he is near. The opportunity will last for a thousand 
years and all will be invited to drink of the water of 
life freely. All appreciating the situation fully may 



attain to all that was lost in Adam— attain it through 
the processes of restitution. 

Verse seven shows how the Lord may then be sought 
and found, namely, the wicked must forsake his ways 
of unrighteousness, the unjust must abandon unrighteousness 
even in thought. Under such conditions during 
that thousand years all may return unto Jehovah 
and find mercy and abundant pardon through the great 
antitypical David. But it will require all of that thousand 
years of Christ's reign to restore and make fit for 
presentation to Jehovah those who will hear the voice 
and apply for the water of life, forsake unrighteousness 
and seek the Lord. How glorious the prospect! 

Verses 12,13 set forth the blessings and peace and 
favor of God which will then be upon the whole world of 
mankind. It will no longer be true that whosoever will 
live godly shall suffer persecution, for then whosoever 
will live godly shall go out with joy and be led forth in 
peace by the great Shepherd of the flock, who, after 
telling us that we, his flock of this present age, are like 
sheep amongst wolves, assures us that "other sheep I 
have which are not of this fold." (John 10:16.) It is 
these other sheep of the Millennial age which are referred 
to and whose leading out and in in peace and joy is assured. 
There will be no wolves there, no "lions or any ravenous 
beast," is the assurance. 

In grandly poetic language mountains and hills 
and trees and fields are represented as all rejoicing in 
that glorious day when Satan shall be bound, when the 
knowledge of the Lord shall fill the earth, when the 
darkness of sin shall have fled away before the glorious 
beams of the Sun of Righteousness. Instead of the 
thorns of the present time, the wicked who lurkingly 
seek to injure the unwary foot, there shall then be the 
fir tree, an evergreen— symbolical of a man possessed 
of life everlasting. Instead of the briar with its thorns 
reaching forth to attack and ensnare those attracted 
by its sweet odor, shall come up the myrtle tree, beautiful 
and harmless. Thus does the Lord contrast the condition 
of the world to-day, full of men and women who 
are really thorns and briars in word and deed, injuring 
others, and the peaceable, strong, stalwart ones full of 
life and vigor in the next age. 

THE LORD SHALL BE GLORIFIED 

The conclusion of the chapter is that by that time, 
when the Lord's work of salvation for our race shall 
have been fully accomplished, the results will be to the 
name or honor of Jehovah, and this sign of his greatness 
and goodness will be perpetual— it will never be cut off. 
Evil doers, we are assured, shall be cut off— it would not 
be to the glory of the Lord that they should be permitted 
to continue. It will be to the Lord's glory that 
he should save from amongst mankind all who have a 
love for righteousness, all who under favorable conditions 



would prefer harmony with God and with righteousness, 
with truth and with goodness and purity. 

Verses 8-1 1 point out that such wonderful blessings 
as these will be beyond the thinking of mankind— they 

R3598 : page 219 

will be unready to believe that God's plan as it shall 

ultimately be developed will be so grand, so broad, 

so high, so deep. The Lord, therefore, explains in conjunction 

with these promises, "My thoughts are not 

your thoughts; neither are my ways your ways, saith 

the Lord." Many have thought it strange that earthly 

parents and generous and benevolent members of the 

human family should conceive grand and noble beneficences 

for each other, and especially for the more 

degraded of mankind, and have wondered how it could 

be that men's ways would be so much higher and 

grander than God's ways. The difficulty has been that 

they have not known the mind of the Lord; they have 

supposed that God had predestinated a little handful 

to eventually attain glory— saints favored by his grace 

and possessing much advantage every way over the 

majority of mankind. They have supposed, and in all 

the creeds of Christendom still teach, that all the remainder 

of mankind are according to the divine purpose 

to be eternally tormented. They have thus imagined 

that a good man's ways and a good man's plans are 

much higher than the ways and plans of the Almighty. 

Alas! How the Lord's holy name and character have 

been traduced and blasphemed by those who really 

sought to serve him and honor him. Alas, how shortsighted 

we have all been! 

Not until the Millennial Kingdom and its work are 
seen— not until the eyes of our understanding discern 
something of the lengths and breadths and heights and 
depths of God's wonderful provision for every member 
of the human family— not until then can we realize the 
meaning of this assurance before us, "As the heavens 
are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than 
your ways and my plans than your plans." 

SHOWERS OF REFRESHING 

The Lord gives us a word picture respecting his 
dealings with us as a race— respecting his word of 
promise which has been with us for 3,500 years, assuring 
us of the ultimate blessing of all the families of the earth 
but whose fulfilment is not yet apparent except to the 
eye of faith. The illustration offered is that as the rain 
cometh down from heaven and returneth not thither 
until it have watered the earth, causing it to bring forth 
and bud and to give seed to the sower and bread to the 
eater, so shall it be with the Word of the Lord which has 
gone out of his mouth: it shall not return unto him void, 
empty, without fruit, but it shall accomplish that which 



he pleased and shall prosper in the thing whereunto he 
sent it. 

Isaiah evidently realized, as did Solomon (Eccl. 1:7), 
that the rain coming down from the clouds returned 
thither again, and it therefore furnishes us a 
faithful picture of the Lord's Word, promise, which, as 
his messenger, comes into the world charged with a 
certain duty, obligation and purpose, which will ultimately 
return to the Lord to make report. The report, 
the result of the promise, shall not be other than that 
which the heavenly Father in his greatness and mercy 
and love designed; the report of the results of the divine 
plan shall not be such as would be a discredit to the 
Creator, a shame or blot upon his work, his character, 
his plan. The results shall be worthy of the one who conceived 
the plan: they shall show not only to restored 
humanity in the Millennial age, especially at its close, 
but they shall show also to all the holy angels, the wisdom, 
justice, love and power of God, and how grand and 
noble and loving are his thoughts and plans toward his 
creatures. 



R3598 : page 219 

A DISHONOR TO HIS FATHER. 

-2 CHRONICLES 33:1-13.-JULY 30.- 

Golden Text:— "Righteousness exalteth a nation, 
but sin is a reproach to any people."— Prov. 14:34. 

A PREVIOUS lesson showed Hezekiah to have been 
in many respects a model king— obedient to 
God and faithful. This lesson evidences the fact 
that good men and loyal to the Lord may be poor fathers, 
careless of their responsibilities to their children. Alas, 
that it is so to this day, and that even amongst the 
children of God, begotten of the holy Spirit, there are 
some who still fail to acquire the spirit of a sound mind 
in this particular. 

The Scriptural declaration is, "Train up a child in 
the way he should go, and when he is old he will not 
depart from it." (Prov. 22:6.) The thought seems to be 
that if the plastic mind of a child be properly cared for, 
properly impressed with the principles of righteousness, 
that impress cannot be wholly effaced even though the 
child might temporarily try forbidden paths of sin. 
Would that this important matter could be clearly 
discerned by all of the Lord's people, and that all could 
realize that in bringing children into the world a serious 
responsibility is undertaken, a responsibility which cannot 
be shirked, a responsibility which no right-minded 
person would desire to shirk. 

If this thought could be impressed upon all readers 



of ZION'S WATCH TOWER it surely would profit them and 
their children greatly. Indeed we are glad to know in 
various ways that the Truth is having great influence in 
the lives of WATCH TOWER readers and also upon their 
families. This is the practical outworking of the Spirit 
of the Lord, the spirit of a sound mind, the spirit of love 
and truth and righteousness. May it abound more and 
more, telling not only in the present life in the welfare 
of the children, but witnessing also to friends and 
neighbors a good testimony to the wisdom that cometh 
from above, first pure, then peaceable, easy of entreatment, 
full of mercy and good fruits. 

HEZEKIAH'S WICKED SON 

The story of Manasseh's reign is briefly told and is 
abominable. A boy of twelve years of age, properly 
reared, should have possessed considerable reason and 
sound sense and should have been considerably established 
in the ways of righteousness, in appreciation of 
the Lord and of the responsible position he occupied as 
his representative in Judah. It is a mistake that many 
parents make when they suppose that reasonable and 
sensible thoughts cannot be entertained by their children 
until they are twenty to thirty years of age. On 
the contrary, the most lasting impressions of life are 
frequently received before ten years of age, and the 
lessons should begin when the child is a month old- 
lessons of loving obedience to law and order, to the 

R3598 : page 220 

parental authority as representing the still higher 

power of the Creator. The child that does not learn to 

respect his parents and the proper laws and regulations 

of his home will be disadvantaged as respects his appreciations 

of his responsibilities to the Lord and his 

covenant laws, etc. 

It is all a mistake to suppose that childhood years 
must be spent in sowing wild oats or even in frivolity 
and play. From early infancy the thought should be 
instilled that life is a great privilege, a great blessing, 
and that every day and every hour should be used 
wisely and should bring some returns— to the glory of 
God or to our own advantage or to the advantage of 
others. From earliest infancy each should be taught that 
it is a shame and a sin to kill time, to waste time, to 
allow hours and days to slip by without improvement, 
without use in some worthy manner. The child who 
learns to waste time or to fritter it away in a useless and 
unprofitable manner is being permanently injured, and 
if ever he becomes useful in the world must do so by 
counteracting, by fighting against the wrong lessons 
learned in childhood. 

Parents owe it to their children to lay for them the 
proper foundation, to see that their minds are not filled 



with vanities, foolishness, nonsense, and that their 
hours and days are not wasted, but that the child shall 
be sympathetically made to understand that every 
moment is precious as a fitting and preparation for the 
great work of life upon which it is about to enter. Every 
parent owes it to his child also to impress upon the plastic 
mind noble thoughts, noble ambitions and not merely 
selfish ones. The child should be taught in a kindly 
manner by word and by example that any waste is 
reprehensible, and that hoarding in a miserly manner is 
likewise censurable; that those people who have merely 
as the chief end of life the accumulation of money are 
monomaniacs on the subject, and that the only reasonable 
and proper course is to use all the blessings and 
privileges, advantages and opportunities coming to us 
in God's providence for our own mental, moral and 
physical uplift and for rendering assistances to all within 
our reach, in harmony with the Golden Rule and with 
the law of love, first for God and secondly for our 
neighbor. 

The evils which Manasseh fostered and developed 
are set forth in the words of our lesson as succinctly as 
it would seem possible to state them and need no particular 
comment from us. One sentence covers the matter. 
"So Manasseh made Judah and the inhabitants 
of Jerusalem to err so that they did evil more than did 
the nations whom the Lord destroyed before the children 
of Israel." (R.V.) Thus in few words we are 
given the picture of the depth of degradation attained 
in a very short period— the heirs of the promises sinned 
more grievously than the Amalekites, the Perizzites, 
the Hittites and all those nations whom the Lord drove 
out of Canaan to make room for them, and whose iniquities, 
we are told, had come to the full. One lesson we 
might draw from this plunge into unrighteousness is 
that sin is constitutional derangement, that through the 
fall the whole human family is prone to sin as the 
sparks fly upward, that it requires continual effort under 
the guidance of the Lord to maintain even a reasonable 
standing and not to go backward into sin. With such 
a plunge into sin in such a short time, we can readily see 
how some of the heathen, not helped by the Lord as 
Israel was, reached still lower depths of degradation, as 

R3599 : page 220 

is evidenced in the various heathen nations of today. 
A parallel lesson might be drawn for the benefit of 
spiritual Israel. The New Creatures in Christ should 
realize that there is a continual warfare between the 
flesh and the spirit, and if the new nature yield the old 
nature triumphing will run a short course into sin, as 
the Apostle describes, saying of some that they were 
turned like a dog to his vomit and like a sow to her 
wallowing in the mire. The lesson in this connection 
would be that as New Creatures we must be continually 



on guard. We note the words of the Apostle as valuable 
instruction along this line, "I keep my body under, lest 
having preached to others I myself should be a 
castaway." 

CHASTISEMENT AND FORGIVENESS 

The Israelites under God's covenant were subject 
to disciplines for their deflection from the divine law, 
and these chastisements repeated frequently not only 
teach us of the perversity of the stiff-necked nation but 
also teach us of God's faithfulness, and illustrate to us 
how the judgments of the Lord bring forth a good fruitage. 
The judgment of the Lord as punishment for sin 
which came upon Manasseh eventuated in a blessing 
for the evildoer. When in prison in Babylon in sore 
distress he besought Jehovah his God, and humbled 
himself greatly before the God of his fathers and prayed 
unto him. 

In this we have an illustration of the principle that 
will go into effect in the Millennial age, only that the 
retributions of that time will be more prompt than they 
were in the days of Israel. When Christ shall be King 
over all the earth and shall lay righteousness to the 
line and justice to the plummet and sweep away every 
refuge of lies, his rewards for every good endeavor and 
intention and punishments for every evil intention and 
effort will be the establishment of judgment in the world. 
And the record is that "when the judgments of the Lord 
are abroad in the earth the inhabitants of the world will 
learn righteousness." 

Mercy is one of the grandest and most impressive 
features of the divine character, as the Apostle has declared, 
"There is forgiveness with thee that thou mayest 
be feared." (Psa. 130:4.) If God were not forgiving 
and merciful we might indeed be in terror before him; 
but we could not love him, neither would we have the 
same incentives to righteousness, because if he were 
not willing to forgive where would be the advantage or 
wisdom of repentance. Manasseh's petition to the Lord 
and his sincere repentance secured his release from Babylon 
and his return to the throne of Judah. On his 
return to power he apparently did everything he could 
do to efface the results of his previous wrong course. 
He endeavored to root out idolatry, cleansed the Temple 
of abominations, restored the divinely appointed services 
and issued positive commands that the people should 
follow his example in the worship and service of the Lord. 
But a good tree may be more easily and quickly cut 
down than a new one can be grown, and so it was that 
the evil effects of Manasseh's reign were never thoroughly 
effaced before his death, and the son born during the 
period of his wrong course and tainted with the adverse 
conditions was an enemy of righteousness, who, after 
two years' reign, was assassinated by officers of his own 
household. 



R3599 : page 221 

One of the important lessons for us to draw from 
this narrative is respecting the mercy of God to the 
truly repentant here illustrated. Many who are now 
spiritual Israelites were once wicked, vicious, idolators 
of money or of houses or of lands or of other things and 
alienated from God. His gracious character and readiness 
to forgive needs to be continually emphasized as 
we present the message of salvation to the members of 
our fallen race. Yea, sometimes this element of God's 
character needs to be emphasized to those who have 
already become his people, but who through weaknesses 
of the flesh have erred or strayed into forbidden paths— 
"There is forgiveness with thee that thou mayest be 
feared." 

No right-minded person will conclude that because 
God is very merciful and of tender compassion, therefore 
he may be sinned against repeatedly and forgiveness be 
relied upon. Rather let us get the thought that even 
though we should be forgiven and even though God 
should be merciful to us to the very last extreme, nevertheless 
every transgression and disobedience shall 
receive a just recompense of reward in some way or 
other. He who sins suffers, even though he subsequently 
repent and be forgiven. The dregs and degradation 
effected by the transgressions of divine law persist. And 
this principle applies to us who now have divine forgiveness 
in this present time, so that many of the Lord's 
jewels are to-day suffering mentally and physically 
for sins that are past and covered by God's mercy. And 
the same will be true in the next age in God's dealing 
with the world through the glorified Christ. Sins that 
are past will be forgiven them as they are forgiven us, 
but the degradations coming to the world through sin 
will survive the forgiveness of sins as they do with us 
and they will have proportionately the more to get rid 
of, the more to be restored from; they will be obliged to 
climb from the greater depth to the glorious heights of 
life and perfection in the image and likeness of God. 



R3601 : page 221 

THE TEMPLE GOD IS BUILDING. 

"Of all the beautiful lessons 

With which God's book is filled, 
This one, of wonderful sweetness, 

Hath most my being thrilled. 
Oh, wonderful care of the Father! 

Oh, wonderful love so free! 
To know that the Maker of all things 

Careth so much for me! 



"Tis said that the temple, so stately, 

That crowned Moriah's hill, 
Was built without sound of hammer, 

The toilers working so still. 
Far off from the grand foundation 

Was all the noise and strain 
Of fitting one stone to another, 

From base to turret's fane. 

"And when all were brought together, 

The stones of every size, 
The columns, so strong and graceful, 

Each in its place to rise— 
They formed so grand a temple 

As never before was seen; 
So true in its great proportions, 

So bright in its glittering sheen. 

"Yet there is a greater temple, 

And God is he who plans; 
Now gath'ring his stones together 

For his 'house not made with hands,' 
And each 'living stone' will be there, 

Which evermore, day by day, 
He's fitting for this great temple, 

Which will last for ever and aye. 

"Our pains, temptations and perils, 

Our sufferings, sighs and tears, 
Are God's chisels, tools and hammers, 

Until the Master appears. 
Let no one shrink from the process, 

Let none of the Lord's complain; 
But wait with a meek submission, 

'Twill not be long nor in vain." 



R3599 : page 221 

SOME INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 

IS A PLACE IN THE "LITTLE FLOCK" TOO GREAT AN 
ASPIRATION? 



Question.— Who will be found worthy to be of the 
"little flock"? Is not this aspiring too high? Should 
we not, rather, hope to be of the great company, who 
will go through the fire of tribulation? 

Answer.— Were it not that God has graciously, in 
the New Covenant, made provision for the covering of 
our unintentional blemishes and weaknesses, under the 
garment of Christ's righteousness, none of us could hope 



to be worthy of such a high calling as has been extended 
to us— a call to the divine nature and to joint-heirship 
with our Lord and Redeemer. As the Apostle expresses 
it, "Our sufficiency is of Christ." 

This does not mean, however, that we have nothing 
to do with making our calling and election sure. On 
the contrary, God having made provision for our justification 
from the sins that are past, thus fitted us to receive 
this high calling and prepared us to respond to it 
in a manner acceptable to himself. But our response 
must be hearty, as unto the Lord— a full consecration 
of ourselves even unto death in his service. We cannot 
claim that our Lord's death secures for us the prize of 
the high calling. His death secures for us the right to 
run the race; but the running of the race is our own 
affair, and only those who run that race will win that 
prize. Our Lord's sacrifice, in addition to opening for 
us the race-course, helps us over the infirmities of the 
flesh, because under the terms of the New Covenant 
God accepts our will, our heart-intentions, in respect to 
this race, and not the achievements of our flesh merely. 
God's grace in Christ making up for our natural imperfections, 
we are accredited as running the race with 
all the zeal and fervor of our minds, our wills, our 
endeavors. God thus judges us according to the spirit 
of our minds, and not according to the attempts of the 
flesh. 

It is thus, with Christ's righteousness supplementing 
our fully consecrated wills and best efforts, that the Lord 
reckons us "worthy" of joint-heirship with his son, our 
Lord. And if God counts such "worthy" why should 
not we count such worthy, including ourselves, if with 
our hearts we are serving the Lord to the best of our 
several abilities? 

No; it will be easier to get into the little flock than 
into the great company, so far as experiences are concerned. 
The difference between the two classes will 

R3599 : page 222 

consist not so much in the experiences as in the willingness 
to endure those experiences. As justified and consecrated 
children who endure whatever divine providence 
may permit, joyfully, and who go about the Father's 
business, doing with their might what their hands find 
to do, counting it a joy to suffer persecution in his service, 
these will constitute the "little flock," the "overcomers," 
the "worthy." Those who hold back from 
such suffering, and who endure persecution unwillingly, 
and merely rather than deny the Lord, are the ones 
whom we may expect to find will pass through the great 
time of trouble, and be of the great company, who will 
wash their robes in the blood of the Lamb. 

WERE ALL THE MARTYRS OF THE SAINT CLASS? 



Question.— Will not first of all the martyrs of the 
past be of the little flock, and are not they more than 
144,000? 

Answer.— We have no reason to question that there 
were faithful saints amongst the martyrs of the past. 
We may therefore expect such to be classed by our 
Lord as amongst the overcomers, the 144,000 mentioned 
in Revelation, the little flock, the elect Church. But we 
are of the opinion that there were fewer of the saints in 
olden times amongst the "martyrs" than the majority 
of people are inclined to think. Our reasons for this 
opinion are: The vast majority of those martyrdoms, so 
far as we are able to read between the lines of history, 
were in large part at least the results of political and 
social animosity— comparatively few of them for what 
might strictly be termed saintship— full consecration 
and faithfulness to the Lord. So far as the records 
show, many were executed very unwillingly; few willingly, 
joyfully, laid down their lives as living sacrifices 
to the Lord and his cause. Some, from the records, 

R3600 : page 222 

would appear to have gone to martyrdom spurred on by 
more or less of bravado, others by family or personal 
pride. Nor need it surprise us if we should ultimately 
find that a considerable number who were martyrs in 
the "dark ages" will be of the great company class who 
laid down their lives unwillingly, unjoyfully— impelled 
by their unwillingness to deny the Lord. 

WHO ARE THEY WHO ARE "DEFILED" BY BABYLON? 



Question.— You have already suggested that the 
expression, "These are they which were not defiled by 
women" (Rev. 14:4) symbolically refers to earthly church 
organizations, represented as women— Babylon, mother 
and daughters. Now, I want to enquire, Have not all 
or nearly all of us who now enjoy the light of 
Present Truth been at one time or another in Babylon, 
connected with some of these church systems or 
"women"? If so, have we not all been thus defiled? If 
not, what is signified by the defilement? 

Answer.— To our understanding, the point where 
defilement begins is after the light of truth has reached 
the Lord's people, and opened the eyes of their understanding 
to see the difference between the Church 
whose names are written in heaven and the human 
organizations whose memberships are written on earth. 
After we have come to see something at least of the 
lengths and breadths and heights and depths of the 
divine character and plan, and to appreciate something 



at least of how the Lord and his plan have been misrepresented 

by these women (systems) and his character 

traduced, and after we have heard thus the voice of conscience 

and of the Lord's Word, saying to us, "Come 

out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her 

sins and that ye receive not of her plagues;"— then it is 

that our defilement of conscience begins, if we refuse to 

obey the light that God has granted us, and the voice 

of his Truth. Whoever, for social or financial or other 

mercenary reasons, holds to that which he sees is built 

upon a wrong principle, and upholding wrong theories, 

in defamation of the divine character, is defiling his conscience, 

will be unworthy to be counted an overcomer, 

and will fail to have a part in the first resurrection. 

That this is so— that God does not reckon us defiled 
by our contact with Babylon up to the point of our 
enlightenment and our intelligent acquiescence in Babylon's 
wrong condition and course— is evidenced by the 
Scripture which says, "Babylon is fallen, is fallen [rejected]. 
Come out of her, my people [this shows that 
the Lord's people have mainly been in Babylon], that 
ye be not partakers of her sins [they are not reckoned 
to this point as being 'defiled'], and that ye receive not 
of her plagues [all who thus defile themselves with Babylon 
after seeing her true character prove themselves unworthy 
of being classed amongst the overcomers, and 
at very most could only hope to be of those who would 
come up through great tribulation, and wash their robes 
(of defilements) and make them white in the blood 
of the Lamb]." 

PRAYERS FOR EARTHLY RULERS. 



Question.— How should we understand the Apostle's 
expression (1 Tim. 2:1-4), respecting the propriety 
of making prayer and supplication on behalf of "kings 
and all in authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable 
life in all godliness and honesty"? 

Answer.— We are to feel a keen interest in the 
whole world, its great and its poor. We are interested 
in them because they are our brethren and neighbors 
according to the flesh and because God loved them, had 
mercy upon them, and redeemed them with his blood, 
and has made a gracious provision for their reclamation 
by and by. In proportion as we are in accord with our 
Lord we must be in accord with all these features of his 
gracious plan, and this means a love for mankind and a 
desire to "do good unto all men as we have opportunity, 
especially to the household of faith."— Gal. 6:10. 

Having such a kind feeling for the world it is appropriate 
that we should have their interests in mind 
when we pray, "Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done 
on earth as in heaven;" indeed, any and everything 
which bears upon the interests of humanity must of 



necessity come close to the hearts of those who have 
the holy spirit of love. It is appropriate, therefore, 
that on proper occasions prayer and supplication be 
made on behalf of rulers, indicating our good wishes for 
their welfare and leading in ways of righteousness- 
even though we see them hastening in a wrong course 
toward evil conditions, sure to react to their injury. 
The Apostle implies that these prayers for rulers 
should be to the intent that we may live a peaceable 
and quiet life— that God's people may have the peace 
of God at all times ruling in their hearts, and never 
fearing the anarchistic or hateful spirit of the world, and 
of the blind leaders of the blind. So that if we cannot 
speak well of them nor cooperate with them for conscience' 
sake we can at least bear them no grudge, but 
can pray for them, and make sure that we speak evil of 
no man. 

R3600 : page 223 

Our Lord's prayer, recorded in John 17, "I pray 
not for the world," should not be understood in contradiction 
of the Apostle's declarations in this text, but 
rather be interpreted to mean, I am not now praying 
for the world, "but for those whom thou hast given 
me." 

Neither are we to understand the Apostle to mean 
that we are to pray for something contrary to what the 
Lord has instructed us; we are not to pray for and to 
expect the conversion of kings and rulers and nations, 
so that the time of trouble will not be necessary and 
will not come. On the contrary, we are to understand 
that the trouble will come, because the world is not in 
the proper attitude of heart for the change of dispensation 
which is now due to take place. It must pass 
through the baptism of "blood," "fire," "wrath," in 
order to be ready for the new order of things, and these, 
therefore, will be so many blessings for the time disguised. 
Our prayers are to be in full accord with what 
is written, but this will not hinder us from good wishes 
for all, and from a sympathetic realization that many 
are perverse because they are blinded by the god of 
this world. 

PSALM 51:12-16. 



Question.— Please throw some light on Psa. 51:12-16. 
We do not see sinners converted, as therein 
stated. Why? 

Answer.— You evidently recognize the Psalms as 
prophetic, and this is right. The words of the Prophet 
relate to the body of Christ in the Gospel age, rather 
than to himself in the Jewish age. Our desires are to 
be that we may be filled with the Lord's spirit, transformed 



by the renewing of our minds, and we recognize 
as a fact that only those who have experienced such a 
transformation can properly represent the Lord as rebukers 
of sin and examples of righteousness and assistants 
for the recovery of the sinners to harmony with 
God. This is true now as respects the sinners of the 
present time, who chiefly are those whose eyes have been 
once enlightened with some measure of the light of truth, 
and who are not walking worthy of the Lord. The members 
of the body of Christ are all to be living epistles, 
known and read of all men— their influence in the world 
is to be a reproof to sin in every state and condition. 
This Scripture will have a particular fulfilment in the next 
age, when the Church now under instruction "taught 
of God," "made perfect through suffering," "filled with 
the spirit," shall by and by be glorified and become, as 
members of the body of Christ, the teachers of mankind 
—kings and priests unto God. In the present some 
sinners are reclaimed through good example; in the future 
we hope that many will be turned to the Lord under 
clearer light and more favorable conditions of the 
Millennial Kingdom. 

"BORN OF WATER AND THE SPIRIT." 



Question.— In DAWN, Vol. I., p. 277, and again in 
the WATCH TOWER, January 1, 1905, considerable has 
been said respecting the new birth, discussed by our Lord 
with Nicodemus, but we do not find a particular comment 
upon our Lord's statement, "Except a man be born 
of water and the spirit he cannot enter into the Kingdom 
of God." Will you kindly give us a word on this 
statement— what it imports? 

Answer.— The Lord seems to have had in mind the 
natural birth as a figure or illustration of the new birth. 
Our thought is that water is here used, as frequently 
elsewhere, as a symbol of the truth, and that these words 
signify that unless one be first begotten "by the word of 
truth" he cannot be born of the spirit to the new nature. 
(Eph. 5:26.) We believe that the Word does teach a 
water immersion too, and that all of the Lord's people 
who discern this teaching would and should be glad to 
obey it, but we fail to see that the Lord has laid such a 
stress upon water immersion. One of the best evidences 
that he has not done so is the fact that so many Christian 
confessors of the past have given evidence of having 
been begotten of the holy Spirit and of having participated 
in the real baptism into Christ's death through 
a full consecration, and yet being ignorant of the Scripture 
teaching respecting water immersion they were 
never thus symbolically baptized. To apply the word 
"water" in this text to water immersion would, therefore, 
be to exclude from the Kingdom many of the 
Lord's loyal and faithful ones who have laid down their 



lives in his service. This fact corroborates our view, 
above stated, that the Lord did not mean to refer to 
water baptism, but to the truth which, in the quotation 
already referred to is mentioned as the begetting power 
—as primarily related, therefore, to our birth of the 
Spirit. 

R3601 : page 223 

THE DIVINE STANDPOINT. 



Question.— Please explain Rom. 4:17— "God... 
calleth those things which be not as though they were." 

Answer.— The Apostle is discussing Abraham and 
God's promises to him, one of which is, "I have made thee 
a father of many nations." The Apostle calls attention 
to the fact that Abraham, in this matter, was a type of 
God, and that these words, therefore, imply that many 
nations would become children of God. The thought is 
somewhat beclouded by the translation, "before him 
whom he believed." If this were rendered, "foreshadowing 
him whom he believed," or "typifying him whom 
he believed," the thought would be clearer to many. 

The words concerning which you particularly 
enquire signify that God here, as frequently in other 
places, speaks of things not yet accomplished as though 
they were accomplished. Abraham was not a father of 
many nations at the time, and God did not even refer 
to his natural seed, through Ishmael and Isaac, and the 
sons of Keturah, but referred to the seed, the antitypical 
son of Abraham, which is Christ, the antitypical Isaac, 
and the Church, the antitypical Rebecca, through whom 
during the Millennial age all the families of the earth 
will be blessed, and be granted opportunity for regeneration, 
as children of God. 

HOW ARE WE UNDER GOD'S PROTECTION? 



Question.— How are we under divine care? How does 
the Lord's protection come to us, his followers? 

Answer.— It is as new creatures and not as old creatures, 
according to the flesh, that we are reckoned members 
of the body of Christ, and under control and supervision 
of our Head. It follows, then, that the interests 
of the new creature are those which will have the Lord's 
special care and protection— even though this be at the 
expense of his earthly, temporal, physical interests. 
The flesh is consecrated to death anyway, and our desire 
and the Lord's promise is that the faithful consummation 
of that earthly sacrifice shall work out the far 
more exceeding and abundant honor and blessing to the 
new creature. In a word, then, the Lord's special care 



toward us is in respect to our spiritual interests, as 
members of the Royal Priesthood. 



page 225 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVI. AUGUST 1, 1905. No. 15 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 227 

Union of Churches 227 

Seventeen Million Church Members to 
Federate 227 

The Newer Unrighteousness 228 

Luther's Suppressed Utterance 229 

The New Christianity 229 

Berean Bible Study for August (Brotherly Love).. ..230 

"Full of Mercy and Good Fruits" 230 

The Great Company in the Court 232 

"Lord, Choose My Cross for Me" (Poem) 235 

A Good Son of a Bad Father 235 

"Thy Word Was Found, I Ate It." 237 

Thanks Be to God for Deliverance 239 

page 226 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



NEW MOTTOES AND OLD FAVORITES 



We have just received a large line of new Mottoes, of designs 
never before shown, and also duplicates of some of the 
best patterns of former lots. 

The prices on these are gauged so as to cover cost, customs 
duty, packing and postage, and no more. We again have 
arranged them in assorted $ 1 .00 packages, marked: 

Am, for packages containing some old styles, which some 
may have had before. 

(Bm, for packages all strictly new and different, medium 
sizes. 

Cm, packages new mottoes, chiefly medium and large. 

Dm, packages of large new mottoes. 

Those who want $3.00 worth or $5.00 worth can thus select 
several packages. If no designation is made we send the Am 
assortment. 

We have some 25c and 50c packages also— all of the smaller 
sizes, so as to afford variety. They are all choice mottoes and 
beautiful. They should be on the walls of all Christian homes 
—if possible in every room. They exercise a quiet but powerful 
influence for good. 

The variety is too great to catalogue satisfactorily. The 
prices range from lc each up to 25c and are about one-half the 
usual retail rates. 

We can supply German mottoes also, though the delivery 
will be slower, as we order them sent direct from our German 
branch. 

Our British friends can order mottoes best from our London 
office— saving customs duty, freight, etc. Our mottoes 
all come from London. 



R3601 : page 227 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
UNION OF CHURCHES 



A MOVE toward the formation of a federation of 
the Protestant Churches of Cleveland, O., was 
taken yesterday morning at the Ministers' 
union meeting. 

A paper was read by Dr. Paul F. Sutphen of the 
Second Presbyterian Church, in which he presented an 
argument in behalf of unity among the churches on the 
basis of a federation similar to the relationship between 
the United States government and the States, the denominations 
to retain their names, but be members of a 



federation. Dr. Sutphen said that he thought the time 
was now ripe for the organization of such a federation. 

The paper was followed by a discussion. The views 
expressed by Dr. Sutphen met with approval and the 
ministers selected a committee of five, of which Dr. Sutphen 
is chairman, to look over the situation in Cleveland 
and ascertain whether or not an organization can 
be formed. 

The movement in Cleveland is similar to the movement 
which has been started to form an organization 
including all the Protestant denominations in the United 
States. At a meeting in New York next November delegates 
will meet to discuss the situation. It is expected 
that there will be 600 to 700 delegates at the 
meeting, over which President Roosevelt has been invited 
to preside.— Cleveland Plaindealer. 



This is precisely what we suggested as the probable 
outcome of the "Union" movement,— a federation on 
the plan of the union of the several States in the United 
States of America. Denominations of kindred creeds 
and spirit may indeed unite absolutely, but federation 
alone will bring opposing creeds into accord. This is 
really a revival of "The Evangelical Alliance," but it 
will include the Episcopal Church and thus get the "life" 
mentioned by the Revelator. (Rev. 13:15). The proposal 
to have the chief executive of the nation preside 
at the meeting for proposed federation is significant of 
the close political alliance which will result. 

SEVENTEEN MILLION CHURCH MEMBERS TO FEDERATE 



We clip the following from the North American:— 

Long strides have been taken towards the practical 
federation of the Protestant churches of the United 
States. Fourteen denominations have already agreed 
to participate in the great conference to be held in New 
York city during November of this year. It is understood 
that the synods of the Lutheran Church will vote 
to participate, and the Protestant Episcopal Church, 
through its Committee on Unity, will do likewise. 

If these two denominations' assent, seventeen millions 
of communicants will be represented. It will be 
the first time in the history of Christianity since the 
Reformation that such a unity has been realized. 

There will be no union along the lines of rules of 
faith or church organization, but there will be consolidation 
of effort in all the matters pertaining to the broad 
moral and national questions upon which all sects can 
meet on a common basis. 

It will be a great church "trust," in fact, if not in 
name. The leaders of the movement prefer to say they 



are adopting the national spirit; forming a union of denominations 
similar to the union of the States. But the 
spirit of consolidation of energy is predominant. 

One of them said yesterday: 

"In many of the general charities, and in scores of 
other ways, we are dividing our energies; we are accomplishing 
a minimum of good with a maximum of energy. 
It is clear that by such a federation as is proposed we 
can reverse the proposition." 

An eminent clergyman, who has done more, perhaps, 
than any other person to bring this church unity, for 
which all sects and denominations have so earnestly 
prayed, yesterday gave the following statement to The 
North American: 

About a year ago a number of gentlemen representing 
different churches, officially connected with 
movements for Christian union and co-operation, met 
in the City of New York and decided to undertake a 
movement whose purpose should be the bringing together 
of regularly appointed representatives of the 
American Christian and Protestant churches, with a 
view to considering their common interests in connection 

R3602 : page 228 

with the moral and religious welfare of the American 
nation. 

A committee was constituted, with the Rev. Dr. 
W. H. Roberts, of Philadelphia, as chairman and the 
Rev. Dr. E. P. Sanford as secretary. 

Dr. Sanford has been for years the secretary of a 
voluntary organization, with headquarters in New York 
city, known as the National Federation of Christian 
Workers, and Dr. Roberts is the stated clerk of the 
Presbyterian General Assembly and American secretary 
of the Pan-Presbyterian Alliance. 

THE NEWER UNRIGHTEOUSNESS 



"Our forced-draft pace relieves us of the super-abundance 
of energy that demands an explosive outlet. 
Spasms of violent feeling go with a sluggish habit of 
life, and are as out of place today as are the hard-drinking 
habits of our Saxon ancestors. We are too 
busy to give rein to spite. The stresses and lures of 
civilized life leave slender margin for the gratification 
of animosities. In quiet, side-tracked communities 
there is still much old-fashioned hatred, leading to personal 
clash; but elsewhere the cherishing of malice is 
felt to be an expensive luxury. Moreover, brutality, 
lust, and cruelty are on the wane. In this country, it 
is true, statistics show a widening torrent of bloody 
crime, but the cause is the weakening of law rather than 
an excess of bile. Other civilized peoples seem to be 



turning away from the sins of passion. 

"The man who picks pockets with a railway rebate, 
murders with an adulterant instead of a bludgeon, 
burglarizes with a 'rake-off instead of a jimmy, cheats 
with a company prospectus instead of a deck of cards, 
or scuttles his town instead of his ship, does not feel 
on his brow the brand of a malefactor. The shedder of 
blood, the oppressor of the widow and the fatherless, 
long ago became odious; but latter-day treacheries fly 
no skull-and-crossbones flag at the masthead.... 

"How decent are the pale slayings of the quack, 
the adulterator, and the purveyor of polluted water, 
compared with the red slayings of the vulgar bandit or 
assassin! Even if there is blood-letting, the long-range, 
tentacular nature of modern homicide eliminates 
all personal collision. What an abyss between the knife-play 
of brawlers and the law-defying neglect to fence 
dangerous machinery in a mill, or to furnish cars with 
safety couplers!... 

"The stealings and slayings that lurk in the complexities 
of our social relations are not deeds of the dive, 
the dark alley, the lonely road, and the midnight hour. 
They require no nocturnal prowling with muffled step 
and bated breath, no weapon or offer of violence. Unlike 
the old-time villain, the latter-day malefactor does 
not wear a slouch hat and a comforter, breathe forth 
curses and an odor of gin, go about his nefarious work 
with clenched teeth and an evil scowl. In the supreme 
moment his lineaments are not distorted with rage, or 
lust, or malevolence. One misses the traditional setting, 
the time-honored insignia of turpitude. Fagin and 
Bill Sykes and Simon Legree are vanishing types.... 
The modern high-power dealer of woe wears immaculate 
linen, carries a silk hat and a lighted cigar, sins with a 
calm countenance and a serene soul, leagues or months 
from the evil he causes. Upon his gentlemanly presence 
the eventual blood and tears do not obtrude themselves." 

"The same qualities that lull the conscience of the 
sinner blind the eyes of the onlookers. People are sentimental, 
and bastinado wrongdoing not according to 
its harmfulness, but according to the infamy that has 
come to attach to it. Undiscerning, they chastise with 
scorpions the old authentic sins, but spare the new. 
They do not see that boodling is treason, that blackmail 
is piracy, that embezzlement is theft, that speculation 
is gambling, that tax-dodging is larceny, that railroad 
discrimination is treachery, that the factory labor of 
children is slavery, that deleterious adulteration is 
murder. It has not come home to them that the fraudulent 
promoter 'devours widows' houses,' that the monopolist 
'grinds the faces of the poor,' that mercenary 
editors and spellbinders 'put bitter for sweet and sweet 
for bitter.' The cloven hoof hides in patent leather; 
and to-day, as in Hosea's time, the people 'are destroyed 
for lack of knowledge.' The mob lynches the redhanded 
slayer, when it ought to keep a gallows Haman-high for 



the venal mine inspector, the seller of infected milk, 
the maintainer of a fire-trap theater. The child-beater 
is forever blasted in reputation, but the exploiter of 
infant toil, or the concocter of a soothing syrup for the 
drugging of babies, stands a pillar of society. The petty 
shoplifter is more abhorred than the stealer of a franchise, 
and the wife-whipper is outcasted long before the 
man who sends his over-insured ship to founder with 
its crew."— Atlantic Monthly. 

LUTHER'S SUPPRESSED UTTERANCE. 



A Council of the Lateran, held A.D. 1513, under 
Pope Leo X., pronounced the immortality of the soul 
to be an orthodox article of Christian faith. The following 
is a translation of the rule which was adopted 
by this council, as given by Caranza, p. 412, 1681. 

"Whereas, some have dared to assert concerning 
the nature of the reasonable soul, that it is mortal; we, 
with the approbation of the Sacred Council, do condemn 
and reprobate all those who assert that the intellectual 
soul is mortal, seeing that the soul is not only truly and 
of itself and essentially the form of the human body, as 
is expressed in the canon of Pope Clement the Fifth, 
but likewise immortal; and we strictly inhibit all from dogmatizing 
otherwise, and we decree that all who adhere 
to the like erroneous assertions shall be shunned and 
punished as heretics." 

Martin Luther visited Rome during the reign of 
Leo X., and the profligacy, corruption and licentiousness 
that he witnessed at the Papal court destroyed forever 
his former reverence for the sacred authority of 
Popes and Councils. For the decree of the Lateran 
Council he seems to have entertained a special contempt. 
In his Defense, prop. 27, "Adversus Execrabilem Antichrist 
Bullam," (Luther's Works, Vol. 2, folio 107, 
Wittenberg 1562) published in 1520, he said: 

"I permit the Pope to make articles of faith for 
himself and his faithful— such as 'the soul is the substantial 
form of the human body,' 'that the soul is immortal,' 
with all those monstrous opinions to be found 
in the Roman dunghill of decretals." 

SPIRITISM'S ONWARD MARCH 



The day is near when the world will accept the belief 
that spirits importantly participate in terrestrial life and 
exercise influences on our minds and acts. I am giving the 

R3602 : page 239 

study of spirit possession or obsession of insane persons most 



profound attention.— Bishop Samuel Fallows. 

I often see the spirits who cause insanity in my patients 
and at times I even hear their voices. Persons who are spoken 
of as helplessly insane are frequently simply lost under the 
overwhelming control of a spirit or, at times, a crowd of 
spirits. We frequently find by post-mortem examinations 
that no physical disorder exists in the brain or nervous 
systems of such insane. A large percentage of the insane are 
persons who have attempted to become spiritualistic mediums 
and who, by laying themselves open to spirit influence, have 
found the wrong or an evil spirit taking advantage of their 
susceptibility for the purpose of giving vent to spiritual 
desires and ideas through an earthly medium.— Dr. Edgar 
M. Webster, member of the Mental Section of the American 
Medical Association. 

THE NEW CHRISTIANITY 



The Rev. Dr. Francis L. Patton, President Emeritus 
of Princeton University, addressing the students of 
Washington University Medical Department, said:— 

"Some of the symptoms of the new Christianity are 
found in the studied avoidance of doctrinal statement, in 
the disposition to deal very prominently with sociological 
topics and to treat even doctrinal subjects exclusively from 
their ethical side. 

"Underlying the movement is a new conception as to 
what Christianity is. 

"The old view of Christianity, of course, is that it is a 
piece of supernatural information respecting the way of 
salvation through a crucified Redeemer. 

"The new Christianity is the direct denial of this. According 
to one form of that denial, Christianity is simply a 
stage in the great progress of development. This form of 
denial has been, in a measure, superseded by another, which 
looks upon Christianity as the revelation of God in Christ 
and claims attention as being a return to the historic facts 
of the gospels. It is a return, however, which is distinctively 
associated with the repudiation of metaphysics in theology 
and an uncertain attitude with reference to the real deity 
of Jesus Christ. 

"The logical result of either form of the new Christianity 
is the elimination of doctrinal statement, and the 
placing of the emphasis altogether upon the ethical teachings 
of Jesus. It must, however, be constantly remembered 
that Christianity must be more than ethical in order to be 
even ethical. If we are to uphold the ethics of Jesus we must 
uphold the authority of Jesus, and to uphold the authority 
of Jesus, we must maintain the supernaturalism that enters 
into his life. 

"The tendency to reject the teachings of Paul is one that 

R3603 : page 229 



has its logical expression in the thoroughgoing subjectivism 

of Sabellius, and the way to escape from the blighting influences 

in morals and religion which result from this subjectivism 

is to rehabilitate the Pauline theology."— St. 

Louis Republican. 

POPE TOUCHES TRUST QUESTION 



The "trust" question is dealt with in an encyclical 
letter from the Pope. Among other things it says:— 

"There are to-day vast numbers, continually being 
recruited by fresh accessions, who are utterly ignorant of 
the truths of religion, or who at most possess only such knowledge 
of God and of the Christian faith as to lead the lives of 
idolators. In consequence of this ignorance they regard it as 
no crime to cherish hatred against their neighbor, to enter 
into the most unjust contracts, the most unjust speculation, 
endeavor to possess themselves of the property of others 
by enormous usury and to commit iniquities not less 
reprehensible." 

HUMANITY IS SAVAGE 



Count Tolstoy, in an interview, reiterates at length 
his views on the inefficiency of the proposed government 
reforms in Russia. He says:— 

"This striving for a renewal of the state is impossible until 
the people have within themselves the image of the living 
God. Civilization has become savage. When the war with 
Japan is finished there will be war with India for Thibet. 
Human happiness is only attainable when such individual 
will do his utmost, one in the workshop, another in the field 
and another to compose sonatas; it only matters that each 
fulfils his duty, creates something. Positive rest will come of 
itself. Reform is of little value when humanity is savage. 

HEBREW CHILDREN EXPELLED FROM MOSCOW 



The Russian authorities have ordered the expulsion from 
Moscow of all Jewish children living with their parents. 
The order is issued on the ground that while permission has 
been granted to a limited number of Jews to live in the city 
the privilege does not extend to their children. The order 
therefore has been issued that the children must leave the 
place.— Cleveland Plain Dealer. 

"BE READY TO RECEIVE THE TRUTH." 



Rev. John Robinson was the pastor of the Pilgrim 
Fathers. Below we note his memorable "parting charge" 
to the Pilgrims who came long ago to settle in America: 

"I charge you before God and His blessed angels, that 
ye follow me no further than ye have seen me follow the 
Lord Jesus Christ. The Lord has more truth yet to break 
forth out of His Holy Word. I cannot sufficiently bewail 
the condition of the Reformed Churches who are come to 
a period in religion, and will go at present no further than 
the instruments of their reformation. Luther and Calvin 
were great shining lights in their time, yet they penetrated 
not into the whole counsel of God. I beseech you remember 
it— 'tis an article of your Church covenant— that you 
be ready to receive whatever truth shall be made known to 
you from the written word of God." 

LIVING AT OUR BEST 



Do not try to do a great thing; you may waste all your 
life waiting for the opportunity which may never come. 
But since little things are always claiming your attention, 
do them as they come, from a great motive, for the glory of 
God, to win His smile of approval, and to do good to men. 
It is harder to plod on in obscurity, acting thus, than to stand 
on the high places of the field, within the view of all, and to 
do deeds of valor at which rival armies stand still to gaze. 
But no such act goes without the swift recognition and the 
ultimate recompense of Christ. 

To fulfil faithfully the duties of your station; to use to 
the uttermost the gifts of your ministry; to bear chafing annoyances 
and trivial irritations as martyrs bore the pillory 
and stake; to find the one noble trait in people who try to 
molest you; to put the kindest construction on unkind acts 
and words; to love with the love of God even the unthankful 
and evil; to be content to be a fountain in the midst of a 
wild valley of stones, nourishing a few lichens and wild flowers, 
or now and again a thirsty sheep; and to do this always, and 
not for the praise of man, but for the sake of God— this makes 
a great life.— F. B. Meyer. 



"It is blasphemy to assert that the infinitely good God 
should plan a redemptive system for His children, and that 
the Son of God should give His life for its advancement, and 
the Holy Ghost His continuous, unwordable efforts for its 
carrying forward, and then have it fail, and the only other 
alternative should be to have the Judge come and destroy 
the whole race and world."— Bishop H. W. Warren. 

True. Much better is the Bible teaching of coming 
"times of restitution."— Acts 3:19-21. 



R3603 : page 230 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDY FOR AUGUST. 
--(SEE PREFACE OF WATCH TOWER BIBLES)- 
BROTHERLY KINDNESS (BROTHERLY LOVE) 

1. What is the "new commandment" given by Christ to 
his disciples? Jno. 13:34; 15:10,12,17; 1 Jno. 4:21; 
Z/00-183 (2nd col, par. 1,2); 1 Jno. 3:11,23; 

Jno. 15:12; Z/05-125 (2nd col. par. 2). 

2. What is brotherly love? Z. '02-197 (2nd col. par. 2,3); 
Z.'98-201 (1st col. par. 2; 2nd col., par. 1). 

3. Who are our "brethren"? Matt. 12:50; Z/97-31 1 
(1st col. par. 1,2,3); Z/00-180 (1st col, par. 5 and 
2nd col. par. 1); Z/03-207 (1st col. par. 4,5); E.120, 
par. 2. 

4. Why is the manifestation of brotherly kindness so 
necessary? Z. '04-292 (2nd col. par. 2,3). 

5. Is it important that we observe the spirit as well as 
the form of our Lord's command? 1 Pet. 1:22; 

Rom. 12:9; Z/99-216 (2nd col. par. 6,7), and 217 
(1st and 2nd cols.); Z/97-264 (1st col. par. 2); Z.'98-8 
(2nd col. par. 1); Z.'05-l 18 (2nd col. par. 4,5); 
Z/03-333, (2nd col., par. 4). 

6. Why do the Lord's "brethren" need no "outward 
passwords, grips or badges"? Jno. 13:35; Z. '05-139, 
1st col. par. 2,3); Z/05-164 (2nd col. par. 8). 

7. How is our love for God measured by our love for 
"the brethren"? 1 Jno. 4:8; Z/00-183 (2nd col. 

par. 3), 184 (1st col. par. 1); F.467, par. 3; F.600, par. 2). 

8. Can we fellowship all "the brethren" alike? Jude 21,22; 
Z/03-333 (2nd col. par. 1,2,3); Z/02-198 

(1st col. par. 1,2); Z/03-207 (2nd col., par. 1). 

9. Should we always expect to have our manifestations 
of brotherly kindness received in the same spirit? 
Z/05-106 (2nd col. par. 7) and 107, par. 1. 

10. How are the comfort and peace of the Church dependent 
upon the manifestation of this grace? 
Z.'04-296(lstcol. par. 2). 



R3603 : page 230 

"FULL OF MERCY AND GOOD FRUITS." 

ONE HALF of a year is gone, and we wonder to 
what extent the text selected as our year text 
for 1905 has been remembered by all the dear 
readers, and to what extent they have sought to secure 
the wisdom to which our text referred. 



"Wisdom is the Principal Thing: 
Therefore Get Wisdom."— Prov. 4:7 



"The Wisdom that is from Above 
is First Pure, 
Then Peaceable, Gentle, Easy of Entreatment, 
Full of Mercy and Good Fruits."— Jas. 3:17 



These heavenly counsels have been in the Lord's 
Word for centuries, they have been in our hands and 
before our eyes for years. We know them, we assent 
to them and yet how many— how few— seem to know 
how to apply them in the ordinary affairs of life. Surely 
as the Lord looks down upon us he must say, These 
people require line upon line, precept upon precept, instruction 
and repetition continually. Alas that it is so! 
We all might well be thoroughly discouraged were it not 
for the assurance we have that the Lord looks deeper 
than the outward conduct, that he is a discerner of the 
thoughts and intents of the heart, and that according to 
what he sees to be our desires and efforts is his judgment 
respecting us. The thoughts and intents of our hearts 
are sometimes short of the standard that we ourselves 
approve, and O how short of any standard we could approve 
would be much of our conduct if we could but 
see ourselves as others see us and especially as the Lord 
sees us! 

We are not writing with a view to discouraging any 
dear brother or sister who is painfully, laboriously, 
striving to climb up Zion's hill along the narrow way. 
On the contrary, we have nothing but sympathy for 
them, and are assured that the Lord regards both 
them and us compassionately— "he remembereth our 
frame, he knoweth that we are dust." The Lord recognizes 

R3604 : page 230 

that we are imperfect, fallen creatures, and he is not 
expecting perfection of us. He has made provision for 
the covering of such of our imperfections as we do not at 
heart assent to; he has also given us instruction respecting 
his will, and he is carefully scrutinizing us day by day to see 
to what extent our love for him and for the principles of 
righteousness, which he has enunciated and which we 
have acknowledged, are entering into and controlling the 
forces and conduct of our lives; for, after all, the words 
of our mouths are but the echoes of our hearts, and to whatever 
extent our hearts are clean our words will be pure, 
and to whatever extent our hearts are loving and gentle 
and kind our words and conduct will be in accord with 
these divinely approved qualities. 



FIRST PURE, THEN PEACEABLE. 

Let us examine ourselves afresh to know the condition 
of our hearts, remembering the word of the Lord, 
that if we judge ourselves we would not require that he 
should judge us, but that if we neglect to judge ourselves 
he will chasten us, because we put our cause in his hand, 
because we are his. The word pure has in it the thought 
of innocent, without deceit; it has in it the thought of 
virtue and chastity; it contains the thought of clean, 
true and truthful. We cannot hope that any, either 
in the Church or out of it, are actually pure in the absolute 
sense of this word, but we do rejoice that our dear 
Master gave the key to a proper understanding of the 
matter when he said, "Blessed are the pure in heart." 
So long as we are in this present, mortal, imperfect condition 
absolute purity is impossible; for us to be pure 
of heart is possible— purity of intention, purity of 
motive. 

When we begin a self-examination to see whether 
or not we are using our time and talents and influence 

R3604 : page 23 1 

wisely, this is the first point for scrutiny, Are we pure 
in heart, in our daily course of life? Are we sincere in 
the prayers that we utter to the Lord, in our endeavors 
to please him? In our relationship toward the Father 
are we candid and honest? Do we love him with a pure 
love, heartily, fervently, or do we not? Let each decide 
this point for himself before proceeding to the next. If 
upon examination we find that our hearts have not been 
pure in respect to our covenants and relationship to 
the Lord and his Word and to the Father, let us go no 
farther until we have asked divine forgiveness and resolve 
that by the Lord's assisting grace we will be 
nothing less than pure in heart, pure in endeavor. 

If we can assure ourselves that our motives and intentions 
have nothing of selfishness connected with them, 
that our purposes are pure in the sight of the Lord, then, 
indeed, our hearts may rejoice whatever may have been 
our weaknesses and imperfections of the flesh, in our 
relationship toward the Lord or the Father or our neighbors 
or the world. 

The next point is, Are we peaceable? Have we thus 
far in the year been seeking to cultivate peace, or, as the 
Scriptures put it, "Follow peace with all men and holiness, 
without which no man shall see the Lord"? Have 
we lived thus far in the year as peaceable, as pure of 
heart toward God and his Word and his brethren as is 
possible for us? If so we have cause for rejoicing afresh 
and being of good courage; if not, here is another lesson 
and opportunity for going to the throne of grace to acknowledge 
our fault, to pray for more of this wisdom 
from above, which is first pure and then so far as possible 
peaceable toward all— peace loving, peace disposed. 



"EASY OF ENTREATMENT." 

How has it been with us so far? Have we been 
hard-hearted, cold and repulsive, or have we been gentle, 
kind, sympathetic with those with whom we are in contact, 
easy to be entreated, willing, yes, anxious to do 
everything which in our judgments would seem to be in 
the interest and for the welfare of others— proper, reasonable 
and right to do? If so, happy are we, but let us not 
too hastily conclude, not too hastily congratulate ourselves 
along this line, until we have made close inspection 
of the pathway of the last six months. Have any appealed 
to us for forgiveness and been refused? If so ours 
is a very dangerous position. The Lord declares most 
positively that while that is our attitude we can expect 
no mercy from him. He insists upon this— "After this 
manner pray ye, Forgive us our trespasses as we also 
forgive those who trespass against us." 

Emphasizing the matter, we remember that the 
Master explained, "Unless ye forgive men their trespasses, 
neither will your heavenly Father forgive your 
trespasses." What a thought! Do we need mercy? Do 
we need to have our faults and weaknesses of the flesh 
covered? Do we rejoice in the privilege of approaching 
the throne of heavenly grace to obtain mercy? Then, as 
a condition to those privileges and blessings, we must be 
in the attitude of heart where we not only will forgive 
those who trespass against us, but forgive them gladly, 
freely, heartily. Our Lord specially warns us against 
a forgiving with the lips which does not include a forgiving 
from the heart, saying, "Except ye shall from 
your hearts forgive," etc.— Matt. 18:35. 

Let no one deceive himself— mercy is a prime essential 
to everyone who would be counted amongst the 
Lord's saints, and who would count himself as having 
any of the evidences of acceptance with the Lord to a 
participation in the glorious high calling. If we have 
been derelict in this matter in the past, let us be the 
more zealous now to correct matters, and the more on 
our guard as respects the future that we may not err 
farther in this same direction. 

"FULL OF MERCY AND GOOD FRUITS." 

Ah! Here we have the pith of the whole matter: 
Full of mercy does not signify that we are not wholly 
without mercy, merciless; nor does it signify that we should 
have a little tinge or coloring of mercy in connection with 
our thoughts, words and doings. On the contrary, it 
does mean that the Lord is very merciful, Love is his 
name, and that in proportion as we have received his 
spirit, in that proportion we are full of love and full of 
mercy. He that lacks mercy lacks the spirit of the Lord, 
as though when we read, "If any man have not the 
spirit of Christ he is none of his," we should substitute 



the word mercy and say, If any man have not mercy he 
is none of Christ's. O, Merciful Lord, help us, we pray 
thee, that we may have more and more of thy spirit of 
compassion and sympathy and love, that we may more 
and more become copies of thy dear Son and thus copies 
of our Father whose mercy endureth forever, and obedient 
followers of him who said that unto seventy times 
seven we should be ready to fully and freely forgive from 
the heart those who transgress against us and repent! 

Full of good fruits! Yes, mercy is one of the good 
fruits of the Lord's Spirit, but there are others, and it is 
a consolation that being filled with mercy does not mean 
that we shall be unable to contain the other graces, but 
rather that the fuller we are of mercy the more of the 
other graces of the Lord's spirit we may possess. Mercy 
is not one of the good fruits, although it is classed high. 
It is really a negative quality: it signifies merely that we 
do not resent the evils of others, that we are willing to 
forgive, to have compassion. Still more is necessary, 
we must also have the active traits of character that will 
reach out toward others, not to injure them, not to pull 
them down, not to slander them, not to backbite them, 
but to do them good. The fruits of the spirit of evil are 
anger, malice, hatred, envy, strife. Whoever finds any 
of these lurking anywhere in his heart should both labor 
and pray to have himself cleansed from the leaven of 
corruption that he might be completely filled with the 
fruits of the spirit, good fruits, meekness, gentleness, 
patience, long suffering, brotherly kindness, love, that 
these things might be in him and abound. 

If we have mercy towards a dear brother or sister 
who may have transgressed against us, we are not to feel 
boastful of the matter, but to realize that we also have 

R3604 : page 232 

been forgiven much and are objects of divine mercy, and 
we are to go on to cultivate in our hearts and to be filled 
with the other good fruits. We ought to learn to exercise 
patience toward a brother, to help him over his 
natural difficulties and weaknesses in a most kind, gentle, 
sympathetic manner, remembering ourselves also lest we 
should be tempted. We should be on the alert to exercise 
brotherly kindness, not merely toward those whose 
natural dispositions we admire because like or superior 
to our own; but rather our love for the Lord and love for 
the brethren should lead us to sacrifice our natural tastes 
and inclinations to some degree, that we might give aid 
and encouragement and assistance in the good way to 
those members of the body who are naturally less amiable 
or who have made less progress or whose weaknesses 
or shortcomings are more apparent. 

This will be brotherly kindness, and it will also be 
God-likeness, for thus the Almighty and our Lord Jesus, 
while having the common fellowship with the holy in 
heaven, condescended to us and continually bow down 



to hear us, to sympathize with us and to assist us. Let 
us be more and more God-like then in our relationship 
and dealings with and toward each other, and finally 
these various elements of love will form in us more and 
more completely until, by the grace of God, eventually we 
shall be filled with his spirit, the spirit of love— until we 
shall have that perfect law in full control of all our words 
and thoughts and doings, and thus attaining let us stand 
fast, waiting for the glorious conditions of the first resurrection, 
which the Lord has promised to all such overcomers 
of the world and its spirit of sin and bitterness 
and evil. 



R3605 : page 232 

THE GREAT COMPANY IN THE COURT. 

SOME matters connected with the Tabernacle 
Shadows of the Better Sacrifices and the typical 
services connected therewith seem still to be 
obscure to some of the dear friends who apparently 
are giving earnest heed to their study. To all such we 
recommend a fresh reading of the pamphlet published 
by our Society, devoted to this topic, and also a fresh 
reading of the references made to it in MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, Vol. VI. pp. 126-132. Matters of this kind 
require deep and careful study to be understood by any, 
and, of course, were never meant by the Lord to be 
understood by everybody. The Apostle clearly indicates 
that only those begotten of the Spirit can ever properly 
and correctly appreciate and understand spiritual 
things. Others may hear or read and partly understand 
and appreciate, but can never be expected to grasp 
matters fully. Amongst WATCH TOWER readers, however, 
we have hope that there are many who are spirit 
begotten, and our endeavors in this article and always 
are on behalf of these. The Lord's time and way for 
reaching others are our time and way, and we wait 
patiently for the development of that feature of the 
divine plan in its "due time." 

THE ANTITYPICAL LEVITES 

We have already pointed out that only the members 
of one tribe of Israel, the tribe of Levi, were permitted 
within the sacred enclosure outside the Tabernacle tent, 
called the "court," and that of this tribe only the priests 
were permitted to enter the holy places. We have 
shown that those priests typified the Royal Priesthood, 
of which Jesus is the High Priest and his faithful ones the 
under priests, and that the Levites in general represented 
the household of faith— the justified. We recognize a 
difference between the priests of the present time and 
those of the future; for any now recognized as priests 



who do not perform the sacrifice will be cut off from that 
special privilege and honor, and will constitute what in 
Revelation is pictured as a "great company." Those 
who have taken the step of consecration and been 
accepted of God and been made partakers of the holy 
Spirit, cannot ignore their covenant, they cannot 
return to human conditions. They must go on to perfection 
on the spirit plane or be hopelessly lost in the 
Second Death. There is no middle ground, because the 
terms and conditions upon which the Lord will receive 
them on the spirit plane are as reasonable as any he 
could make for them on the human plane. 

When during the Millennial age the whole world of 
mankind will be granted an opportunity of coming into 
full accord with their Creator, it will be on condition 
of their absolute obedience to his law of love— not merely 
a perfunctory obedience either, but an obedience from 
the heart. Any who will not by the close of the Millennial 
age reach that proper condition will assuredly be 
amongst those who will die the Second Death, as pictured 
in Revelation 20:9 and Matthew 25:46. Nothing can 
be accepted of the Lord as righteous that is in any degree 
in sympathy with sin. And that same rule which will 
then apply to the world is during this Gospel age applicable 
to the great company. It will be required of 
them that when brought into straits they shall at least 
prove loyal to the principles of righteousness, that they 
shall not deny the Lord nor the principles of his government, 
whatever the cost— otherwise they will be unworthy 
of eternal life on any plane. The case with the 
little flock is recognized as being still different: the overcomers 
delight to do the Father's will to such an extent 
that they make haste at the sacrifice of earthly interests 
to lay down their lives in the service of the King and his 
brethren and all the principles of righteousness. 

ONCE CONSECRATED, ALWAYS CONSECRATED. 

The difficulty with some of the dear friends seems to 
be their unsuccessful attempt to identify this great 
company with the typical Levites. Let us, therefore, 
examine this point. They query, How can these, who 
have already made a sacrifice, be represented by the 
Levites who did not sacrifice? We reply that the great 
company do not sacrifice. Their covenant, their agreement, 

R3605 : page 233 

was to sacrifice even unto death, and had they 
faithfully carried out that agreement they would not be 
of the great company but of the little flock, the overcomers, 
the Royal Priests. From God's standpoint they 
never carried out their covenant, and hence cannot be 
recognized as priests, and therefore, although for a 
time recognized as priests in a tentative way, their 
failure to perform the sacrifice hinders them from being 



ultimately received as priests— it separates them from 
their brethren and constitutes them a different class, a 
class who have consecrated but who have not performed 
in harmony with that consecration. 

Nevertheless, this great company class will not consist 
of persons who have repudiated the Lord, who have 
sinned wilfully, who have despised the covenant: on 
the contrary, at heart they are still in sympathy with 
righteousness, loyal to the Lord, but they do not develop 
that consuming zeal for righteousness which would 
constitute them overcomers in the Scriptural sense. 
They love righteousness and hate sin, and yet they do 
not deal with these principles in that thoroughgoing 
manner which would constitute them copies of God's 
dear Son. So long as they hold on to the Lord, so long 
as they love him and love righteousness, they shall not 
be utterly condemned of him even though repudiated 
as respects a share in the Bride company, the little flock. 
Thank God, No! All who love righteousness and hate 
iniquity in any measure shall have fullest opportunity of 
demonstrating this, and shall be accounted worthy of 
life everlasting, and unquestionably this company is 
a "great company," as the Scriptures indicate— far more 
numerous even than the little flock, as the Levites in 
the type numbered thousands in proportion to the five 
chosen from amongst them to be priests. 

If, then, the Royal Priesthood were all originally of 
the household of faith (Levites in the type) before their 
covenant of sacrifice as priests was accepted of the Lord, 
what would they be if failing to sacrifice they were put 
out of the priesthood? We answer that they would still 
be Levites after they had lost their priestly privileges, 
after their names had been blotted out as respects membership 
in the body of Christ, after their crowns had been 
apportioned to others; as respects the Kingdom they 
would still be of the household of faith unless they had 
wilfully and deliberately repudiated the Lord and his 
grace. They would still, therefore, be represented in 
the tribe of Levi. 

IF JUSTIFICATION WERE LOST 

We have already pointed out that as our standing 
as members of the Royal Priesthood is at the present time 
tentative, subject to change if we do not sacrifice, so 
likewise our justification is in the present time tentative 
—dependent upon our continuance in a condition of 
faith and obedience. We see again that justification by 
faith, as it operates during this Gospel age, is merely 
with a view to bringing us into a relationship to God 
which will permit us to consecrate ourselves for the 
Royal Priesthood. Were it not the divine purpose to 
select the Royal Priesthood there would be no present 
call to justification by faith, but the whole world of mankind 
alike would share in the blessed arrangements of 
the divine plan for the future age, namely, an actual 



justification, an actual restitution, an actual making perfect, 
such as the world will experience during the Millennial 
age— a justification by works cooperating with faith. 
Thus it is written respecting the world's judgment in the 
Millennial age that they will be judged according to their 
works.— Rev. 20:12. 

On the contrary, we of this Gospel age are assured 
that our judgment will not be according to works impossible 
to us under present conditions, but according 
to faith, with which our works will cooperate to the extent 
of our ability. In a word faith is now the standard 
of test, and such works as we can present merely attest 
our faith: in the coming age works will be the standard 
and perfection will be demanded, while faith will cooperate 
and approve the works. 

If, then, it be granted that the only object of justification 
by faith now is to permit the believer to present 
his body a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, his 
reasonable service, it follows that those believers who 
never reach the point of such a consecration receive the 
grace of God (justification) in vain. It does not accomplish 
for them the only purpose, the only object, for 
which it was intended. And it follows that such justification 
by faith lapses or becomes null and void within 
a reasonable time if it be not exercised, if the consecration 
which it was intended to make possible be not offered 
to the Lord. This being true, it would seem that those 
whose justification lapses because not used in consecration 
will at the time of the lapsing cease to be considered 
as typified by the Levites; they drop back from the 
Levites' position to that of Israel in general, representing 
the world, just as those who do make the consecration 
and for a time are recognized as priests drop back from 
the priestly position if they fail to go on and complete 
the sacrifice. 

Now, then, view the situation. See who ultimately 
will constitute the Royal Priesthood— that it will 
be only the little flock who have gladly and loyally laid 
down their lives in the service of the King and after the 
example of the High Priest, Jesus. Likewise note that 
the only ones who will ultimately constitute the antitypical 
Levites will be those who make consecration and 
fail to attain the priestly degree through their failure to 
make a proper sacrifice— "a great company." 

THE LORD'S GOAT AND THE SCAPE-GOAT 

We have already set forth in Tabernacle Shadows 
that the work of this Gospel age, this antitypical Day 
of Atonement, began with the sacrifice of the bullock, 
which represented our Lord Jesus. The blood of the 
bullock being taken within the Most Holy by the High 
Priest, appropriation of its merit was made on behalf 
of the members of the High Priest's body, the under 
priesthood, and on behalf of the entire household of 
faith, the antitypical Levites. Next in order came the 



R3606 : page 234 

two goats, both bound, consecrated at the door of the 
Tabernacle, representing all who consecrate themselves 
to the Lord, and how ultimately they would be divided 
into two classes— the little flock and the great company. 
The course of the little flock, the Royal Priesthood, was 
typified in what was done to the "Lord's goat." As 
that goat was sacrificed after the same manner as the 
bullock, its fat burned upon the altar, its hide, etc., 
burned without the camp, and its blood taken into the 
Most Holy and sprinkled, so with the entire company of 
the little flock: they pass through the experiences of the 
High Priest, they suffer with him, they are hated with 
him, they go to him without the camp bearing his reproach. 
But as a bullock has much fat and a goat is 
very lean, so our Lord had much love to offer upon the 
Lord's altar, while his followers altogether have very 
little, and that little is acceptable merely because the 
High Priest's previous sacrifice opened the way, covered 
its blemishes and made it acceptable. 

It has required this entire Gospel age to do this 
sacrificing of the Lord's goat, and its blood has not yet 
been presented before the Father by the glorified Christ, 
—Head and body. 

Next we have to consider the scape-goat. It represents 
a consecrated class, because it as well as the other 
goat was tethered at the door of the tent, devoted to 
sacrifice. It represents a class, however, that does not 
go to sacrifice, that does not go without the camp and 
bear the reproach with the bullock, a class whose fat 
does not go upon the altar, a class whose blood will never 
be sprinkled upon the Mercy Seat. It represents the 
great company of the consecrated who fail to make their 
calling and election sure, but whom the Lord's mercy 
rescues from the second death because they also trust in 
him, because they love righteousness and hate iniquity, 
even though they did not display the proper amount of 
zeal in connection with their love of righteousness to 
merit their being classed with the overcomers, the Royal 
Priesthood. 

THE SINS BORNE BY THE SCAPE-GOAT 

The Scriptures show the priest laying his hands upon 
this scape-goat and confessing over it the sins of the 
people, and that then it was taken into the wilderness 
and left there under that load. This we have interpreted 
as the delivering over of the unworthy members of the 
Church to the power and control of the Adversary, that 
their flesh might be destroyed, that their spirits or life 
might be ultimately saved. In other words, the life 
which was not sacrificed was destroyed, the sufferings 
which were not voluntarily taken up in harmony with 
the consecration are nevertheless inflicted; and if those 



sufferings are rightly received and if as a result loyalty 
to the Lord is ultimately demonstrated, that spirit shall 
be saved "so as by fire," coming through great tribulation 
—"a great multitude whose number no man knoweth" 
shall "come up out of great tribulation and wash 
their robes and make them white in the blood of the 
Lamb"— the Levites, a glorious company, but occupying 
a lower plane in the divine plan for the world's salvation, 
occupying a subordinate place to the Bride in the glorious 
work of uplifting the world of mankind during the Millennial 
age. 

Some who do not grasp the matter clearly, who have 
not learned how to apply types and antitypes, may say 
that the scape-goat never went into the Holy and therefore 
could not represent the great company class. We 
answer that neither did the goat go into the Holy nor 
did the bullock go into the Holy. The bullock represented 
our Lord as a human being, not as a spirit being; 
the goats represented the Lord's consecrated people as 
human beings, not as spirit beings. The point to be 
noticed is that the one goat followed the bullock to sacrifice 
and the other goat did not. The blood of the Lord's 
goat, therefore, was sprinkled by the High Priest upon the 
Mercy Seat, while the blood of the scape-goat was not 
so sprinkled. 

A TIME OF TROUBLE 

As to the signification of the confessing of the sins of 
the people upon the scape-goat: the sins thus confessed 
upon the head of the scape-goat are assuredly not the sins 
for which atonement is made by the blood of the bullock 
and of the Lord's goat. The atonement is made for 
original sin and all of its blemishes and imperfections as 
they affect the race of Adam. There are other sins than 
these for which atonement is not made, which are not to 
be forgiven, but on account of which divine wrath has 
been more or less manifest throughout the past six thousand 
years, and will be especially manifested in the great 
time of trouble such as was not since there was a nation 
nor ever shall be again, and which is now nearing. That 
trouble is spoken of as the pouring out of the vials of 
wrath upon the world because men have not lived up 
to their knowledge and opportunities and privileges. It 
will come as a natural effect from natural causes, and yet 
will be retributive punishment upon the world. In that, 
we understand, the great company will be given a special 
place, a special share. That will be the time in which 
every man's work shall be tried "so as by fire," this being 
applicable specially to the Church. 

True, some of this great company class have been 
turned "over to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, 
that the spirit might be saved [that they might be saved 
as spirit beings] in the day of the Lord Jesus" all down 
through this Gospel age. But the proportionate number 
of these has probably been small as compared with the 



number who to-day, under the greater light and opportunity 
and privileges which we enjoy, have consecrated 
themselves, yet hold back from the completion of their 
sacrifice. The portion of this Day of Atonement picture 
which relates to this great company class is not different 
from that which relates to the other classes. For instance, 
the sacrifice of the Lord's goat is not represented 
as being accomplished until the very last member of the 
body of Christ shall have suffered with the Head, until 
the final work in that connection, the sprinkling of the 
blood of the Lord's goat upon the Mercy Seat shall have 
been accomplished, and until the last member shall not 
only have consecrated but shall have finished his 
sacrifice. 

R3606 : page 235 

LORD, CHOOSE MY CROSS FOR ME. 

"It was a time of sadness, and my heart, 
Although it knew and loved the better part, 
Felt weary with the conflict and the strife, 
And all the needful discipline of life. 

"And while I thought on these— as given to me, 
My trial test of faith and love to be- 
lt seemed as if I never could be sure 
That, faithful to the end, I should endure. 

"And thus, no longer trusting to his might 
Who says, 'We walk by faith and not by sight'— 
Doubting, and almost yielding to despair, 
The thought arose: My cross I cannot bear. 

"Far heavier its weight must surely be, 
Than those of others which I daily see: 
Oh, if I might another burden choose, 
Methinks, I should not fear my crown to lose. 

"A solemn silence reigned on all around, 
E'en Nature's voices uttered not a sound; 
The evening shadows seemed of peace to tell, 
And peace upon my weary spirit fell. 

"A moment's pause, and then a heavenly light 
Beamed full upon my wondering, raptured sight; 
Angels on silvery wings seemed everywhere, 
And angels' music thrilled the balmy air. 

"Then one more fair than all the rest to see- 
One to whom all others bowed the knee- 
Came gently to me, as I trembling lay, 
And 'Follow me,' He said— I am the Way.' 

"Then speaking thus, He led me far above; 
And there, beneath a canopy of love, 



Crosses of diverse size and shape were seen, 
Larger and smaller than mine own had been. 

"And one there was more beauteous to behold, 
A little one, with jewels set in gold; 
Ah, this, methought, I can with comfort wear, 
For it will be an easy one to bear. 

"And so the little cross I quickly took, 
But all at once my frame beneath it shook; 
The sparkling jewels— fair were they to see, 
But far too heavy was their weight for me. 

'"This may not be,' I cried, and looked again, 
To see if there were any here could ease my pain, 
But one by one I passed them slowly by, 
Till on a lovely one I cast my eye. 

"Fair flowers 'round its sculptured form entwined, 
And grace and beauty seemed in it combined; 
Wondering, I gazed, and still I wondered more, 
To think so many should have passed it o'er. 

R3607 : page 235 

"But O! that form so beautiful to see, 
Soon made its hidden sorrows known to me: 
Thorns lay beneath those flowers and colors fair, 
Sorrowing, I said, 'this cross I may not bear.' 

"And so it was, with each and all around, 
Not one to suit my need could there be found. 
Weeping, I laid each heavy burden down, 
As my guide gently said, 'No cross— no crown.' 

"At length to him I raised my saddened heart, 
He knew its sorrow, bade its doubts depart. 
'Be not afraid,' he said, 'but trust in me, 
My perfect love shall now be shown to thee.' 

"And then with lightened eyes and willing feet, 
Again I turned my earthly cross to meet; 
With forward footsteps, turning not aside, 
For fear some hidden evil might betide. 

"And then, in the prepared, appointed way, 

Listening to hear and ready to obey. 

A cross I found of plainest form, 

With only words of love inscribed thereon. 

"With thankfulness I raised it from the rest, 
And joyfully acknowledged it the best; 
The only one of all the many there, 
That I could feel was good for me to bear. 

"And while I thus my chosen one confessed, 



I saw a heavenly brightness on it rest, 
And as I bent, my burden to sustain, 
I recognized my own old cross again. 

"But O, how different did it seem to be, 
Now I had learned its preciousness to see, 
Yes, now no longer will I say, 
'Perhaps another is a better way.' 

"Ah! henceforth my one desire shall be, 

That he who knows me best shall choose for me, 

And so whate'er His love seems good to send, 

I'll trust it's best— because he knows the end."— Unknown 



R3607 : page 235 

A GOOD SON OF A BAD FATHER. 

-2 CHRONICLES 34: 1-13. -AUGUST 6.- 

Golden Text:— "Remember now thy Creator 
in the days of thy youth."— Eccl. 12:1. 

WE CANNOT treat this lesson from the standpoint 

evidently intended by those who selected it. 

We cannot base upon it and plead for "good 

citizenship" amongst the Lord's consecrated people 

of spiritual Israel. We cannot make it the groundwork 

of an exhortation to social, political and moral public 

reforms, because while commending the course followed 

by Josiah we cannot concede that it is a proper illustration 

for the Lord's people of spiritual Israel to-day. 

A failure to recognize the times and seasons in the 

divine plan, and the different features of the work apportioned 

to those different times and seasons, have 

greatly beclouded the judgment of many good people in 

their endeavors to expound the Word of the Lord and 

to draw lessons therefrom. 

Coming to the throne at eight years of age it is remarkable 
that, instead of having his head and heart 
turned to foolishness and vanity, Josiah at the age of 
sixteen began to seek earnestly to know and do the will 
of God in respect to the kingdom which he governed as 
an absolute ruler. By the time he was twenty years of 
age his convictions were crystallized and he began a 
thorough reformation of the kingdom of Judah, extending 
the same beyond the lines of his own particular 
dominion into the territories of Manasseh, Ephraim, 
Simeon and Naphtali. He was in earnest, and not only 

R3607 : page 236 

gave the commands for the destruction of the images 
and various paraphernalia associated with the idolatry 



established in the land, but he gave the matter his personal 
supervision,— he went with the officers whom he 
commissioned and saw to it personally that the destruction 
was thoroughly accomplished. This work of reform 
had been prophesied for him years before, even to the 
declaration that he would burn the bones of the priests 
of Baal upon the Baal altar at Bethel.— 1 Kings 13:1-3; 
2 Kings 23:15-17. 

The course of Josiah and that of other reformers of 
the Jewish epoch— as, for instance, Elijah, who caused 
thousands of the priests of Baal to be slain— are a source 
of confusion in the minds of many earnest Christians, as 
apparently sanctioning acts of violence public or private, 
totally out of accord with the spirit of this Gospel dispensation. 
In order to have a right conception of the matter 
it is necessary that we remember that the Jewish nation 
by divine arrangement represented God's judgments in 
the world, and that under the Law there was a certain 
responsibility resting upon every king of Israel, and also 
in some respects upon the individuals of that nation, to 
oppose idolatry with violence, because the kingdom 
typically represented God and his reign of righteousness. 
With the end of the Jewish era, when fleshly Israel was 
cast off from divine favor as a nation, all the laws and 
regulations given to that people governing such matters 
ended, were abrogated, made null and void. As our Lord 
declared unto them, "Your house is left unto you desolate." 
-Matt. 23:38. 

With the establishment of Spiritual Israel at Pentecost 
a new covenant, a new relationship and new regulations 
have accordingly gone into effect. The spiritual 
Israelites are not to war with carnal weapons. Their 
warfare is to be each within his own heart, fighting the 
good fight of faith against the desires of the flesh, the 
wiles of the Adversary and the spirit of the world. Each 
heart has its own dominion to conquer, to clear of 
idols; each heart is expected to establish in all the realm of 
the natural body which it controls the worship and reverence 
and service of the Lord our God. As for worldly 
affairs we are distinctly told that we have nothing 
whatever to do with them— "Ye are not of the world 
even as I am not of the world." The world at present 
is under the control of the Gentiles and that by divine 
permission. The New Creatures, spiritual Israel, are to 
keep themselves separate from the world, and, so far as 
their consciences will permit, to be subject to the powers 
that be because these powers are permitted of God. This 
does not signify that they endorse all the doings of the 
powers that be in their hearts— they may be seriously 
grieved thereby; but whatever they may experience of 
grief or opposition or suffering or trials of patience and 
of faith are to be esteemed as so much of the Lord's 
fitting and polishing process, making them ready for 
the kingdom conditions of the future, making them the 
more humble and patient and loyal to himself and to 
righteousness, and the better qualified for the great 



work they will be engaged in in the future of blessing, 
ruling, judging, uplifting and encouraging the world 
in the right ways of the Lord. 

THE MOTHER'S INFLUENCE 

In a previous lesson we saw something of how a good 
father might have a bad son, and how in a general way 
at least it implied dereliction, unfaithfulness to his 
duties as a father, no matter how zealous and faithful 
he might have been in other respects and whatever 
excuses might be possible as respects his own lack of 
parental talent. Our lesson to-day reverses the matter, 
showing us the good son of a bad father, and we think 
it entirely reasonable to suppose that this implied a good 
mother. For a bad father and a bad mother to have 
reared a good son would appear almost impossible. 
Hence we feel safe in assuming that Josiah's mother 
was a godly woman. 

The divine arrangement by which the mothers of 
the human family are considerably separated from the 
selfishness and strife of business and politics, so that if 
the mother will she can expend her energies in the training 
of her children according to the highest ideals before 
her mind, has undoubtedly been a great blessing to the 
race in various ways. Undoubtedly it has prevented a 
more rapid decline into extreme selfishness and sin, and 
wherever this arrangement of nature is interfered with 
more or less of disadvantage to the children is almost 
certain. 

O, that the mothers of the world could appreciate 
the great power for good which the Lord has placed in 
their hands! O, that they could realize that the hand 
that rocks the cradle is the hand that rules the world! 
To realize this and to use the opportunity thus providentially 
placed in their hands would be a proper response 
to the divine arrangement, and would entirely 
remove from such the ambition to have a share in politics, 
business, etc. The trouble is that the counsel of the 
Lord's Word and the arrangements of divine providence 

R3608 : page 236 

on this as on other subjects pass measurably unheeded. 
The poor world is doing perhaps as well as it knows, 
some better and some worse proportionately as the instincts 
of nature are acknowledged and followed with a 
lofty sentiment. 

Christian mothers, especially those whose eyes of 
understanding are opening to a larger appreciation of 
the divine character and plan, should be swift to avail 
themselves of their privileges in the training of their 
children— their responsibilities. Let none think that 
the work is small and insignificant and without its influence. 
Every son and every daughter properly trained 
to reverence and obedience to God and his Word and to 



their parents, and to the Golden Rule in respect to their 
dealings with playmates and neighbors, and to order 
and regularity and punctuality and system and truthfulness, 
is not only prepared for his and her own blessing in life, 
but prepared also to be a blessing and example to other 
boys and girls and men and women. Thus every mother's 
influence extends and multiplies as days and years go by. 
Even if there were no such desirable influences to 

R3608 : page 237 

be exercised outside the family circle, the proper training 

of the children means so much to the home— so much 

to the general peace and comfort and love constituting 

a home. While the father should not shirk his responsibilities 

as the head of the family, the mother as his 

efficient co-worker and helpmate earnestly cooperates, 

and to her must fall the major part of the responsibility 

for the training of the children, the breadwinner of the 

family being necessarily less in contact with them. And 

when the mother only is a child of grace, the whole 

responsibility, so far as her husband will permit, falls 

upon her shoulders, with only the assistance and guidance 

which the Lord provides. Alas, that so many homes 

are anarchous, lawless, therefore not really homes at all. 

Many parents, with false conceptions of kindness and 

indulgence, allow the children to grow up devoid of 

the proper respect for God, for parents and for the rights 

and interests of others. This is the secret of much of 

the lawlessness and growing spirit of anarchy everywhere 

manifest in the world. The wonder indeed is 

that, with homes devoid of law and order and love and 

kindness, the world is not in a worse state than we find 

it. 

"IN THE DAYS OF THY YOUTH" 

The Golden Text of our lesson should be made 
prominent in every family. The child who learns to 
remember and reverence his Creator, who learns also 
of his own imperfections and how they were incurred, 
and that the death penalty is the curse resting upon 
himself and all the world, blighting every earthly prospect, 
will be in a fair way to receive the message of salvation 
from the curse— to learn of how God in his love has 
provided Jesus as the great Redeemer, and that the 
deliverance secured through his death will soon extend 
to every member of the human family. Reverence to 
parents follows naturally as a result of reverence to 
God. 

The Editor of this journal had the good fortune to 
be born of Christian parents and to be reared under 
Christian influences, and thus in God's providence, 
quite early in life, was led to see the privilege as well as 
the blessing of consecration to the Lord. Looking back 
he can see with increasing clearness the many pitfalls 



and snares and sad experiences which were thus averted 
and the great blessings which were thus secured. His 
sympathies go out toward all who by the grace of God 
flee from sin and lay hold upon the great Life-giver and 
seek to walk in his steps, holding fast his hand. He rejoices 
with all such, but he feels specially interested in 
those who seek the Lord early in life, before the evil 
days draw nigh, before passing into the sowing of wild 
oats and the reaping of the crop of bitter experiences 
which this implies. He feels a deep interest, therefore, 
in all the younger readers of this journal, especially of 
those who have felt the love of God constraining their 
hearts and who have responded to that drawing influence 
and have made a full consecration of themselves 
to walk in the steps of the Captain of our Salvation- 
steps of self-denial, self-sacrifice, steps which lead from 
glory to glory. To all such he extends earnest greetings 
and salutations in the Lord— congratulation on the steps 
already trod and best wishes for those which are to 
come. 



R3608 : page 237 

"THY WORD WAS FOUND, I ATE IT." 

-2 CHRONICLES 34:14-28.-AUGUST 13- 

Golden Text:— "I will not forget thy Word."— Psa. 1 19:16. 

KING AHAZ, in his wicked rebellion against God's 

authority, had caused the manuscripts of the 

Law to be burned— presumably all of them. 

However, in God's providence, perhaps with the cooperation 

of some of the faithful priests, one copy of the Law 

was buried under a pile of stone and rubbish in one of the 

little rooms surrounding the court of the Temple. 

There it was found by the priest Hilkiah in the process 

of the cleaning up and restoring of the Temple services 

commanded by King Josiah in connection with 

the reforms he instituted, considered in our last lesson. 

Shaphan was the name of the king's scribe, his position 
corresponding somewhat to secretary of state at the 
present time. He, as the king's representative, had 
general charge of the Temple repairs, the collection of 
moneys donated by the people for the repairs of the Temple, 
and the re-institution of its services. Not to the 
king, therefore, but to Shaphan his representative, Hilkiah 
the high priest delivered the sacred manuscripts, 
and he in turn reported them to the king. Whether they 
included all the books of the Law, the five books of Moses 
and possibly the book of Judges, we cannot surely know, 
but evidently from the context they included the book 
of Deuteronomy. 



"SANCTIFY THEM THROUGH THY TRUTH." 

The Lord predicates two things respecting his Word 
of truth: First, it is intended only for those of an honest 
heart and who are seeking the truth; and, secondly, it is 
intended to still further enlighten and thereby to still 
further sanctify this class for whom it is intended. It 
was so with Josiah. Devoted to righteousness and seeking 
to serve the Lord, the message of the Law tended to 
deepen his every conviction and stimulate him to still 
further endeavors in the Lord's service. The reading of 
the Law alarmed the king greatly, for he was in a condition 
of heart to believe every word of it. He realized that the 
nation of Israel had committed the very sins recorded in 
Deuteronomy, the twenty-eighth chapter (See 2 Kings 22:19), 
and that, therefore, they were subject to the very 
penalties therein specified. He rent his clothes— the 
tearing of the loose outer garment in olden times being 
a symbol of distress, perplexity or fear. 

R3608 : page 238 

At once the king sent commissioners, saying, "Go, 
inquire of the Lord for me and for them that are left in 
Israel and Judah concerning the words of the book that 
is found, for great is the wrath of the Lord poured out 
upon us because our fathers have not kept the commandment 
of the Lord to do all that is written in this book." 
The commissioners inquired of the Prophetess Huldah, 
and brought to the king the answer that all the evils, 
"curses," declared in the book as the punishment for 
such sin would surely come upon the people because they 
had forsaken the Law. The punishments must be inflicted, 
but the king, who had shown such a loyalty to the Lord 
(and presumably others who manifested a similar spirit), 
would be preserved from the trouble. That is to say, it 
would not come at such a time and in such a manner as to 
involve them. 

LOYALTY TO GOD, SYMPATHY FOR MAN. 

The king was doubtless comforted in a measure by 
the assurance of his own escape from the fiery troubles 
predicted, but the right condition of his heart was evidenced 
by the fact that he was not content merely with 
this, but sought as far as possible to bring the priests, 
the nobles and all the chief people of Israel, and incidentally, 
of course, all who were under their influence, 
back into harmony and fellowship with the Lord. The 
work of destroying idols throughout the land, which was 
accomplished in a considerable degree six years before, 
was renewed and thoroughly accomplished; the Temple 
services were established also in good form. 

In this connection the king ordered the observance 
of the Passover as directed by the Lord, and the record 
seems to be that there had never been a more notable 



one in the history of Israel: the reformation seems not 
only to have been an outward one but one that reached the 
heart, and the desire to please and serve the Lord seems 
to have extended to all classes. Nevertheless we may 
be sure that then, as at all other times, there were both 
deep and shallow natures, and that the majority of the 
Israelites were swayed by the example of the king and 
nobles, without having any clear moral and religious 
sentiments of their own on the subject. It is always so 
in every nation; only the comparatively few seem to 
really hear and appreciate the Word of God. Thus our 
Lord said to those whom he addressed, "Blessed are your 
eyes for they see, and your ears for they hear." The 
majority neither saw nor heard nor appreciated with 
their hearts, although the multitudes said, "Never man 
spake like this man," and great crowds appeared to 
listen. 

R3609 : page 238 

I WILL NOT FORGET THY WORD. 

The golden Text is the key to all proper living. It 
was because David did not forget the Word of the Lord 
that he was the good king, the prototype of the great 
Messiah. David's prophetic words, however, relate 
more particularly to the Christ than to himself. Many 
of his prophecies were written from this standpoint— as 
speaking for Messiah. We are reminded of our Redeemer's 
sentiments as expressed in another Psalm, "I 
delight to do thy will, O my God: thy law is written in 
my heart." (Psa. 40:8.) The Apostle applies these 
words directly to our Lord.— Heb. 10:7. 

What was true of our Lord, the Head of the Church, 
must be true of every member of his body. Not a member 
can be indifferent even to the Word, the testimony, 
the will of God. And the attitude of each must not 
merely be a willingness to do the Lord's will under restraint, 
but it must be of a willing heart, "I delight to do 
thy will." To this end the Word of God must not only 
be appreciated as so much of literature and history and 
divine direction, but it must be so thoroughly appreciated 
as to be received into the heart, or, as the Apostle 
states it, it must be written in our hearts. This reminds 
us of the fact that Adam in his perfection was an image 
of God— that God's law was written in his heart. Indeed 
in his nature, being, he was created in harmony with God, 
in his image, his likeness, as was also our Redeemer by 
his immaculate birth. The followers of Jesus, however, 
born in sin and shapen in iniquity, are far from having 
the divine law written in their hearts— with all of them 
it has become more or less obliterated through the fall. 
A part of the Christian's daily business is to engrave in 
his character, in his heart, more and more deeply, the 
laws of the Lord; and the more earnestly he gives attention 
to this discipline and schooling, necessary to all the 



disciples of Christ, the more he prepares himself for the 
Kingdom condition and join t-heirship with the Lord, 
promised to all those who love and obey and follow him. 

"MAKING WISE THE SIMPLE." 

"The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the 
soul: the testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the 
simple. The precepts of the Lord are right, rejoicing 
the heart: the commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening 
the eyes." (Psa. 19:7-9.) How true are 
these prophetic declarations may be comprehended only 
by those who have learned to appreciate the Word of 
God. It deters from sin, it encourages toward righteousness, 
it gives consolation in trouble, it gives strength and 
courage in a time of general fear and quaking, it gives 
wisdom in times of perplexity, and the result is that the 
people of the Lord have much advantage everyway 
through it as respects the present life, besides the hope, 
the encouragement and the preparation which it gives 
for the life which is to come. 

The Prophet, representing the Lord's people of a 
future day, cries, "Thy words were found and I did eat 
them," and this represents a double thought: first it 
implies that the Word of the Lord would be lost and 
would need to be searched for; secondly it implies that 
when found it will avail us nothing unless it be appropriated 
to our needs, unless its testimony be received into 
good and honest hearts and be put into practice. The 
Word of the Lord was lost in a most important sense 
during the dark ages. Forms and ceremonies and the 
decrees of councils took the place of the testimony which 
the Lord declares to be sure. The result was increasing 
confusion and deterioration of spiritual vitality amongst 
those professing the name of Christ. Not only was the 
Word of the Lord lost in the sense of not being followed, 

R3609 : page 239 

but in a very important sense it was also lost by not 
being studied. The writing of the Scriptures was generally 
discontinued and the old manuscripts were lost 
sight of. 

The finding of the Word of God seemed to begin 
afresh with the introduction of the art of printing, at 
a time when certain of the Lord's people were aroused to 
inquire more particularly for the "old paths." (Jer. 6:16.) 
In Luther's day, when printing was considerably 
advanced, history tells us that although he had been in 
a religious college for years, and was a professor and 
teacher, he never saw a copy of the Word of God until 
he was twenty years of age. Thank God, conditions are 
so changed now that his Word is found in the sense of 
being easily accessible to the whole people, and in the 
sense, too, that, under his providential care, in this time 
of the end knowledge has been increased so as to be 



universal in Christian lands. (Dan. 12:4.) Thank God 
that to-day his Word is abundantly distributed in all 
civilized lands and is obtainable in all heathen lands 
and in all languages. 

BURIED UNDER TRADITIONS. 

Nevertheless the Word of the Lord is in one sense 
still hidden. It is covered with a thick coating of false 
teaching and human tradition, so that in the homes 
where the book is to be found there is often so much 
blindness upon the eyes of the understanding that the 
truth of God cannot be appreciated. It is still necessary 
for us to pray with the Apostle, for ourselves 
and for others, that, the eyes of our understanding 
being enlightened, we might be able to comprehend 
with all saints the lengths and breadths and 
heights and depths of the love of God, which passeth 
understanding. It is only as our eyes of understanding 
open that we really see the wonderful things of God's 
book, and that we really get the wonderful blessings 
which he intended only for those who seek in truth and 
in sincerity, only for the saints. 

The prophet speaks of a famine in the land, not for 
bread nor for water, but for the hearing of the Word of 
the Lord. There was such a famine in the dark ages, 
and to a large extent the reformation movement was a 
supply of the heavenly food and drink, spiritual nourishment. 
But, as we have just seen, there is still a famine 
though of another kind. Although there are churches 
in every direction, Bibles in every home, many are 
beginning to find that they are starving— that with the 
Word of God in their hands they are famishing, because 
they have been feeding upon the husks of human traditions, 
creeds and theories of men, which will not stand 
the tests of present-day enlightenment. Some are feeling 
lank and hungry spiritually. We wish there were 
more of these, for the Lord to-day, as ever, is as good as 
his word, assuring us that they that hunger and thirst 
after righteousness [truth] shall be filled. To all who now 
come into the right relationship to the Lord and to his 
Word there is refreshment never before known by his 
people. His Word, always precious, is a hundred-fold 
more precious now than ever before; its beauty, its true 
meaning, its reasonableness are more and more manifest 
to those who have the hearing ear and the eyes of their 
understanding opened, to those who are freed from the 
bondage of human traditions and are seeking the Bread 
from heaven, the testimony of the Lord that maketh wise 
the simple, the humble. 

Now is the time for those who have tasted that the 
Lord is gracious and who have found his Word to be 
meat indeed, who realize that the Lord is present and 
has girded himself, and is serving the household of 
faith with meat in due season— now is the time for these 
to seek for and to assist those who are coming to an 



appreciation of their lankness and their hunger and 
thirst. May the Lord more and more give us wisdom 
and grace in presenting his Truth, that we may testify 
not only with our lips, but with all the conduct of life, 
the power and grace of the Word of Life. 



R3609 : page 239 

THE LONDON, ENG., CONVENTION. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have much pleasure in giving you a short report of 
the third London Convention. The three days of last 
weekend the 10th, 11th and 12th of June, were, to the 
brethren who gathered in London, as a holy convocation 
unto the Lord. We had indeed a time of rejoicing with 
each other for all his goodness, and a time of solemn waiting 
upon him, that we might offer our praise and gain 
further strength. The result is according to his gracious 
promise: the windows of heaven were opened and his 
love was poured out upon us. It has been a memorable 
time for all, and with one consent there were expressions 
of gratitude for the privilege of attending and for the encouragement 
and stimulus gained. It was specially good 
to hear from some who are learning the value of the 
Truth that the Convention has been as a seal to their 
faith, and that full assurance had come. 

All the meetings were well attended and all were 
larger than last year. On the Sunday night there were 
about 600 present, while the average of the other meetings 
was about 350. We had with us Brother Luttichau 
from Copenhagen and Brother Lundborg from Stockholm, 
and it gave pleasure to hear of the growth of the Truth in 
their countries. Then there were, as usual, brethren from 
Scotland and Ireland. 

The addresses were helpful, but a large proportion of 
the value of the Convention was plainly in the assembly 
of the brethren and encouragement through the mutual 
faith. The testimonies were good, indicating a fervent 
desire to be found pleasing to God, and to be faithful 
stewards of the treasure committed to us. On Monday 32 
brothers and sisters symbolized their consecration to the 
Lord by immersion. 

At the close of a Colporteur meeting for testimony, 
etc., on the suggestion of a brother, a message of love 
was sent to you and I have very much pleasure, dear 
brother, in conveying this to you. In support of this all 
the people rose to signify their feelings. We look forward 
to the time when we may have you with us again and when 
the love may be spoken to you and shown in the face. 
We were also desired to express the gratitude which the 
friends have for the meetings held under the auspices of 
the Society. 

We pray for you, dear brother, that you may ever be 



found faithful to the great things committed into your 
hands, that your joy of the Lord may ever increase and 
that you may walk worthy of the Lord to all pleasing, 
being spared to do all his will may have for you. 
With much love in him, I am your brother, 
J. HEMERY. 



page 241 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVI. AUGUST 15, 1905. No. 16 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 243 

The Church and the School 243 

The Religions of New York 244 

Nominal Christians Described 244 

Fate of the Theological Student 245 

Convention of the Joyful People 245 

The Church of Today 246 

"Not Holding the Head" 248 

Only the Humble are Safe 249 

Burning the Word of God 249 

Persecuted for Righteousness' Sake 252 

Two Questions Answered 254 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers 255 

Portland Convention Arrangements 242 

page 242 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



GENERAL CONVENTION, PORTLAND, OREGON, SEPT. 8-10 



All sessions of the Convention (except the Sunday afternoon 
public service) will be held in the "Woodman's Hall," 
corner of East Sixth Street and E. Alder Streets. Brethren 
arriving over the S.P. line on Friday morning, Sept. 8th, 
should get off the car at E. Morrison St. station and come 
direct to the hall, thus saving carfare as well as any inconvenience 
through transferring. All other brethren arriving on all 
other lines at any time should come to the Union Depot 
where arrangements will be made to meet them and direct 
them to Hall and accommodations. All cars crossing "Morrison 
Bridge" pass within one or two blocks of the Hall. To get 
to Hall from Union Depot:— Take "M" car one block south, or 
"S" car, southbound, three blocks south on Sixth St., ask for 
"Morrison Bridge" transfer when paying fare, get off at Third 
and Yamhills Sts. and take any car crossing bridge. Get off 
at Grand Ave. and look for banner showing location of Hall one 
block north and one east. 

The public service, Sunday afternoon at 3, will be held in 
the First Methodist Church, corner Third and Taylor Sts., 
easily reached from all car lines without transfer. 

Entertainment.— Good rooms can be obtained in the vicinity 
of the Convention Hall for 50c, 75c and $1.00 per night for 
each person, two, three and four in a room. Meals at nearby 
restaurants can be had for 20c and 25c. Special room rates can 
be obtained for families or unencumbered brothers or sisters, 
three or four in a room. 

It is important that all brethren who anticipate attending 
the Convention should notify Wm. A. Baker at Couch St. Dock, 
Portland, Ore., at least two weeks in advance, so that accommodations 
can be secured. 

Letters should state price of rooms desired, number in 
party, etc. Arrangements will also be made for brethren who 
cannot afford to pay for accommodations but who can pay their 
fare to Convention, but in such cases it is also necessary to be 
advised before date of Convention. Some of the brethren have 
already written relative to bringing tents and others as to bringing 
their own blankets, which they can do without extra cost as 
baggage. All who feel it to their advantage to do so will be 
taken care of, and where brethren cannot afford to take furnished 
rooms it is a very good plan. Compliance with the 
above will greatly facilitate work of the Entertainment Committee 



and add to the general harmony of the Convention at 
the opening session. 

Railroad Rates.— The regular excursion rate of all roads 
entering Portland, with tickets on sale at all times, is one and 
one-third fare, with a thirty-day limit. Parties of ten on one 
ticket, ten-day limit, one fare for round trip. "Coach parties" 
from any one locality are made special excursion rates, averaging 
considerably less than one fare for the round trip. It is 
suggested to friends in the northwest that they may be able to 
make joint arrangements with the local committees of the other 
two Associations (National Letter Carriers' Association and the 
"Hoo-Hoos" or Lumbermen) holding their conventions at 
Portland at this time, for "coach parties," and thus get the advantage 
of the lowest possible rate. 

MISSIONARY ENVELOPES 



These are now in stock in large quantity. Every letter you 
send through the mail may be a more or less potent messenger 
of the Truth, even on its outside, by the use of these envelopes. 
They catch the attention not only of those to whom they are 
addressed, but postmen and others have an opportunity, and 
sometimes the curiosity, to read their message of peace— the 
gospel in condensed form. Price, 25c per 100, postpaid. 



R3610 : page 243 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
THE CHURCH AND THE SCHOOL. 



THE endeavor to bring the public school system of 
England under the supervision of the Church of 
England is causing considerable friction, and 
amounts to a modern persecution for conscience' sake 
that reminds of the persecutions of the long ago. Good 
people, whose consciences are perhaps not backed by 
proper knowledge of the Lord's teachings on the subject, 
and who therefore lack some measure of "the 
wisdom that cometh from above," are refusing to pay 
school taxes because such taxes would support schools 
which they disapprove. They thereby bring upon them 
the regular penalties: their goods are sold to meet the 
debt and some, in default of the money, have been 
imprisoned. 

In Canada the same question is up in another form 
—the division of moneys raised by school taxes amongst 
sectarian schools. Many Canadians see in this an attack 
on the public-school system that would favor Romanism. 
They see correctly; but those who see that "the 



time is short," after voicing a reasonable protest may 
safely and quietly leave all in the hands of the Lord. 

The "Churchman" (Episcopalian) makes some sensible 
comments on the subject. We quote: 

"Does not the endeavor to ally the Church and 
Christianity with the public school place the Church in 
just as false a position as would the endeavor to ally 
it with the State? The Church represents Christ infinitely 
more than through a mere code of laws or a 
system of education. She is in the world to convert, to 
inspire, and to furnish the enabling power for the life 
of men and of society in its entirety. 

"Definite religious teaching should be left where it 
belongs, to the Church and to the home. State officials 
could not teach even the Ten Commandments in other 
than a perfunctory way without arousing controversy. 
It is because the Church and Christian parents have 
failed to give the religious instruction, that they ought to 
have given, that the demand is made for such instruction 
in the public schools. With anxiety, it seems sometimes 
almost with desperation, they ask that the State shall 
do what the Church has failed to do. The State can not 
do what they ask, but the Church can. With renewed 
zeal and the best educational methods she must supply 
the religious instruction that the State and its schools 
can not give." 

CHURCH UNION IN THE MAY CONVENTIONS. 



A marked tendency toward Church union characterized 
the May meetings of the various denominations this 
year. Among the definite steps taken were the organizing 
by the Northern and Southern Baptists of a permanent 
body to be known as the General Convention of the 
Baptists of North America; the agreement of the United 
Brethren, at their quadrennial conference in Kansas 
City, to accept the plan of federation with the Congregationalists 
and the Methodist Protestants, looking to 
a complete consolidation in the future; and the action 
of the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church 
toward completing organic union with the Cumberland 
Presbyterians. The vote approving the latter merger 
was taken on May 22. Says a correspondent of the New 
York Herald, in reference to this vote: 

"It was the final action of the General Assembly 
on one of the greatest questions which have come before 
it since the Civil War, and brings back into that 
organization a branch which went out during the war 
because of differences over negro slavery. 

"If the opposition to the union has made any fight 
it has been chiefly at the secret meetings of the special 
canvassing committee appointed last Saturday, but 
there were to-day no signs of such a contest. The 
special committee in its report canvassed the votes 



taken by presbyteries on the question of union. It 
showed 144 yeas to 39 noes. Two took no action, one 
gave conditional assent, and five made no report." 

The same correspondent gives the following further 
details: 

"The special committee in its recommendations 

R3610 : page 244 

asked that the proposition be referred to the Committee 

on Cooperation and Union; that the committee be increased 

in membership to twenty-one; that it have 

power to confer with a committee from the Cumberland 

Church; that it find what details must be worked out 

to consummate the union, and that a report be made 

to the General Assembly next year. 

"This committee is to consider the corporate and 
legal rights of both general assemblies. The purpose is 
to keep the consolidation within legal limits, that all 
civil suits and injunctions may be avoided." 

THE RELIGIONS OF NEW YORK. 



A journal styled Federation has gathered statistics 
of religious conditions in New York City. Its conclusion 
is that "the greatest home missionary field in the 
United States is New York City, and the sooner the 
churches realize it the better it will be for our city and 
our land." The Sun, reviewing the report, says: 

"At present the aggregate of the distinctively Christian 
population of the town is only two-fifths of the 
whole. This includes the whole of the Roman Catholic 
population and the total number of Protestant communicants. 
Besides these the Federation estimates a total 
of about half a million Protestants who attend Church 
more or less regularly and more than a million Protestants 
who are 'churchless,' or outside of any religious 
faith. 

"New York, therefore, can not now be called a Christian 
city. Jews and infidels and the religiously indifferent 
or unattached constitute a majority of the inhabitants. 
The Protestant percentage is becoming less, 
the vast preponderance of the additions to the population 
being of Roman Catholics and Jews. The total of 
Protestant communicants and church attendants, as 
estimated by the Federation, is only about as great as 
that of the Jews alone, and by 1910 it is likely to be 
much less. By that time there will be more Jews here 
than natives of native parentage. The Jewish population 
has increased from only about 3 per cent, of the 
whole in 1880 to nearly 20 per cent, in 1905." 

NOMINAL CHRISTIANS DESCRIBED. 



We hear boasts of the progress of Christianity in 
connection with the project of converting the world. 
We see the estimate of four hundred millions of Christians. 
It is well that we examine the following picture 
of some of this number— the great mass of them. We 
quote from the New York Herald a description of the 
emigrants now coming to our shores. Alas! the name 
Christian has come to be a byword by reason of the 
attempt to count large numbers, and to stimulate the 
hope that some day the heathen world will be converted 
to as good conditions as is Christendom now. Alas! 
Christendom is "Babylon" in God's esteem (Rev. 18:4) 
and really worse than heathendom— more excusable because 
of its grosser darkness, denser blindness. If the 
400,000,000 of Christendom commit more and greater 
crimes and are every way more profane than the 1,100,000,000 
heathen, which most needs converting? 

The Herald says: 

"They are barbarians most of them. Subtracting 
a certain small percentage of fairly intelligent— a percentage 
drawn for the most part from the better class of 
Scandinavians, Scotch, and Germans— the great residuum 
are to all appearances so densely ignorant, so 
utterly alien to all our preconceived notions of what 
constitutes civilization, that it is only with great difficulty 
that we force ourselves to remember that most 
of them have been born and bred in the very strongholds 
of Christendom." 

REV. A. BEET, D.D. 



Some time ago we called attention to Prof. Beet's 
acceptance of the Bible teaching of man's mortality: 
that eternal life is God's gift through Christ to those 
only who become his followers. 

The following, clipped from the London Daily News 
explains the present situation. Prof. Beet's fidelity to 
the truth he has already seen has led him to renounce his 
honorable position and good salary for conscience' sake. 
May he be abundantly blessed and led into the still 
deeper truths now due to the household of faith. We 
quote as follows: 

When a man loves truth better than dignities and emoluments, 
he is a man to be noted. Such a man is Dr. Agar Beet, 
Theological Professor at Richmond Wesleyan College, England. 
For eight years he has been under a cloud and an 
object of suspicion in certain Methodist circles on account of 
his Eschatological views. Under pressure he withdrew his 
book, "Last Things," from circulation, and gave reluctantly 
a promise not to issue another edition, "in order to avoid 
danger to the peace of the Church," and generally to keep 
silent on the dark question of the Doom of the Lost until the 



Wesleyan Conference gave permission for the book to be 
published. 

To an earnest seeker after truth the position became intolerable 
and impossible. It was not a matter of surprise 
that after the last Conference had refused to unseal his lips 
he promptly announced his intention to vacate his chair this 
year and claim freedom of thought and action. It was the 
only course possible. Better cease to be a Professor than be 
placed under an embargo of silence. 

Rev. Dr. Beet said to a reporter: 

"What has brought about this crisis is that I can no longer 
withhold from the world a book that has already brought 
light and comfort to many readers. Even in its present form 

R3611 : page 244 

it has lifted the gloom from many hearts. Not less than a 
hundred ministers and many laymen have thanked me for 
blessings received from its perusal. I owe it to the Church, 
to Christ, and to conscience to place the results of my study 
of this solemn subject in the hands of readers, many of 
whom are groping in darkness. The opinion of Methodists 
on the doom of the lost has completely changed during the 
last half century. They have discarded the traditional belief 
in the literalness of hell-fire and the eternity of future 
punishment, but they have been without guidance as to a 
positive article of faith to put in its place. This overthrow 
of the dogma has been carefully hidden. Godly ministers 
have nursed their doubts in silence, some under a sense of 
guilt for concealing their change of view, until the need for 
concealment has become to them a humiliating and intolerable 
bondage." 

"What is your view, the view to which strong objection has 
been taken?" 

"I hold that the New Testament represents Jesus Christ 
as declaring that for those who reject His Gospel there is 
nothing in the future for them but ruin, hopeless, utter, and 
final ruin, but he does not say implicitly what will become of 
the lost, or in what that final ruin consists. The references 

R3611 : page 245 

to the doom of the impenitent are too uncertain for us to 
dogmatise upon them. The traditional view is that those 
who reject Christ will think and feel for ever and will suffer 
endlessly. That dogma I reject unhesitatingly. 

"That there are some passages in the Scriptures that seem 
to suggest conscious suffering I admit, but there are other 
passages which contradict that view, and in the absence of 
distinct and definite teaching on the subject why should we 
dogmatise? As to the natural immortality of the soul, that 
is not a Christian doctrine at all. It has been incorporated 
in Christian theology from the Platonic philosophers, but no 
proof of its truth is to be found in Scripture." 

FATE OF THE THEOLOGICAL STUDENT 



Rev. Robert Ker contributes the following to the 
Toronto Globe:— 

On behalf of the modern apostasy known as "higher 
criticism," a plea is set up on the ground of liberty so-called. 
But there is no interference with anybody's liberty, that an 
ordinary mind can see, and the Bishops rightly say to those 
wonderfully learned men— professors in colleges and holders 
of Church endowments in various forms— there is a "wide 
open door" through which you can pass, and through which, 
as honorable men, you ought to go, and not stand on the 
manner of your going. We may say to those who take this 
consistent course that we shall be very sorry to see them go, 
particularly so, as they modestly tell us that they carry with 
them all the scholarship and enlightenment of the Church. 
But it can't be helped, and we shall struggle on in our own 
feeble way, wrestling with "the traditional view," while they, 
freed from its oppressive trammels, shall have added to their 
manifold gifts and graces the homely virtue of honesty. A 
man who can deliberately recite a creed without believing it, 
and draws pay for doing so, is as little worthy of respect as 
the man who forges a check, because they are both "getting 
money under false pretences." 

The theological student, as matters are going, will soon be 
as extinct as the Dodo. And need we wonder at it? Let the 
Bible be the hodgepodge which these wonderfully learned 
people represent, a mass of fiction and folly, and every 
honest man will see just one of two courses open before him— 
either plain and unvarnished infidelity, or absorption into 
the Papal obedience. It is astonishing how men pledged to 
honor and honorable dealing can blind themselves to the 
position that they must of necessity occupy in the sight of 
honest men. And what is it all about? Who is the great 
high priest of the new cult? The higher criticism had its 
birth and growth in licentiousness and infidelity. Its 
ostentatious claim to unprecedented scholarship is now ridiculed 
as little more and nothing better than hyper-criticism. 

But there is a side to this question which is less considered 
than it ought to be. I refer to the prevailing and 
widespread indifference of the laity. There was a time in 
the history of the Church when things were very different 
from what they are to-day. I think it was last Christmas a 
clergyman of the city of Montreal sent around a Christmas 
card to the members of his congregation, on which, instead 
of a quotation from Holy Scripture, he treated them to a 
quotation from Harnack. Next year it will likely be a quotation 
from Tom Paine, Bolingbroke or Voltaire. There's 
really no difference. But will it evoke any protest from the 
laity? Do they see that this new apostasy strikes at the root 
of revealed religion? Do they stop to think that this new 
"doctrine of devils" leaves them without Christ and without 
God in the world? "How sweet the name of Jesus sounds," 
has no music for the man who has no faith in the resurrection 
or whose views respecting it, as a college professor avowed, 



were in a state of suspense. It is God-dishonoring to have 
such men in our pulpits leading men and women into the 
deeper condemnation. 

Then what are we to say about the colossal folly of the 
men who, having eliminated the incarnation and the resurrection, 
talk about "a revival of religion?" Better far to call 
things by their proper name and pray for a revival of Paganism 
and the re-introduction of its licentious worship. 

We are reproducing with extraordinary exactitude the 
conditions that prevailed in ancient Rome before she sank 
into the pit of her own digging. It behooves those who are 
sincerely on the Lord's side in these days of alarming apostasy 
to stand fast in the faith. 



R3611 : page 245 

CONVENTION OF THE JOYFUL PEOPLE 

BLESSED are the people who do know the joyful 
sound." (Psa. 89:15.) No Convention yet held 
by us better illustrated this text than the 
Niagara Convention. It was a joyful meeting of happy 
people. Not merely did the association conduce to 
happiness, but nearly all in attendance were happy before 
they came, and merely increased their joys by their 
fellowship there with the Lord and with one another. 

The Boston railway agent remarked to the Brother 
who secured the arrangements for the sixty brethren 
and sisters from that quarter,— "You all seem to be 
anticipating a good time. Every face is happy— not a 
frown, not a vexed or cross word." He was the more 
surprised because the people were of no sect or party— 
merely Christians— and enroute for a Bible Students' 
Convention. He became interested in "the happy people," 
and says he wants to read "DAWN" to find the 
secret. A similar experience attended another party. 

The watchman at the Conservatory had not expected 
arrivals before 10 a.m. Sunday and refused to open 
the building, but finally did open it, inquiring, "What is it 
that makes you all so happy?" He was informed that 
the people were happy because they loved and trusted 
the Lord and his Word. He thought he would attend 
some of the meetings and learn why those people were 
so happy in coming long distances at their own expense. 
He attended, declared it was a different gospel 
from any he ever before heard, and got the DAWN to 
study further. 

The janitor of the building not only noted the joy 
of the Lord in the faces and conversation, but remarked 
also that this was the only Convention ever held in the 
Conservatory, attended by men, that did not litter the 
carpets, etc., with cigar ashes and stumps and tobacco 
quids. A number of the employes, we learn, are now 
reading DAWN as a result of their having read the "living 



epistles" of the Lord's "people who do know the 
joyful sound." 

THE CITY, THE AUDITORIUM, THE PEOPLE 

Niagara Falls, N.Y., is a quiet, clean and beautiful 
city, all that could be desired. Its citizens let us alone, 
and we let them alone; except that the 1,100 conveners 
got their lodgings with them at not unreasonable rates. 
We did not advertise this Convention to the public, 
preferring to have it chiefly a gathering of those already 
deeply interested in Present Truth. No doubt this contributed 
to the general sentiment that this was the 
best Convention yet held under our Society's auspices. 
Hereafter we prefer to follow this plan in respect to the 

R3611 : page 246 

"General Convention" (except perhaps one discourse 
for the public) leaving to the "One Day Conventions" 
more particular appeals to the local public. 

The Natural Food Co., manufacturers of "Shredded 
Wheat Biscuit," granted us the free use of the fine 
auditorium in their extensive buildings. It was scrupulously 
clean, well lighted, well ventilated and seats 
1,000 persons. It was more than full on two occasions, 
on Sunday. The Convention voted its thanks to the 
management and their courteous employes. 

EAST, WEST, NORTH AND SOUTH 

Some in attendance came long distances— two from 
Florida, one from Tennessee, some from Nebraska, but 
the majority, of course, from the more central districts. 
Boston, Chicago and Allegheny churches seem to have 
been most liberally represented— about 60 from each. 

From the opening of the Convention to its close the 
keynote was loving gratitude to God and love and 
sympathy to the brethren and the entire groaning creation. 
About a dozen brethren took part in the public 

R3612: page 246 

services. More than a dozen others present would have 
been quite competent for service had there been opportunity 
for them. No doubt the discourses did good by 
stimulating faith and zeal, but after all the great feature 
of the Convention surely was the heart-fellowship of 
the occasion. No earthly family-reunion compared with 
the gathering of the Lord's family and their loving interest 
in each other's welfare. Introductions were not 
waited for— each knew the other's heart and soon reached 
it. 

Ninety-four brethren and sisters symbolized their 
consecration as being "even unto death." It was a 
beautiful and solemn witnessing. The pastor of the 



Baptist Church, which so kindly granted us the free use 

of their baptistry, was present at the service, we learn, 

and is now reading DAWN. An Episcopal minister and 

his wife, also a Baptist minister and his wife, were conventioners 

with us, having come considerable distances. 

We believe they were favorably impressed and blessed. 

We hope to hear from them further, ere long. 

THE ABSENT ONES REMEMBERED 

We reminded the dear friends that we surely had 
the prayers and blessed wishes of others of "the happy 
people," "the Truth people," all over the world, thousands 
of whom would have been with us had the Lord's 
providence permitted. We remembered you all earnestly 
in our prayers that the Lord would compensate your 
unwilling absence by pouring upon you a portion of 
our blessing; and we exhorted all of the dear friends 
present to endeavor to carry back to their homes some 
of the precious words and experiences of the Convention. 
We doubt not some of them will talk about their experiences 
for a year to come. 



R3612: page 246 

"THE CHURCH OF TODAY." 

BY REV. JOSEPH A. SEISS, D.D., LATE 
LUTHERAN MINISTER IN PHILADELPHIA, PA. 

THERE is nothing in the history of the world hitherto, 

and especially nothing in the present status 

of its affairs, to favor the doctrine of our Modern 

Millennialists, or to make us think it likely, if at all 

possible, that the Church in this dispensation, by any 

human activities or improvements, will ever be able to 

bring about a condition of universal conversion, righteousness 

and peace, such as some say will and must 

come "before" Christ comes. As no preaching of the 

Gospel, or efforts of evangelical workers, the holiest and 

most efficient in all these many centuries, have succeeded 

in making converts and saints of the entire population 

of any city or locality on this earth, it would seem to 

be sheer folly to expect these agencies and endeavors 

to do for the whole earth what they have never done 

for any part of it, however small. In all the ages... 

whithersoever it has come it has taken out a people 

for the Lord, who will live and shine with him in immortal 

glory. ..whilst. .the majority have 

everywhere been on the outside. ..and how can we 

suppose that it will ever be different in the present 

order of things? And when we examine the condition 

in which nearly two thousand years of the Gospel have 

left the most favored nations, not to speak of the regions 



beyond, we look in vain for solid evidences that 

another two thousand years of the same would bring 

the world any nearer the fancied Millennial state [before 

Christ comes] than Christendom is at present... 

Some hold up their hands in holy horror 

at the idea that "Christendom," as it now exists— "this 

chaos of intermingled divisions, antagonistic communions 

and interminable contentions, jealousies and 

strifes"— is to remain. They cannot think that the 

Greek Church, the Papal Church, the disagreeing Protestant 

churches, together with the many sects and 

heretical coteries which "disgrace" the Christian profession, 

are to continue to the end of time. 

But this state of things is exactly what has developed 
under "eighteen hundred years of the Gospel proclamations," 
and what has been is that which shall be, 
unless radical changes come, by the intervention of 
some new power and method of administration, such 
as the coming again of the Lord Jesus to judge and 
rectify will bring.... 

When we look at the evils and the tares that have 
all the while been growing, at the sad estate into which 
"Christendom has been brought" by the spirit of sect, 
human ambition, self-seeking hypocrisy, unbelief, misbelief 
and the super-exaltation of humanitarian goodishness, 
"which makes nought of doctrine," it seems 
next thing to absurdity to say that "this" is the instrument 
and agency to convert "the world" to truth and 
genuine godliness. 

People say, "Oh, yes; but only set the Church aright. 
Put it to work to do as it should; bring it up to what 
it 'ought to be' in enterprise and liberality, and there 

R3612: page 247 

can be no question that it will soon conquer and sway 
the world to Christ and salvation." Be it so; but who is 
to convert Christendom and put it in condition to convert 
the world? Reform, Reform! That is the watchword. 
The whole Church and the whole earth are full 
of reformers laboring at reforms. But the sad fact remains: 
"That which is crooked, cannot be made straight; 
and that which is wanting cannot be numbered," while 
the doctoring is often worse than the disease.... 
To convert the world there must first be a conversion 
of the Church, and that can never be until Christ the 
Judge shall come. 

Yet another thing to be noted in connection with 
our subject, is the character of the times in which we 
live. The Scriptures abound in allusions to the moral 
aspect of the world in its "last" period— the period 
bordering on the time when Christ shall come with 
power and great glory, and everywhere those times are 
represented as full of unbelief, lawlessness, outbreaking 
sin, rampant lust, blasphemous mockery, and reviling 
of sacred things,— a very carnival of bad passions and 



God-defiant crimes. 

The question, therefore, arises, whether our times 
are not of the character thus divinely described and 
fore-intimated. ...Have "we" not withal fallen 
upon a time of extraordinary degeneracy and wickedness? 
Has there not come a grievous falling away from 
the faith, a giving of heed to seducing spirits and doctrines 
of demons, through the hypocrisy of men that 
speak lies? Have not people become lovers of self, 
lovers of money, boastful, haughty, railers, disobedient 
to law and rightful authority, unthankful, unholy, 
without natural affection, implacable, slanderers, without 
self-control, fierce, traitors, headstrong, puffed up, 
lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of God, "holding 
certain forms of godliness," but failing to show the power 
of godliness in their lives? Have "we" not plentiful 
examples of those mockers who were to come, walking 
after their own lusts and likes, and saying "Where is 
the promise of his coming?" [Parousia, presence, Diaglott 
translation.] 

Think of the startling multiplication of divorces, 
the breaking down of the sacredness of marriage, the 
shameless prevalence of licentiousness, and the commonness 
of infanticide, and secret bloodguiltiness of 
which physicians tell. Note the growing indifference 
to the solemnity of oaths, to sacred promises, to moral 
obligations, to the laws of God, and to all holy things. 
Observe the rapid accumulations of colossal robberies, 
swindles, defalcations, embezzlements, rascalities and 
false dealings, which disgrace our civilization, much of 
it also in high places, by people of social rank, education 
and refinement. Estimate the increasing killings, 
murders, incendiarisms and lawless and malicious misdoings 
of men and women, and the trampling under 
foot of right and justice in political, commercial and 
banking circles. 

Observe the awful increase of suicides, which, within 
the past few years, have exceeded the number of 200,000 
per annum! Lusts and crimes and fiendish passions 
seem to have reached flood tide, blossoming like trees 
in springtime, filling our "daily journals with their 
stench," and yet, treated and familiarly talked of as 
ordinary and trivial things! And when we consider 
that all this is within the realm of so-called Christendom, 
we may well wonder that we should have Christian 
people singing over it, and telling us that we are on the 
march to a glorious Millennium [before Christ comes]. 
What this state of things betokens is not Millennial 
Glory, but "the day of Judgment, on the margin of 
which the world of to-day is reading."... 

The question whether there is to be a glorious 
Millennium on this earth before the return of 
Christ is not to be decided by what is most agreeable 
to our reason and fancy, nor yet by what we imagine 
the most effective to stir zeal in effort to benefit the 
world lying in sin, but by what the Word of God says. 



What does not accord with the Word must go under, 
without regard to human likes, reasonings or opinions. 
...That many good and sensible people have need 
to examine the question with more thoroughness than 
they yet have done, is abundantly evident; and that 
what we have thus written may help some to right 
conclusions, is our earnest wish. ...Nor can we 
leave the subject without solemnly laying it on the 
consciences of all whom we can reach, not to rest satisfied 
with notions which flatter and please a rationalistic 
fancy, but which they have never critically examined; 
and to beware of giving sanction to a modern popular 
persuasion, which they may find without just foundation 
in Scripture.... 

It is indeed a fact for all to consider, that the side 
which we take on the question will and must make 
serious difference in the whole system of our theological 
thinking. There is scarcely a doctrine which is not 

R3613 : page 247 

more or less affected by the ground we take upon this 
question. Our decision will and must affect our views 
of the Resurrection— of the Kingdom of God— of the 
Second Coming itself— of the Nature and Purpose 
of the Present Dispensation— particularly of the Judgment, 
and what is to come after it, and the whole condition 
and life of the finally redeemed.... 

And it will and must make or unmake to us many 
most pregnant passages of Holy Writ, rendering them 
grandly luminous, or sealing them as meaningless and 
uncertain— mere riddles for interpreters to guess at, 
without agreement as to their clear and certain import. 

A decision so far-reaching and momentous in its 
consequences and effects cannot safely be treated with 
indifference, and certainly demands a very serious, 
candid and thorough examination, that the conclusion 
may be one solidly founded in the revelations given us 
in the sacred Scriptures. 

For our part we are deeply convinced and satisfied 
that the doctrine of a glorious Millennium of Christianity 
triumphant throughout all the world before Christ 
comes, is "groundless" and damaging to the cause it 
would promote. 



R3613 : page 248 

NOT HOLDING THE HEAD. 

-COLOSSIANS 2:18.- 

THE APOSTLE warns us all against a wrong attitude 
which at all times has more or less threatened 
the body of Christ, in its larger gatherings 



as well as in its little handfuls;— he warns us against the 

danger of looking too much to ourselves or to other men 

in the Church and not enough toward the Lord, who is 

indeed "the Head of the Church, which is his body." 

Some members he represents as taking a head position, 

forgetful of the fact that "one is the Head of the Church, 

even Christ," and inclined in consequence of this forgetfulness 

to think too highly of themselves, to imagine 

that the whole weight and importance of the Lord's 

cause devolves upon them, and to assume too much 

leadership. 

The Apostle warns other less prominent members of 
the Church against a recognition and support of such a 
wrong position, assuring them that their condescension 
is extreme, prejudicial to themselves and to the interests 
they would serve; that the angels, that is the messengers, 
the representatives of the Church (Rev. 1:20; 2:1) are 
not to be worshipped, though they are to be highly esteemed 
in proportion to their faithfulness, good works and 
humility. He warns other members that such a humiliation 
as would ignore themselves entirely and cast all 
the weight and responsibility and influence upon these 
angels or elders would be improper, would indicate an 
unfaithfulness to Christ and a failure to rightly appreciate 
his arrangements. 

DANGERS IN OPPOSITE EXTREMES. 

Thus, reproving two classes because of taking opposite 
extremes, the Apostle proceeds to explain that 
the difficulty with both parties is a failure to hold the 
Head in proper esteem— Christ, the only true Head of 
the Church. Whether by exalting ourselves, usurping 
our Lord's place in the Church, and ignoring his words 
and arrangements and being puffed up as his servants, 
or whether on the other hand quietly submitting to such 
things and doing reverence to those who usurp the Lord's 
place in his body, in either case the difficulty is the 
same— a failure to rightly recognize the true Head. 

If we accept the fact that Christ is the Head of the 
Church, let us rest every argument on that basis; let 
us not feel for a moment that everything will go to pieces 
unless we steady the ark— that we are main spokes in 
the divine program in any little quarter of Zion. (1 Chron. 13:10.) 
All such self-conceited ideas are traitorous as 
respects the Captain of our Salvation, for he has told 
us— and we believe his word— "Without me ye can do 
nothing." Every member of the body of Christ, whom 
the Lord has in any sense of the word set in the Church 
to serve his cause, should realize that he is not at all 
essential to the development of the divine plan, that it 
is favor pure and simple that he has been granted a 
share in connection with it, that his blessings day by 
day more than compensate any little service and sacrifice 
he may be able to render. So far from feeling heady he 
should feel humbled by the thought that he is permitted 



to have any part in the great plan of God as a servant 
amongst his brethren, and he should realize distinctly 
that, so surely as the Lord is the Head of his Church, any 
who cease to occupy positions of trust in a humble 
manner will be debased, will lose the privileges and 
opportunities, perhaps with injury to themselves and to 
others. 

Those humble brothers and sisters who quietly permit 
a brother to exalt himself amongst them and to speak 
of the gathering, large or small, as "my Church," "my 
followers," etc., are not only doing the brother an injury 
and encouraging him in a wrong course, but they are 
disloyal to the real Head of the Church. He who submits 
to such conditions and language demonstrates that 
he does not properly appreciate "the liberty wherewith 
Christ makes free"— demonstrates either that he is but 
a "babe in Christ" or that he has gone to sleep as 
respects a proper watchfulness for the honor of the 
Church and of the Head of the Church. It matters not 
that such things can be explained away as not having 
meant anything serious. The fact is that such language 
and claims indicate that something serious has already 
taken place, for no truly humble Elder of the Church of 
Christ, loyal to the Head, would think of speaking of 
himself as instead of the Head of the Church, nor think 
of speaking of the Lord's people as his Church. 

Such public offenses should be publicly apologized 
for, otherwise such leaders should be relegated to the 
back seats. No matter if they had all the oratory 
imaginable, no matter if none of the others had any 
talent for public service. The poorest and weakest and 
most insignificant member of the body is, in the Lord's 
estimation, better qualified to teach than is one who 
vaunteth and puffeth up himself and affects to take in 
the Church the position of the Head. Mark the Apostle's 
words, "Vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind and 
not holding fast the Head, from whom all the body 
being supplied and knit together through the joints and 
bands, increaseth with the increase of God."— Col. 2:19. 

SELF FIRST, GOD SECOND. 

In 2 Timothy 2:3 the Apostle assures us that, 
In the last days grievous times shall come. For men 
shall be lovers of self, lovers of money, boastful, haughty, 
railers, disobedient to parents [and higher authority in 
general], unthankful, unholy. ..traducers, heady, 
high-minded... having a form of godliness, but 
ignoring the power thereof. 

This picture certainly fits well to our day throughout 
nominal Christendom, and it is not strange therefore 
that something of the same general spirit at times seeks 
to invade the camp of the saints— the little companies 
of the consecrated who are striving to be overcomers 
of the world and its spirit. The fact that the Apostle 
writes thus forcefully on this question does not prove any 



lack of sympathy on his part, and assuredly our reference 
to his words indicate no lack of sympathy on our part. 

R3613 : page 249 

But the trouble is a grievous one and especially injurious 
to the brethren who may yield to such headiness: 
nothing is surer to sap spiritual vitality and to lead us 
into darkness, both doctrinal and spiritual. 

On the contrary the Apostle James warns us against 
this danger which besets the more talented of the Lord's 
people. He writes, Be not many of you teachers, 
brethren, knowing that a man shall receive the stronger 
testings. (Jas. 3:1.) It is because of our love for the 
brethren, because of our high esteem for them, and because 
we appreciate their services and desire that they 
may be continued in the service of the Lord, not only 
now but also in the everlasting future, that we feel it 
necessary to press this point, not personally, not individually, 
but generally. 

We urge upon all whom the Lord hath set in the 
body, either in a humble position or in a conspicuous 
place, that the Apostle's words be remembered— that 
as our Lord humbled himself and was subsequently 
exalted, it demonstrates a principle at work in the 
Father's program under which all of his Royal Priesthood 
must humble themselves if they would in due time 
be exalted; also the Apostle's concluding argument is, 
"Humble yourselves, therefore, brethren, under the 
mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due 
time." Now is not the proper time for exaltation; to 
elevate ourselves or others under present conditions is 
to incur the greater danger of a fall. Hence all who are 
earnest and of humble heart should both watch and 
pray lest they enter into temptation along this line, 
which from the very beginning of the Gospel age has 
been the most serious stumbling block in the pathway 
of this class. We remember that it was amongst the 
apostles themselves that the argument took place as to 
which would be greatest in the Kingdom. Let us also 
remember our Lord's words of reproof to them, "Except 
ye humble yourselves and become as little children 
ye can in no wise enter into the Kingdom." 

ONLY THE HUMBLE ARE SAFE 

Thus our Lord marks humility as one of the prime 
essentials of a place in the Kingdom. And we can see 
the importance, the reason for this. To exalt to the 
glory, honor and immortality of the Kingdom and divine 

R3614: page 249 

nature one who had not thoroughly demonstrated his 
humility of spirit would be to place him in a position 
where he might become another Satan, another adversary, 



who in time under one delusion or another might 

wish to divide the divine honors even beyond the munificence 

of our heavenly Father's provision for all those 

who are truly his consecrated ones. 

It will not be very long, dear brethren— let us have 
patience. Let us have faith, too, not be doubters. Much 
of the endeavor to grasp and wield authority in the 
Church is at first undertaken with the best of intentions, 
with the desire to do and be in the highest interests of 
the Church. In such cases faith is not strong enough to 
realize how unnecessary we are to the divine plan and 
how able the Lord is to overrule every incident and 
circumstance according to the divine will. More faith 
in the Lord's power to regulate the affairs of the Church 
will counteract largely the efforts of some of his people 
to run the Church's interests along lines of their own 
wisdom and ability. Let us remember that he is able, 
he is willing, to work all things according to the counsel 
of his own will. Let us remember that our highest place 
is lying low, that the greatest mastery is self-mastery, 
and that whatever success we might have in usurping 
the place and authority of our Lord and his Word would 
undoubtedly react unfavorably to us in the end. Hence 
in self-preservation as well as in the interest of the Church 
and in honor of the Lord, we need to keep self under. 
Let us remember the words of the poet and apply them 
daily: 

"O! to be nothing, nothing, 

Painful the humbling may be; 
Yet low in the dust I'd lay me 

That the world my Savior might see. 
Rather be nothing, nothing— 

To him let their voices be raised; 
He is the fountain of blessing, 

Yes, worthy is he to be praised." 
Let us keep ever in memory the Apostle's example 
and words: "We preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus 
our Lord, and ourselves your servants for Jesus' sake." 
2 Cor. 4:5. 



R3614: page 249 

BURNING THE WORD OF GOD. 

-JEREMIAH 36:21-32.-AUGUST 20.- 

Golden Text:— "Amend your ways and your doings, 
and obey the voice of the Lord your God."— Jer. 26:13. 

KING JOSIAH, of our last lesson, dying in battle, 
made no arrangement respecting his successor 
on the throne, and the elders of the people chose 
his youngest son to be the king of Judah. The king of 
Egypt, on his victorious return from war with Assyria, 



exercised a suzerainty over the kingdom of Judah, and 
took the king a prisoner to Egypt, and exalted to the 
throne his eldest brother, Jehoiakim, who proved to be 
a thoroughly bold and bad man. Under his guidance of 
the kingdom evil of every kind seemed to prosper, 
and the good reforms instituted by his father gave 
way to fresh idolatry. 

This was at the time when Jeremiah was one of the 
principal prophets in the land, who had been hindered 
for some time from prophesying publicly, but under the 
Lord's guidance he wrote out his prophecy respecting 
the coming judgments and chastisements upon the people 
of Judea, his scribe being Baruch. When it was finished 
it was read before certain prominent people of Jerusalem, 
and so deeply impressed them that they desired that the 

R3614: page 250 

matter should be brought to the king's attention. Apparently 
they were friendly to the prophet and the scribe, 
and suggested the necessity for their concealment, lest the 
king should be angry with the prophecy and should seek 
to do them injury. King Jehoiakim, not satisfied with 
the general report given him respecting Jeremiah's 
prophecy, demanded to see the document itself, and had 
his own scribe read it before him. The king was unmoved 
by the message, and after hearing the contents 
of three of the columns of the manuscript he took his 
scribe's penknife and cut them off and cast them into 
the fire before him, and so he continued to do with the 
remainder until the entire manuscript was read and 
destroyed. Thus he emphasized his determination to 
take no counsel from the Lord, or we might say that he 
evidenced his lack of faith in the Lord and his disregard 
for his Word. 

THE BOOK OF JEREMIAH. 

The king ordered the arrest of Jeremiah and his 
scribe, but, in harmony with the Lord's providences, 
they had already secreted themselves and were not 
found. In their seclusion they learned of the destruction 
of the manuscript, and prepared another statement 
of the prophecy, which we are informed had certain 
further additions, and this constitutes the book of 
Jeremiah as found in our Bibles. This gives us a little 
view of the manner in which the Bible came into existence 
piece by piece under the Lord's supervision. 
Doubtless the first manuscript delivered to the king was 
more particularly in respect to his own time and affairs. 
This served its purpose, and then the larger and fuller 
book of Jeremiah's prophecy, as we now have it, was 
prepared— not especially for the people of that time, but, 
as the Apostle Peter points out, it was designed for the 
instruction and edification of the Gospel Church. (Rom. 15:4; 
1 Pet. 1:12.) Even those things which were applicable 



in some measure to Jeremiah's day and to 
Jehoiakim and to the king of Babylon were, as we have 
seen, of two-fold significance— applying not only to the 
literal Babylon of that time but also to the mystic 
Babylon of this Gospel age. 

The Lord declares, "My Word that goeth forth out 
of my mouth shall not return unto me void, but shall 
accomplish that which I please, and shall prosper in 
the thing whereunto I sent it." (Isa. 55:11.) We see 
this not only in the narrative foregoing— that the Lord's 
plans were not frustrated by the king— but we see it 
also in all the various steps of the Lord's providences 
in connection with the giving to us of his Word. Much 
of that Word for centuries has seemed dark and meaningless 
to the Lord's people, but in the light of the 
Millennial dawn it is becoming luminous. Not that we 
should consider that every little item and detail of the 
prophecies of old would contain great value and great 
instruction, for this we do not find. Our understanding 
is that the pearls of truth are scattered throughout the 
Word, here a little and there a little, and that in this 
manner our Lord has hidden the beauties of his plan 
from the casual reader, while his Spirit draws the attention 
of the New Creation to these pearls of thought so 
valuable to us in our spiritual upbuilding, in giving us 
knowledge of the divine plan. It is with this as with 
everything in nature: diamonds are not found in a heap 
together, but scattered here and there in the peculiar 
soil in which they are secreted. Gold is not found in large 
blocks, but usually in very minute grains intermingled 
with tons of sand and dirt and rocks. In the wheat 
field there is a much larger bulk of straw and of chaff 
than of clean grain. 

We have doubtless all noticed this in the quotations 
made in the New Testament from the prophecies of the 
Old Testament, that only a fragment here and there is 
quoted and applied. We have all doubtless noted also 
that frequently the context seems very irrelevant, 
without connection with the part quoted. In other 
words, the Lord and the apostles selected for our nourishment 
the grains of wheat without specially referring to 
the chaff and straw of the connections. And so at the 
present time, as the Spirit of the Lord opens the Old 
Testament before his people more and more, and we see 
in it wonderful things, we need not expect to find every 
item and every verse of every chapter full of meaning 
and spiritual nourishment. We must expect that a 
considerable portion of it will be like the straw and the 
chaff, not suited to our spiritual nourishment though 
necessary to the presentation of the meat in due season- 
necessary and proper in connection with the giving of 
the same, while at the same time hiding it from the 
world in general, especially until the due time. Thus 
the chaff hides the grain. 

Our figure is still more complete when we remember 
that even if we have found the grain it needs a certain 



preparation of grinding or bruising, etc., before it is 
ready for our nourishment. So even after we have 
separated wheat from chaff, spiritual things pertaining 
to our time from other features pertaining to the time 
in which the Scriptures were written, we still require the 
assistances of the holy Spirit and agencies used of the 
Lord for the grinding and preparation of the meat in 
due season. By whatever means it is provided it is 
necessarily of the Lord's provision, and to him we 
render the thanks and praises and appreciation for all 
that has been done under the various instrumentalities 
of the Lord, the apostles and others. 

FIGHTING AGAINST GOD. 

As Jehoiakim found it in the end vain to fight 
against God, and that burning the words of Jeremiah did 
not destroy nor render null and void his prophecy, so 
others are finding the matter to this day. Roman 
Catholics have apparently long been opponents of the 
Word of God, the Bible, and under their direction considerable 
Bible burning has been done. History tells 
us that the first edition of Tyndale's translation of the 
New Testament was bought up in the book-stores of 
London, etc., and burned. Indeed in very recent years 
we have heard of similar proceedings in Spain and less 
than three years ago in Brazil. The Bible may be set 
down as the strongest foe of ignorance, superstition and 

R3615 : page 251 

every wrong doing: it is no wonder, therefore, that many 
hate the book. 

It would not do for Roman Catholics to ignore the 
Bible altogether, since in considerable measure their 
religious system is based upon its teachings; hence they 
have from time to time issued various editions of the 
Bible, various translations, though none of these were 
ever issued by the authority of the Roman Catholic 
Church as a whole, but merely by local Bishops. It 
would not be claimed by any that there is a wide discrepancy 
between the teachings of the popular Douay 
edition of the Bible used by Roman Catholics and the 
common English version of the same books. The Catholic 
version is supplied with elaborate notes on the 
Scriptures, supposed to safeguard the latter from 
heresies, while the Protestant version is usually published 
without note or comment except the marginal readings 
respecting the translation. 

In our day a peculiar anomaly is presented: the 
Roman Catholic Church, which through her popes has 
denounced Bible Societies as being of the devil, has 
within the last few years through its councils at Baltimore, 
and also more recently through the pope's encyclical 
letter to the bishops of America, advocated the 
reading of the Scriptures by its people, and urged that 



the priesthood shall encourage this reading. Probably 
this is merely for effect, merely to counteract the past 
tendencies of the Church, and to seem to imply that 
papacy is loyal to the Scriptures. As a matter of fact 
Roman Catholics tell us that the priests do not urge the 
reading of the Scriptures, but when inquired of on the 
subject treat the matter lightly and rather discourage 
it. Of course only a Douay version is permitted at all, 
and it only to the educated, whom it would be unwise to 
refuse. Furthermore, the price of the Catholic edition 
is rather prohibitive so far as the poor are concerned. 

THE BIBLE-BURNING SPIRIT. 

Those whose eyes of understanding are open have 
doubtless noticed a peculiar change of sentiment amongst 
Protestants respecting the Bible. The division is into 
three main classes: one repudiates the Bible except as a 
work of literature. These are known as higher critics, who 
consider their own judgments respecting all Biblical 
matters to be far superior to the opinions and testimonies 
of the Lord, the apostles and the prophecies. 
Egotistical and self-confident, they assume to be much 
wiser than is written, yet hold that it is not well to break 
entirely with the Bible because it still has a considerable 
hold upon many good people, and by rejecting it in to to 
they would not only lose the respect of these good people 
but also lose their support. The second class still holds to 
the Bible as a fetich, a charm, a book of good luck, which 
they like to have upon their parlor tables and without 
which in the house they would not feel entirely safe; 
they regard it as the Word of God, but do not understand 
it themselves nor do they believe that others understand 
it. They have a special interest in and regard for Churchianity, 
especially for the branch of it to which they have 
given adherence, and they somehow realize that an investigation 
of the Bible might undermine the influence of 
Churchianity and make its students independent of those 
systems of man which have grown so grandly influential 
in social and financial circles. These would not burn the 
Bible itself, but would be in full sympathy with the burning 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN or any other book which would 
remove the dust and smoke of superstition from the Word 
of God and let its true light and beauty shine forth. 
They would not hesitate to burn these, because they feel 
instinctively that such a shining forth of the Word of 
God means a proportionate decline in the luster of their 
earthly systems of Churchianity. 

Thus do we account for the burning of the WATCH 
TOWER publications. In one or two cases the burning 
was done in public; in many instances, on the advice of 
this class of people, timid ones of the Lord's sheep have 
burned their books privately. One sister who attended 
a Canadian Convention not long since, as she shook hands 
with the Editor remarked: "Brother Russell, the Lord 
in his providence sent me MILLENNIAL DAWN several 



years ago, but I hearkened to the voice of those whom I 
supposed to be my religious superiors and proper Christian 
guides and I burned the book. Still gracious to 
me, the Lord sent me another copy: again I listened to 
the voices of darkness and burned the book. The Lord 
in great mercy sent me a third copy, and this time I was 
ready for it— it burned me; it has set me free, and I am 
here to-day rejoicing in the favor of God and in the light 
upon his Word." Her husband at her side spoke up, saying, 
"Yes, and it has burned me, too,"— burned the old 
self-will and sectarianism and opposition to the Way, 
the Truth and the Life, which God has revealed to us 
through his Word, to which Jesus and his redemptive 
work are the key. 

Let us, dear friends, realize more and more that we 
cannot turn aside the divine plan by our puny oppositions 
if we were so disposed, and let us get into such 
heart harmony with the Lord, let us exercise such faith 
toward him, that nothing will be farther from our 
thoughts than to substitute a plan of our own for his, 
or in any wise to alter, change, or amend the gracious 
plan which, rightly seen, includes all the lengths and 
breadths and heights and depths of love and wisdom 
divine. Let us not fight against God, and be overwhelmed 
and suffer loss of position if not loss of life 
eternal. Let us on the contrary receive the great blessing 
which comes to all those who are children of the 
light, who receive it into good and honest hearts, and 
who rejoice in it. 

THE GREATEST OF BOOKS. 

Many of the world's best and noblest characters have 
acknowledged the grandeur of God's Book, even those 
who, like Presidents Lincoln and Grant, were not themselves 
professedly consecrated Christians. We are all 
familiar with General Grant's declaration that he esteemed 
the Bible to be the corner-stone of the liberties 
enjoyed in the United States. President Lincoln said, 

R3615 : page 252 

"Take all of this book upon reason that you can, and the 
balance on faith, and you will live and die a better man." 
Coleridge said, "The words of the Bible find me at greater 
depths of my being than all other books put together." 
John Ruskin said, "Whatever I have done in my life has 
simply been due to the fact that when I was a child my 
mother daily read with me a part of the Bible, and daily 
made me learn a part of it by heart." Huxley, the 
agnostic scientist, declared, "The Bible has been the 
Magna Charta of the poor and the distressed." Gladstone 
declared, "What crisis, what trouble, what perplexity 
of life has failed or can fail to draw from this inexhaustible 
treasure-house its proper supply?" President 
Roosevelt said, recently, "If we read the Bible 



right, we read a book which teaches us to try to make 
things better in this world." 

These testimonies come to us from the outside 
rather than from the inside— mainly from those who 
understood very little of the true Divine Plan of the 
Ages. How much deeper and more meaningful is the 
testimony of our hearts to the value of this book as we 
come, step by step, to a proper appreciation of the glorious 
and wonderful words of life which it contains and 
the true meaning of its exceeding great and precious 
promises, by which in the Lord's plan it is designed that 
a little flock may become partakers of the divine nature 
and be prepared to be the Lord's instruments for the 
blessing eventually of all the families of the earth. 

THE BIBLE INDESTRUCTIBLE. 

In an early edition of Wyclifs Bible there was a 
frontispiece representing a fire of true Christianity 
against which its enemies, Satan, the pope, and infidelity, 
were blowing with all their might, trying to put 
it out; but the more they put themselves out of breath 
the more brightly did the fire burn. This is still true. 
The enemies of the Lord's Word, whether great or small, 
those who are doing their utmost against the spread of 
the Truth and to oppose the Helps for Bible Study which 
the Lord is now sending forth, are really in some respects 
at least spreading the flame of the Truth. We may be 
sure that eventually the object, the purpose, of the 
divine Word will be accomplished— the elect Church will 
be called, schooled, prepared for the Kingdom and gathered 
into it to do the work promised, the blessing of all 
the families of the earth. 

As illustrating that the Bible has stood the test of 
time where other books have failed, we note the fact that 
while other books have no particular opposition, no 
attempts having been made to destroy them, nevertheless 
they sink out of sight— while the Bible, with all the 
opposition which has been brought against it for centuries, 
is more widely circulated to-day than ever. It is 
estimated that "there are more than a million volumes in 
the imperial library at Paris gathered in since the fourteenth 
century; yet of this immense catalogue, 700,000 
are out of print... Mere fragments of all the literary 
wealth of Greece and Rome have made their way down 
the centuries, while the riches of Solomon and David and 
Moses, prophets, scribes, have held their steady place." 
"Not a manuscript of the classics is a thousand years 
old, but at least fifty manuscripts of the Greek New 
Testament are more than one thousand years old." 

Our experiences in the study of the Word in this 
harvest time, the new beauties and rich depths of the 
divine wisdom, love and power which our wondering 
hearts behold, are illustrated well by the experiences of 
the French electrician, Ampere. He was shortsighted 
without being aware of it. When he became conscious of 



his defect of vision, through the casual use of a friend's 
eye-glasses, he burst into tears as he realized how much 
he had missed throughout his life of the wonderful beauty 
of the world around him. 



R3616 : page 252 

PERSECUTED FOR RIGHTEOUSNESS' SAKE. 

--JEREMIAH 38: 1-13. -AUGUST 27.- 

Golden Text:— "Blessed are they who are persecuted 
for righteousness' sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of 
Heaven. "-Matt. 5:10. 

INCIDENTS of our last lesson— the writing of his 
prophecy, etc.— brought the Prophet Jeremiah 
into special prominence. Our present lesson 
finds him in the reign of Zedekiah, the last king 
of the house of David to sit upon the throne: the 
one of whom it is written, "O thou profane and 
wicked prince of Israel, whose time is come, when 
iniquity shall have an end. Thus said the Lord God: 
Remove the diadem, and take off the crown. ...I will 
overturn, overturn, overturn it: and it shall be no more, 
until he come whose right it is; and I will give it unto 
him."— Ezek. 21:25,26. 

How accurately this prophecy has been fulfilled! 
With the captivity of Zedekiah the Kingdom of David 
was overturned but not destroyed. To all human appearances 
it has been destroyed, for no heir of his has 
occupied the throne of Israel from Zedekiah's day to the 
present time— over twenty-five hundred years. If 
Israel were to-day exalted to place and power in the 
world, and desired to re-establish the kingdom of David, 
no Jew could prove his title to the throne as being of the 
lineage of David. All such records have long been lost. 
There is just one who could claim title to that throne, 
namely, he who was the man Christ Jesus. Born of 
Mary, he was of the seed of David, and adopted by Joseph 
who was of the same stock. Although he surrendered 
his life as a ransom for sinners, he was and still is heir of 
all the promises made to Abraham and to David, and 
soon, according to the Scriptures, will take to himself his 
power and great glory and reign as the antitypical David 
upon the throne of the Kingdom of the Lord, to bless 
Israel and every nation, people and tongue. 

R3616 : page 253 

The long interregnum of 2520 years, the "seven 
times" of Israel's disfavor and of Gentile rule, will soon 
be complete and usher in the glories of the Kingdom of 
God. The overturning of the diadem was not to be 



perpetual, but "until he come whose right it is." This 
was not completely fulfilled in our Lord Jesus at his first 
advent. True, he came to be a King, but the great Prophet, 
Priest and King of the divine plan was not the man 
Christ Jesus, but the glorified Christ— Jesus the Head, 
and the Church, the members of his body. He whose 
right it is by divine sanction is selecting from amongst 
his brethren a little flock to be his associates, and this 
Gospel age is the period of their testing and 
development. 

THE REMOVAL OF THE DIADEM. 

The captivity of Judah was in two sections: the 
first included Daniel and others with the King Jehoiakim. 
The king of Babylon left Zedekiah in control as 
his vassal under tribute, but on account of the latter's 
treachery and league with Egypt, the Babylonian army 
came again against Jerusalem and besieged it. Famine 
and pestilence resulted, and ultimately the city of Jerusalem 
was captured and utterly destroyed, and King 
Zedekiah, with his eyes put out, was taken a prisoner to 
Babylon, with all the people except a few of the very 
poorest and least competent. Jeremiah, given his 
liberty, chose to remain with the poor of the land who 
subsequently went down into Egypt, so that Jerusalem 
and the country round about lay desolate without inhabitant 
for seventy years, according to the word of the 
Lord at the mouth of Jeremiah.— 2 Chron. 36:21. 

OBEYING GOD, OPPOSED BY MAN. 

Our lesson particularly relates to the period at the 
beginning of the siege of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar's 
army. Jeremiah had prophesied the success of the enemy 
and recommended the Israelites to surrender speedily and 
save themselves from the great trouble, famine, etc., 
which otherwise would surely come upon them. He 
pointed out that their troubles were the result of disobedience 
to God, and that the proper course now was 
to repent and accept the situation and learn the lesson 
and profit thereby. 

Certain princes of the kingdom soon learned of the 
prophesying and appealed to the king that it must be 
stopped, as it had a demoralizing effect upon the defenders 
in proportion as the prophecy was believed. 
They requested the death of Jeremiah, and the king responded 
that the matter should be in their hands. But 
perhaps fearful of the consequences of the act, or perhaps 
deterred by the Lord's providence, instead of putting 
Jeremiah to death they put him into a dungeon, 
which was probably a water cistern. Its bottom was 
foul with accumulated mud, and the prophet sank into 
this and would soon have perished of hunger had it not 
been for the interposition of a colored man, an Ethiopian 
eunuch, one of the king's servants, who appealed to the 



king against the injustice and was commissioned to take 
Jeremiah out from the dungeon or cistern by means of 
cords, his tender heartedness and care for the prophet 
being indicated also by his supplying cast-off rags to keep 
the ropes from cutting the prophet's body. 

Surely we may conclude that this Ethiopian of 
kindly heart was used of the Lord in this emergency; 
that whilst the Lord could have delivered his prophet 
with equal facility in some other manner, he was pleased 
to use a person of kindly heart who was at hand. And 
yet we have people of sufficient intelligence to write 
books who claim that the "Negro is a Beast," and that 
he is everywhere condemned in the Scriptures. This 
Ethiopian evidently had a cleaner heart than the majority 
of the chief men in Israel— a heart much nearer to 
the divine likeness than theirs. Similarly, an Ethiopian 
eunuch, a Jewish proselyte, was amongst the first to be 
established and blessed with the Gospel, under the 
special providence of God, through the ministries of 
Philip.-Acts 8:27-38. 

Jeremiah's experiences illustrated a general principle, 
namely, that where the will of God and the plans 
of man conflict, those who are faithful to God are likely 
to be in the minority and to be considered public enemies, 
because out of accord with those who are out of 
harmony with the Lord and his plan. It was this that 
brought upon Jeremiah his imprisonment, as it has 
brought upon the Lord's people of every age the frowns 
and opposition and persecution of those who are not the 
Lord's faithful people, of those who are not guided by 
the divine counsel, but are walking in their own ways 
under the leadership of the prince of this world. 

"IN IGNORANCE YE DID IT." 

Since Satan is still the prince of this world it is 
reasonable to suppose that those who are in accord with 
him to-day will be found similarly opposed to God, 
opposed to all who are loyal to the teachings of his Word. 
It is for this reason that the Scriptures assure us that we 
must expect to suffer now, to be misunderstood, misrepresented 
—"Marvel not if the world hate you; ye 
know that it hated me before it hated you. If ye were 
of the world the world would love its own, but ye are 
not of the world, for I have chosen you out of the 
world." 

Looking back all through the Gospel age, from 
the days of Jesus until now, we find that those who have 
been loyal and faithful to him in every time have been 
called upon to prove, to witness, to testify to their 
faithfulness to the Lord by the trials and difficulties 
which they would endure for his sake. And this expression, 
"for his sake," means much the same to-day 
as it did in the day of Jeremiah, namely, for the sake of 
the Word of the Lord. It was because Jeremiah was 
faithful to the Lord's message and the others unfaithful 



to it that they persecuted him. And this is still the case: 
the Word of the Lord is his representative in the world 
still. Our Lord places himself and his Word side by 
side when he said, "He who is ashamed of me and my 
Word, of him will I also be ashamed." 
The test is upon us to-day as it has been upon the 

R3616 : page 254 

Lord's people in the past. Are we ashamed of him, of 
his message? All who are of the overcoming class, all 
who will constitute the "very elect," the "Kings and 
Priests unto God," all who will be associated with Jesus 
as overcomers of the world and his joint-heirs in the 
Kingdom will have these characteristics. They will be 
loyal to the message, not ashamed of it. The words of 
the Apostle well voice their sentiments, "I am not 
ashamed of the Gospel of Christ." 

Not being ashamed of the Lord and his message 
implies that they will be faithful in the presentation of 
the same when convenient to themselves or when inconvenient. 
To the best of their knowledge and ability 
they will speak forth the words of truth and soberness— 
as wisely as possible, as inoffensively as possible, but 
they must speak. As the Apostle said, when forbidden 
to declare the good tidings, "We cannot but speak the 
things we have seen and heard."— Acts 4:20. But 
it is only those who have heard something and seen 
something who have any testimony to give; those who 
know nothing may as well keep quiet. Until by the 
Lord's grace the eyes of our understanding are opened, 
until we shall have seen something of his grace exhibited 
in his divine plan, we are not prepared, not qualified to 
tell others. We must first receive the living Bread 
before we can dispense it; we must first know the truth 
and be set free by it before we can become its bond servants, 
before it could be true of us as it was of the Apostle 
"Woe is me if I preach not the Gospel of Christ." That 
is to say, he would be unhappy if not permitted to tell 
the glorious message of God's redeeming love and 
mercy exhibited in his divine plan. 

"GOD KINDLY VAILS OUR EYES." 

As the poet has declared, "We know not what 
awaits us." That is, we know not with distinctness what 
to expect. In a general way we are informed by the 
Lord's Word that a great time of trouble is impending. 
It is not our duty to make this our central theme. 
Rather the good tidings of great joy which shall be unto 
all people, secured through the precious blood of Christ, 

R3617 : page 254 

is our central theme; and in connection with this is the 
proclamation of the terms and conditions upon which 



we hope to be accepted of the Father as joint-heirs with 
Christ— members of his body. Occasionally, and only 
occasionally, need we enter upon the role of Jeremiah to 
be announcers of the evil conditions coming upon the 
world. Perhaps as we get down in the stream of time, 
nearer to the actual trouble, we may see it to be our duty 
to call attention to it more particularly, and to urge the 
people to take the course which would save them from 
the severity of that trouble— the course of harmony and 
accord with the Lord. When that time shall come such 
advice will doubtless run counter to the wishes and ambitions 
of some who will then be in power, and it may 
be that we shall be imprisoned or otherwise maltreated, 
after the example of Jeremiah. The Lord knoweth 
what is necessary for us to know. It is sufficient that we 
have the gracious promise that all things shall work 
together for good to those who love him, and that we 
should be able to trust him, come what may. 

Our Golden Text is especially appropriate and 
should always be remembered, not only in severe 
persecutions but also in the lesser ones, when our names 
are cast out as evil, "when men shall separate you from 
their company," when they make all kinds of misrepresentations 
against you falsely because of your faithfulness 
to the Lord and to his Word and to the principles 
of righteousness. Then remember this Golden Text, 
and assure your heart in harmony with it and with other 
statements of the Lord's Word, that all these experiences 
of opposition the Lord is willing to overrule for your 
highest welfare, causing them to work out for you a far 
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. All who 
will be of the Kingdom of heaven class must pass through 
some such experiences for the development and testing 
of their characters. 



R3617 : page 254 

TWO INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 
ABOUT HOLY THURSDAY 



Question.— Your suggestion that we might celebrate 
our Lord's Last Supper on the Thursday nearest to 
present calculations pleased some of us, but we have 
heard nothing further. What is your thought? 

Answer.— We have no thought of making any 
change in the method of calculating the Memorial date. 
There would always be some who would prefer the 
present method anyway, and we would needlessly endanger 
hurting their feelings; and there will be but 
few celebrations more if our expectations are happily 
realized. 



We suggest to all the dear friends that the main 
thing to contend for is the annual celebration. We are 
not Jews bound by the Law nor are we bound by any 
word of the New Testament on the subject to an exact 
day and hour; but let us continue to celebrate our 
Memorial in harmony with the Jewish calendar, and 
when the date happens to fall on a Thursday we will 
merely have that much more complete a celebration. Still 
let us not forget that we must daily partake of the 
bread from heaven and drink of our Lord's cup to 
accomplish the real celebration. 

ABOUT THE AMMUNITION. 



Question.— We note marginal comments on the 
margin of this season's Volunteer matter. Whose comments 
are these supposed to be? 

Answer.— We got the idea from a Colporteur who 
was laboriously writing such comments on all the tracts 
he distributed; because he found that they had the 
better attention. Assuming that all Volunteers would 
be glad to write such comments, we did it for them. 
We assumed also that Colporteurs going in every direction 
would like to be announced as coming, and therefore 
so stated. But by error the latter got P— for 
Pilgrim instead of C— for Colporteur. 



R3617 : page 255 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:- 

For some time I have intended writing you with respect to 
my recent experiences in re-reading DAWN. It has been my 
custom for several years past to devote my private study 
more especially to the TOWERS, but during this year I have 
been studying DAWN more closely and I can assure you I 
have been much surprised and chagrined, as well as edified 
by my reading. Although I have read Vol. I. probably six 
times, Vols. V. and VI. at least four times, yet I have been mortified 
to see how much I had forgotten. In fact many passages 
seemed entirely new, as though I had never seen them 
before. I fully realized the force of the Apostle's remarks 
about this "earthen vessel," and how "we ought to give the 
more earnest heed to the things which we have heard, lest 
at any time we should let them slip," or as the margin puts 
it, "run out as leaking vessels."— Heb. 2:1. 

And that I am not alone in this experience of having let 
some of these things "slip," I was convinced by an incident 
which occurred in one of our congregations not long ago. A 
brother had preached a funeral sermon, and at the close of 
the service a sister came to him and said, "I wish my husband 



could have heard your remarks, they were fine." Several 
others made similar remarks, and were much surprised when 
the brother told them he had done "little more than read 
the few thoughts given by Bro. R. in Vol. VI." 

My experience has led me to the determination that, by 
the Lord's grace, I will make it the rule of my life to read 
as many of the DAWNS every year as possible, more especially 
Vol. I., so that every detail of the "Divine Plan of the 
Ages" may be made more and more clear to my mind year by 
year, and kept so. 

Praying the Lord's continued blessing upon your efforts to 
serve him and his people, I remain with Christian regards, 
Yours in the love and service of the King, 
G. W. S.-Pa. 



DEAR BROTHER:- 

I feel so thankful for the question lessons which we received 
in last number of TOWER that I thought I must write and 
tell you of it. 

As our little company have chosen me for leader for several 
terms it seemed as though it was hard for me to work out a 
lesson where all could take active part, and, as you said in 
TOWER, either I did not have the time or the talent to do so, 
but now as these splendid questions came I quickly passed 
them around, and you do not know how glad I was yesterday 
when we had our meeting. Nearly everybody took such interest 
and had studied their questions so well that we had 
a most interesting and blessed hour of study and seemed to 
enjoy it so much. 

I also want to express my thanks and appreciation of the 
little "Heavenly Manna" book. We consider it so helpful in 
keeping our thoughts more on spiritual things and feel so 
much more enabled to avoid things displeasing to our Father. 

Although our secretary had already sent in report of our 
meetings while our dear Brother McPhail was here last I 
feel that I must tell you that it was one of the grandest feasts 
I ever enjoyed and I know that that was the sentiment of 
all present. How we always look forward to the good times 
when a Pilgrim comes our way and how thankful we feel that 
we may have such dear Brethren so able to present everything 
clearly and harmoniously. Wishing you and all the 
dear co-workers in the TOWER Office the Father's richest 
blessing, 

I remain, your brother in our Dear Redeemer, 
J. P. ESKELDSEN-Iowa. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

A little more than a year ago I was very nearly an infidel. 
I was brought up by strictly religious parents, and when 
16 or 18 years of age, I was the teacher of a Bible Class in 
a Sunday School in Michigan. The more I studied the Bible 
under the light in which I was supposed to teach it, the 



more perplexed I became, until at last I was nearly ready 
to say that the Bible was a farce. A year ago I got hold of 
a book which explained some points in the Bible so clearly 
that it set me to thinking that perhaps that some man of 
reason that was not bound down by his little 2x4 church 
might explain the whole thing in a rational manner. Six 
months ago a cousin came here on a visit from Ohio. When 
the station agent gave him several of your publications, 
and he gave them to me, I became very much interested in 
them, for I at once saw that the explanation was on the lines 
of reason, not put up for fame or money. I wrote to ask you 
to send me the WATCH TOWER, which you kindly did. You 
also sent me some tracts which I read, and then gave out 
where I thought they would do the most good. 

As soon as I read the WATCH TOWER I send it to some one 
that I think will read it. Through your instrumentality I 
am a believer and will try to let my light shine, so that others 
will see that there is a reality in the Bible, 

Wishing you much success, I remain yours truly, 
H. B. TALBERT-Texas. 

R3618 : page 255 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I thought I would write you a few lines to tell you how I 
came to the knowledge of the Truth. I was born and brought 
up in the Catholic faith in Syria. At the age of eight I was 
brought to this country and sent to a Catholic school and 
Church. Being religiously inclined I wandered off into different 
denominations and sects, Episcopal, Baptist, Spiritualism, 
Seventh Day Adventism, etc. 

At last (about a year ago) I became disgusted with everything 
and didn't go to any church. At that time I was working 
in a bakery. In delivering an order I found, in a pile of 
old paper and rubbish, the first three volumes of DAWN. I 
read the DAWNS and became deeply interested. Then another 
day, as I was taking a short walk, I picked up a circular 
advertising a course of lectures to be delivered in a certain 
hall. I attended, and to my surprise, I found out that the 
people there were all readers of MILLENNIAL DAWN, like myself, 
and just as deeply interested. 

So you see, I have been led all the way. Five thousand 
miles across the Mediterranean Sea and Atlantic Ocean, 
tossed about and seasick, and then across Babylon, tossed 
about and almost drowned, but rescued by the Lord, 
through MILLENNIAL DAWN. 

I have been doing colporteur service for the last two months, 
and would like to continue the work. I have sold 170 
volumes and have 75 orders unfilled at the present time. I 
am now 1 8 years of age. I think I will do better work 
hereafter. 

May the Lord bless you and all the brethren in Allegheny. 
I remain, Yours in the Blessed Hope, 

ABRAHAM OBREY--N.Y. 



DEAR SIRS:- 

I have just read one of your periodicals called "The Divine 
Plan of the Ages." I consider it fine. I was an orthodox 
minister for 18 years. The subjects you treat on were 
always stumbling blocks to me, the fall of Adam especially; 
the billion of dead in their graves; why they should all be 
forever lost. It is as plain now to me as the nose on my face. 
I want you to send me "What say the Scriptures about Hell?" 
I never preached a sermon on Hell in all the 18 years I did 
preach. I could never make myself believe that a good God 
would punish the vast majority of mortals endlessly. I am now 
a recluse. 

I lately wrote an article for one of our city papers, why I 
did not attend churches. I told the people I could no longer 
subscribe to the creeds formulated in the 16th century. I told 
them some of the best men I ever met, while I was a preacher, 
didn't belong to any church. So some one who believes in 
MILLENNIAL DAWN sent me the periodical I mentioned. It 
is the finest thing I ever read, and it is God's truth too. 
Yours faithfully, , Ohio. 



page 257 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVI. SEPTEMBER 1, 1905. No. 17 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 259 

A Business Man's View 259 

Peace! Peace! When There is No Peace 260 

More Darwinism for Sunday Schools 261 

Rev. R. Heber Newton's Views on Spiritism 262 

The Earth Abideth Forever 262 

Church Disestablishment in France 263 

Beyond the Shadows (Poem) 263 

Anent Archaeology and Religion 263 

"A Peculiar People" 264 

A Broken Vow— a Fulfilled Penalty 266 

Berean Bible Study for September 268 

The Life-Giving Stream 268 

Some Interesting Letters 270 

page 258 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



GENERAL CONVENTION, PORTLAND, OREGON, SEPT. 8-10 



All sessions of the Convention (except the Sunday afternoon 
public service) will be held in the "Woodman's Hall," 
corner of East Sixth Street and E. Alder Streets. Brethren 
arriving over the S.P. line on Friday morning, Sept. 8th, 
should get off the car at E. Morrison St. station and come 
direct to the hall, thus saving carfare as well as any inconvenience 
through transferring. All other brethren arriving on all 
other lines at any time should come to the Union Depot 
where arrangements will be made to meet them and direct 
them to Hall and accommodations. All cars crossing "Morrison 
Bridge" pass within one or two blocks of the Hall. To get 
to Hall from Union Depot:— Take "M" car one block south, or 
"S" car, southbound, three blocks south on Sixth St., ask for 
"Morrison Bridge" transfer when paying fare, get off at Third 
and Yamhills Sts. and take any car crossing bridge. Get off 
at Grand Ave. and look for banner showing location of Hall one 
block north and one east. 

The public service, Sunday afternoon at 3, will be held in 
the First Methodist Church, corner Third and Taylor Sts., 
easily reached from all car lines without transfer. 

Entertainment.— Good rooms can be obtained in the vicinity 
of the Convention Hall for 50c, 75c and $1.00 per night for 
each person, two, three and four in a room. Meals at nearby 
restaurants can be had for 20c and 25c. Special room rates can 
be obtained for families or unencumbered brothers or sisters 
three or four in a room. 

It is important that all brethren who anticipate attending 
the Convention should notify Wm. A. Baker at Couch St. Dock, 
Portland, Ore., at least two weeks in advance, so that accommodations 
can be secured. After writing thus for accommodations 
you may depend upon their being secured and should not attempt 
to secure rooms for yourselves. This would greatly interfere 
with arrangements we would make for you. 

Letters should state price of rooms desired, number in 
party, etc. Arrangements will also be made for brethren who 
cannot afford to pay for accommodations but who can pay their 
fare to Convention, but in such cases it is also necessary to be 
advised before date of Convention. Some of the brethren have 
already written relative to bringing tents and others as to bringing 
their own blankets, which they can do without extra cost as 
baggage. All who feel it to their advantage to do so will be 
taken care of, and where brethren cannot afford to take furnished 
rooms it is a very good plan. Compliance with the 
above will greatly facilitate work of the Entertainment Committee 
and add to the general harmony of the Convention at 
the opening session. 

Railroad Rates.— The regular excursion rate of all roads 
entering Portland, with tickets on sale at all times, is one and 
one-third fare, with a thirty-day limit. Parties of ten on one 
ticket, ten-day limit, one fare for round trip. "Coach parties" 



from any one locality are made special excursion rates, averaging 
considerably less than one fare for the round trip. It is 
suggested to friends in the northwest that they may be able to 
make joint arrangements with the local committees of the other 
two Associations (National Letter Carriers' Association and the 
"Hoo-Hoos" or Lumbermen) holding their conventions at 
Portland at this time, for "coach parties," and thus get the advantage 
of the lowest possible rate. 

R3621 : page 258 

GERMAN HYMN BOOK 



We have issued a small book of German hymns, with music, 
99 numbers, suitable for general worship, public and social 
meetings. Uniform with "Zion's Glad Songs." Price, 5 cents, 
postpaid. 



R3618 : page 259 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
A BUSINESS MAN'S VIEW 



HOW a well-informed business man views the present 

situation may be of interest as showing 

that with all the prosperity of business men 

in recent years, and all their hurry and greed for dollars, 

they do see some things which touch their own 

interests. 

The following is an extract from the address of 
Mr. D. M. Parry, before the National Manufacturers' 
Association, at its recent session in Atlanta, Georgia. 
He sees a nearer enemy than "the Yellow Peril." He 
said in part, as reported in the public press: 

"Before proceeding to a brief consideration of the labor 
question, I wish to make a few statements respecting the 
tendency towards Socialism, which, at this time, is being 
strongly manifested in many ways. The Socialist party 
last fall cast nearly a half million votes, a remarkable development 
in strength, and organized labor, composed of over 
two million employes arrayed in opposition to individualism, 
continues, according to reports of its officials, to increase its 
membership. The growth of an avowedly Socialistic party, 
with its present creed, is certainly a sinister fact to all loyal 
citizens who understand and appreciate the importance of 
individual liberty. But while the existence of these organizations 
is indicative of a serious defection from the individualistic 
principle by certain classes, yet I believe that a still 
graver portent of coming evil is to be seen in the Socialistic 



trend of the thought of the general public as reflected by the 
press, by public men, and by recent legislative enactments. 
This trend of thought is having a potent influence on the 
policies of both the leading political parties, and while the 
question of individualism and Socialism is not a political 
issue in the sense that it has caused a division of party lines, 
it is, nevertheless, a leading issue within the ranks of both 
parties. 

"While the enlargement of the scope and power of government 
by the purchase and management of certain enterprises 
has found considerable support among the people, yet I believe 
the sentiment favorable to Socialistic measures involving 
the confiscation of profits and the limitation of private 
management of capital is the more widespread and dangerous. 
Without making special reference to the aim of the avowed 
Socialists to bring about the Millennium through undisguised 
confiscation, we have organized labor and its sympathizers 
supporting the idea that organizations of men may dictate 
to a large extent the management of enterprises which they 
do not own. Besides assuming to say how much wages the 
employer shall pay and how he shall manage his capital in 
other respects, the union also presumes to deny the right of 
the individual to the full control of his own labor, determining 
for him the rate of wages for which he shall work, the 
number of hours he shall employ himself and the maximum 
amount of daily output he shall produce. As eight-hour and 
anti-injunction legislation is designed to assist the unions 
in the accomplishment of these objects these measures fall 
under the classification of Socialistic attempts by confiscation. 
Still another illustration of this kind of Socialistic 
propositions, and one which does not proceed from organized 
labor, is the pending national legislation to have the government 
fix railroad rates. 

"It was Macaulay who prophesied, in effect, that the 
masses of the American people would, in the course of several 
generations, use their right of suffrage to confiscate all wealth 
in the name of the State. This prophecy certainly places a 
low estimate on the moral perceptions of the common people 
and displays a woeful lack of faith in the ability of men in 
general to govern themselves. But while the prophecy is 
rightly to be regarded as absurd, yet there is no question that 
there are elements in our population that are attracted by 
the proposition of enriching themselves through the ballot 
box. It is said that men vote in accordance with their interests, 
and some men doubtless construe it to be for their 
interests to vote for confiscation. But I am confident that 
such men are in the small minority. I prefer to believe that 
the greater number of those who favor Socialistic measures 
do so from an honest conviction that these measures would 
be beneficial for the common weal. The tendency towards 
Socialism is certainly not to be attributed to a declining sense 
of public morality. Rather, I believe, is it to be traced to 
ignorance of the fundamental principles of true liberty and 
to demagogic leadership that for its own ends would stop 
short of nothing. Thousands of well-disposed men, who 
would not think of injuring the interests of their fellow-beings 



by their votes, have been led by these demagogues and false 
teachers into the belief that they are in some inscrutable 
manner being robbed by the rich, and they, therefore, are 
not to be morally censured for taking up with Socialistic 
propositions. 

"Since the Socialistic tendency is to be attributed to 
ignorance rather than dishonesty on the part of many voters, 
the problem of protecting individualism resolves itself down 
to a problem of educating the voting masses. Many Americans, 
in reply to Macaulay's prophecy, will declare that its 

R3618 : page 260 

fulfilment is impossible because the people of this country 

are generally speaking, far more intelligent than the people 

of other countries, and that the democracy in the establishment 

of a great common-school system has amply provided 

for its own protection. But existing facts demonstrate that 

the common-school system is not a sufficient guarantee of 

the perpetuation of liberty. Because the law-abiding elements, 

busy with their own affairs, leave politics to others, 

who perhaps are not quite so busy, the government in many 

of our communities has become a protector of vice and a 

machine for graft, as well as being a policeman. And if these 

same law-abiding elements and busy men of affairs do not 

wish to see the government also blossom out into a paternalistic 

meddler in private business the sooner they devise 

methods whereby they can wield at least a part of their proper 

share of influence in public matters the better. What 

we need is less politics in business and more business in politics. 

It is sheer folly to leave the discussion of public questions 

to the demagogue and agitator alone. 

"The most effective and permanent method of meeting 
the issue of Socialism is, I believe, that of educational propaganda. 
In order to establish such a propaganda it requires 
the organization of the substantial and law-abiding citizenship. 

R3619 : page 260 

With proper efforts and proper support, I have not 

the least doubt that the movement for the maintenance of 

individualism can be made so powerful as to be invincible. 

It is the solemn duty of true American citizens of this generation 

to do whatever lies in their power to down this specter 

of Socialism." 

PEACE! PEACE! WHEN THERE IS NO PEACE 



Notwithstanding the world's fear of war and the 
general desire to introduce the Millennial peace before 
the time and before the proper conditions have been 
established, we opine that more wars are near at hand. 
Why? Because (1) the Scriptures seem to indicate 
that the anarchy which will crush our present civilization 



will be preceded by general wars. (2) Such wars 
seem inevitable as the forerunners of anarchy, because 
so long as the nations are powerful anarchy will have 
little chance of success. (3) The Scriptures assure us 
that there will be a general call to arms about this time, 
resulting in the weakening of the nations. (4) There 
seems not enough time intervening between now and 
1915, and hence we expect present prosperity to continue 
in some measure for the next four years. (5) In 
order to have measurable financial prosperity for that 
time, war, somewhere, is almost a necessity— involving 
large expenditures of money for armies and navies, etc. 

From this view-point we are on the lookout for 
everything likely to result in war. For instance, the 
rupture between Norway and Sweden, the German and 
French dispute respecting Morocco, and now the danger 
of an uprising of India against its British rulers. Let 
us remember that we are already entering the great 
"Day of Recompenses." (Ezekiel 7:7-26.) In this connection 
note the following cablegram from India, widely 
circulated in the public press: 

Dread of another mutiny is being felt by all Europeans 
here. India is in a very serious state, and the authorities 
are making heroic endeavors to prevent the unrest and the 
mutinous spirit which, in spite of all their efforts, is spreading 
like an infection from Province to Province. 

The cause of this condition is the war between Russia 
and Japan, for the supremacy of the yellow race has come 
as a revelation to the natives. That an Asiatic race has 
defied and even conquered a European race has made them 
think. The spirit of dissatisfaction and trouble in the air 
now is far more acute than it was two years before the 
mutiny. 

What makes the situation more dangerous is the 
ability of the "Baboos" to spread their tidings of revolt 
to every end of the Indian Empire with rapidity and 
ease. The problem of how news traveled to the utmost ends 
of India in the days of the mutiny has only been partly 
solved. Since then Lord Ripon has dignified Indian native 
opinion, and the "Baboo" can make himself as easily heard 
as his master. 

THE KING IS CONCERNED 

Lord Kitchener's statement that the Indian army is 
practically worthless has been widely circulated among the 
ignorant natives. Lord Curzon's tyrannical methods have 
set every class against him personally, and the personality 
of a ruler has an effect in India which is incalculable. The 
potential possibilities of the situation have been brought 
directly to the attention of the King and it is known that he 
has had a number of consultations with prominent Anglo-Indians 
now in England on leave. 

It is a fact that in Central India hundreds of Afghans 
are loafing and skulking alone or in couples. This is considered 
to be an ominous sign, for the Afghans do not wander so 



far south with any peaceful purpose in mind. If a holy war 
were to be preached, the Mohammedans would be as much 
the object of native fury nowadays as the Christians. 

The situation has an ugly look, and there is a prayer 
on every one's lips that the cloud will not entail a storm. 

THE YELLOW PERIL 



The papers of the world, especially those of Russia 
and France, are calling attention to the peril of the 
white race at the hands of the yellow. They call attention 
to the fact that since Japan's victories the 
Chinese government has put Japanese at the head of 
its military and naval schools, dismissing the Germans 
previously employed. China has now 700,000 well-armed 
and well-drilled soldiers, and by 1920 A.D. they 
claim they could have the numbers increased to 20,000,000 
and could over-run Russia and all Europe. All the 
writers seem agreed that the combination of all Europe 
at once and fifteen years of preparation would scarcely 
suffice to prepare for such an onslaught. They claim that 
all the guns of Europe would be worn out killing these 
and leave plenty to still come on to the fray. Besides, 
the Japanese and Chinese can make as good guns and 
are doing so. It is claimed that within five years India 
and Russia may be conquered. 

It may never come to this; but the fact that military 
critics are discussing it lends force to two Scriptures: 

(1) Our Lord's words to the effect that in this 

time "men's hearts would fail them for fear, looking 
forward to the things coming on the earth." (Luke 21:26). 

(2) Our Lord's words respecting the awful 
trouble approaching, that except for the elect's sake, 
except for the Kingdom of the elect and its establishment 
of peace, "there would no flesh be saved."— 

Matt. 24:22. 

When we remember that the Yellow Peril is only 
one of the many now impending, and a minor one, no 

R3619 : page 261 

wonder we are assured that "men's hearts shall fail 

from fear" and that all the tribes of earth shall mourn. 

The anarchy and confusion resulting from clashing selfishness 

in civilized lands will be doubtless quite enough to 

make the Kingdom of Christ "the desire of all nations." 

A few short years remain wherein the reaping of 
the "wheat" is to be accomplished. Five years more 
will surely bring us to stirring times. Let us who are 
of the Day not sleep as do others; let us not like them 
dream of worldly wealth and ease and name and fame. 
Let us, as faithful soldiers of the cross, be so zealous that 
it will simply cost "hardship," so that we may be among 
those crowned lawfully. The joys of our Lord and the 



association in the Kingdom work will much more than 
compensate us for every sigh and tear and pain now 
endured. 

A WORLDLY MAN'S OUTLOOK 



The Oregonian is one of the principal journals of 
the Pacific coast, and its editor, an Evolutionist, scoffs 
at our interpretations of the Bible. Nevertheless its 
view of near-at-hand troubles is very closely in agreement 
with what we have been pointing out from the 
Bible for the last thirty years, and very much in opposition 
to the Evolution theory that men are about to 
evolute into angels, as monkeys evoluted into men. 
Here is an editorial clipping from the Oregonian: 

"We suppose our country is 'booked' for socialism. 
Greed of speculators is bringing it on. Exploitation of public 
utilities by our first families hurries it forward. Such incidents 
or operations as this one, under our own eyes, of 
capitalization of the streets of Portland for millions, in the 
interest of private individuals— the public expected to pay 
dividends on the usurpation— are making socialists by thousands, 
in every direction. 

"It is the same with all this exploitation of the modern 
time. Operators everywhere are seizing their opportunity 
to "capitalize" the wants of the public, in ways to create 
great properties and to obtain great dividends. The people 
believe that the only check to these schemes of plutocracy 
lies in a socialistic movement, under which the productive 
forces— in particular those related to municipal functions- 
may be transformed into socialized effort. 

"The Oregonian has not been willing to see this 
change. But in the contest that is coming— forced by the 
greed of capitalism and of exploitation— it finds itself compelled 
to yield to new conditions. In the contest between 
greed and privilege on the one hand, and popular rights on 
the other, it will follow the demands of the people, because 
it belongs to the people. It must stand with them, rather 
than with those who contend for the fictions of privilege and 
of vested rights." 

JUDGMENTS OF THAT DAY 



Russia's woes seem to be part of the judgment of 
the Lord upon an evil system, just such as we should 
expect at this time when the new King Immanuel is 
beginning the correction of earth's wrongs and the establishment 
of justice and judgment [rewards and 
penalties] in the earth. When the Lord's judgments 
shall be extended to include all nations and systems 
what a time of trouble there will be in the earth! But 
before that severity Churchianity must have her bitter 



portion and all the true "wheat" be garnered. 
A NUT FOR EVOLUTIONISTS 



According to the Evolutionists it is only a comparatively 
short time since men were monkeys and 
irrational. We have already pointed out that the findings 
at Nippur contradict such a thought, and that the 
"Great Pyramid" showed an exactness and skill possessed 
four thousand years ago which was lost in the interim, 
since only with something like modern machinery 
could it have been constructed. In other words, that 
the world of long ago had really, in some respects, been 
in advance of everything known in A.D. 1800. This 
would agree with the Bible's testimony that man was 
created perfect— in the image of God— and fell from it 
into degradation. Where the teachings of Christ have 
been received they have served to check the downward 
course; but the great advancement of our day is the result 
of divine overruling, preparing in every way for the 
great reign of Christ— the Millennium. 

Now in accord with all this note the following, 
remembering that Mr. F. Petrie is a man of science and 
one of the best informed in all the world respecting the 

R3620 : page 261 

Pyramid: 

A two years' study at Gheezeh has convinced Mr. Flinders 
Petrie that the Egyptian stone-workers of 4,000 years 
ago had a surprising acquaintance with what have been considered 
modern tools. Among the many tools used by the 
pyramid-builders were both solid and tubular drills and 
straight and circular saws. The drills, like those of to-day, 
were, says an exchange, set with jewels (probably corundum, 
as the diamond was very scarce), and even lathe-tools had 
such cutting edges. So remarkable was the quality of the 
tubular drills and the skill of the workmen, that the cutting 
marks in hard granite give no indication of wear of the tool, 
while a cut of a tenth of an inch was made in the hardest 
rock at each revolution, and a hole through both the hardest 
and softest material was bored perfectly smooth and uniform 
throughout. Of the material and method of making the 
tools nothing is known.— Mechanical News. 

MORE DARWINISM FOR SUNDAY SCHOOLS 



Although Sunday School literature has for some 
time been gradually undermining faith in the Bible, 
supplanting it with the suggestions of "higher critics" 
and evolution theories, it seems that the progress of unbelief 
has not been sufficiently rapid to satisfy some. 



Prof. W. S. Jackman of the Chicago University advocates 
more pronounced teaching— emphasizing Nature 
and her laws and correspondingly ignoring the true 
God. In the Educational Review he says:— 

"To thousands of people it were not more shocking 
to doubt the common axioms of morality than it is to 
question any part of the Biblical story of nature.... 
But out of patient and careful observation science has 
created a conception of the origin, the development and 
the destiny of nature, and of man's place in the great 
plan, that can not be linked with the primitive conception 
by even the maddest flight of poetic fancy.... 
The Darwinian theory, which certainly has more points 
in its favor regarding the history of life than any other, 
completely demolishes the old picture which was very 
firmly established in our minds in our early years 
through the teaching of the Sunday school.. ..It is 

R3620 : page 262 

against this flinty wall of pious belief that Nature-study 
must hurl itself and upon which it must make some 
impression if it is to gain a foothold in the Sunday 
school as a means of moral and religious training. To 
introduce Nature-study into the Sunday school, that is, 
to make it a direct factor in moral and religious training, 
means to give the child an entirely different point 
of view from that received by those of us who learned its 
lessons a quarter of a century ago." 

REV. R. HEBER NEWTON'S VIEWS ON SPIRITISM 



That Spiritism continues to make progress in deceiving 
those in high positions as well as in low, the 
following extract will show. What will the harvest of 
such teachings be? How soon will the seed ripen? A 
very few years will show terrible results. 

Discussing psychical science in an address to-night before 
the American Institute for Scientific Research in the 
home of C. Griswold Bourne, the Rev. Dr. R. Heber Newton 
made the assertion that the spirits of the dead communicate 
with the living; that telepathy is a power possessed by many 
men and women, and that clairvoyance is an established 
scientific fact. Said he in part: 

"Clairvoyance was nothing but a will o' the wisp, but it 
is now a confessed power of certain organizations. 

"For the first time in the history of man these powers 
have been scientifically investigated in our day. Already 
the result is that a considerable number of eminent men of 
science have had the courage to avow that, after allowing 
for illusion, fraud and every possible hypothesis of interpretation, 
they have been driven up to the ultimate solution of 
the problem— the belief in the actual communication of the 
spirits of those whom we call dead with the living. 



"Anyone who walks with his eyes open, ready to hear 
what men have to tell, will find stories pouring in upon him 
from men whom he cannot mistrust as liars, and whom he 
knows to be sane and sensible, which will stagger him. These 
experiences are not at all confined to the seance and the medium. 
Their most impressive forms occur in the privacy of 
the home without a professional medium present." 

RUSSIA AS SUPERSTITIOUS AS JAPAN 



Rev. Dr. Robert S. Macarthur, in an address before 
the Baptist Young People's Conference, held in New 
York, said:— 

"There is Russia— holy Russia, with its famous ikons 
and its worship of them. Everyone knows the story of the 
carload that was sent from St. Petersburg to defeat the 
Japanese. Has heathendom anything to offer worse than 
this? When I was in Russia I knew a noble lady. She went 
to one of the high priests of her faith and hired an ikon to 
cure her of a disease. She paid an enormous sum for it and 
it was drawn through the streets of St. Petersburg, clothed 
in royal robes and in the royal carriage. As it passed through 
the streets I saw men and women throw themselves down on 
the street and bury their faces in the mud until the thing 
had passed. 

"Yet Russia calls herself a Christian country and begs 
as such our sympathy." 

THE GERMAN KAISER'S AMBITION 



It is the growing impression among diplomats that 
Emperor William II. regards himself as a "man of 
destiny," another Napoleon I. He is accredited with a 
desire to form a combination of the governments of 
Europe either as United States of Europe or as a Fifth 
Universal Monarchy. His ambition is a "germ" which 
the Lord can make use of at any time to foment strife-war. 
True, he speaks for peace, but was not the Czar of 
Russia the instigator of the Hague peace conference? 
Very evidently there will be more war ere long. The 
nations apparently will be weakened preparatory to the 
great cataclysm of anarchy which we understand to be due 
to commence October, 1914. "Then they that reverenced 
the Lord spake often one to another: and the 
Lord hearkened and heard, and a book of remembrance 
was written before him, for them that reverenced the 
Lord and that thought upon his name. And they shall 
be mine, saith the Lord, in that day when I make up my 
jewels; and I will spare them as a man spareth his only 
son that serveth him."— Mai. 3:16. 

THE EARTH ABIDETH FOREVER, BUT AGES AND EPOCHS 



PASS AWAY 



BY REV. JOS. A. SEISS, D.D. 

"There is a notion bred from the morbid imagination 
of the Middle Ages, which has given birth to many 
a wild, poetic dream, which has much influenced the 
translators of our English Bible [which has unduly 
tainted religious oratory, song and even sober theology], 
and which still lingers in the 'Popular Mind' [as if it 
were an article of the settled Christian creed], that the 
time is coming when everything that is, 'except spiritual 
natures' shall utterly cease to be, the earth consume 
and disappear, the whole solar and sidereal system 
collapse and the entire physical universe vanish into 
nothingness. How this can be, how it is to be harmonized 
with the promises and revealed purposes of 
God,. ..there is not the least effort to show. The 
thing is magniloquently asserted, and that is 'quite 
enough for some people's faith', though 'sense,' 'reason' 
and 'Revelation' be alike outraged. There is indeed to 
be an 'end of the world.' The Bible often refers to it. 
But men mistake when they suppose the world spoken 
of in such passages to be the earth 'as a planet' 

Four (4) different [Greek] words have our translators 
rendered 'world.' 1, Ge, which means the earth 
proper, the ground, this material orb which we inhabit; 
2, Kosmos, which means the ornamentation, beauty, the 
existing order of things, but not the substance of the 
earth as a terraqueous globe; 3, Oikouene, the habitable, 
the inhabited earth, and 4, Aion, which is used 
more than one hundred times in the New Testament, 
but always with reference to time, duration, eras, dispensations, 
—a stage or state marking any particular 
period, long or short, past, present or future,— the 
course of things in any given instance, rather than the 
earth. ..on which it is realized. It may be earth 
or heaven, time or eternity. ..it is all the same as 
to the meaning of the word 'aion' which denotes simply 
the time-measure and characteristics of that particular 
period or state to which it is applied. And this is the 
word used in all those passages which speak of 'the end 
of the world.' It is not the end of the earth, but the 
end of a particular time, age, or order of things, with 

R3620 : page 263 

the underlying thought of other orders of things and 
perpetual continuity in other ages. Aeons end, times 
change,... but there is no instance in all the Word 
of God which assigns an absolute termination to the 
existence of the earth, as one of the planets, or any 
other of the great sisterhood of material orbs... 
It will not be another earth, but the same earth under 



another condition of things. It is now laboring under 
the curse, but then the curse will have been lifted off. 
At present it is hardly habitable,— no one being able to 
live in it any longer than a few brief years; but then 
men shall dwell in it forever without knowing what 
death is. 

"It is now the home of rebellion and injustice; it 
will then be the home of righteousness. 

"It is now under the domination of Satan, it will then 
be under the 'Blessed Rule of the Prince of Peace.'" 

CHURCH DISESTABLISHMENT IN FRANCE 



In the debates in the French Chamber of Deputies 
respecting the withdrawal of the Government from the 
support of religion in the matter of paying the salaries 
of the preachers and priests and furnishing the church 
buildings, the controversy was warm on both sides. 
Deputy Briand, favoring the movement and opposing 

R3621 : page 263 

some who pleaded that all religions would suffer— Catholic, 
Protestant and Jewish— said: "If the Church cannot 
exist without the aid of the State it is because the 
Church is dead!" 

With the carrying into effect of the new arrangement 
religious matters must be managed in France as 
they are now managed in the United States. Each person 
can pay for his own religious propaganda and have 
his own kind. It will be a good move so far as true 
religion is concerned. However, clericalism will manage 
somehow to ride the people, while more or less 
blindfolding them as respects the truth of God's Word. 

UNION OF THE CHURCHES 



The success attending the efforts to unite Congregationalists, 
Cumberland Presbyterians and United 
Brethren, encourages others. Now the various Lutheran 
bodies are endeavoring to unite, and are meeting with 
good success. The Baptists, as is well known, are independents, 
each congregation being free except as the 
Ministers' Union and Missionary Society unites them. 
Baptists' Missions— South and North— were separated 
during the Civil war and are now arranging for re-union. 



BEYOND THE SHADOWS. 

Further on— beyond the shadows 



Falling darkly o'er my way, 

There is home, and rest and shelter, 

Where no storms can e'er dismay. 

Though the way be rough and narrow, 
And a cross must needs be borne, 
Further on— the night is waning 
Soon will dawn the welcome morn. 

Meekly to His will submitting, 
In His love secure and strong, 
Jesus whispers, "Bide the shadows, 
It is better further on." 

Further on— O blest assurance! 
How it thrills my raptured heart, 
Just to know that I shall see Him 
When the shadows all depart. 

Let me still be strong and patient, 
Trusting where I cannot trace, 
Further on— beyond all darkness 
Faith can see God's smiling face. 

Only waiting, ever praying, 
Let my heart be filled with song. 
Sweet the promise Jesus gives me, 
"It is better further on." 

-LIZZIE C. RAMSDELL. 



R3622 : page 263 

ANENT ARCHAEOLOGY AND RELIGION. 

DR. EDGAR, one of the leading physicians 
of Glasgow, Scotland, sends us the following 
letter:— 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

As many good people think that the dates which are 
accepted by archaeologists must be more reliable than 
those furnished in the Scriptures, it is important that 
we should be aware of the true value of the proofs which 
satisfy these scientific men. The following extract is to 
the point:-"DATE OF SARGON.-Sargon, King of 
Akkad, reigned about 3800 B.C. This is the first date 
in the world's history about which there is no serious 
dispute. This date is made certain by an inscription of 
Nabonidos, the last native King of Babylon, who was a 
zealous restorer of ruined temples. He tells us that he 
succeeded in reaching the foundation stone of the ancient 
temple of the Sun in Sippar, a stone which the great 
Nebuchadnezzar had sought in vain to find. Under it 
was the seal-cylinder of the founder of the temple, 



Naram-Sin, son of Sargon, which, says Nabonidos, had 
not been seen for 'thrice a thousand, twice a hundred 
years.' The date of the discovery of this corner-stone 
was about 550 B.C. We thus reach 3750 B.C. as the 
date of Naram-Sin, and by adding fifty years for the 
reign of Sargon we get 3800 B.C." (Babylonia and 
Assyria. By Ross G. Murison, M.A., B.D. One of the 
Bible Class Primers edited by Principal Salmond, D.D., 
Aberdeen). 

Surely no one but an archaeologist would accept such 
a statement as was made by this heathen king without 
demanding clear proof as to its truth! 

ANOTHER ITEM OF INTEREST, CONFIRMING STATEMENTS OF 
DAWN VI., CHAPTER X. 

In the "Zentralblatt fur Gynaekologie" of 8th 
October, 1904, there is an article on "The Intra-uterine 

R3623 : page 264 

Baptism of Human Ova and Foetuses." The author 
begins by referring to the war engaged in by Dr. Treub, 
a Dutch professor of Midwifery, against the theological 
obscurantism which would allow a mother to die when 
the induction of abortion might have the effect of saving 
her life. An article, entitled "The Right to Life of 
the Unborn Child," written by Dr. Treub, has been 
translated into English by the Rev. C. van der Donckt, of 
New York. To this translation the reverend gentleman 
adds an appendix in which he declares that in such cases 
the intra-uterine baptism of the ovum or the child is 
obligatory. He refers to a case to which a friend of his, 
an American physician, was called. The woman's life 
was saved by the removal of her three-month's child 
from the uterus. "Tormented by the family and the 
first physician, our friend, still hesitating, explains to a 
venerable Jesuit father the reasons which make him 
propose to apply to this case a new method, which permits 
the baptism of the infant. This therapeutic process, 
formerly impossible, but without danger since the discovery 
of the antiseptic treatment, has for its object to 
open quickly the orifice of the matrix by the natural 
ways and to allow the injection of an abundant stream 
of baptismal water by means of a suitable instrument: 
the remaining operations of extraction which may be 
hurtful to the life of the germ are carried out afterward. 
It is admitted, in effect, that baptism in utero by injection 
is not only allowed but obligatory when the 
physician is certain that, despite all his efforts, the child 
will die during delivery. As the reasons were considered 
valid by his counsellor, the physician was enabled 
thanks to the method employed (special metallic instruments) 
to open gently the matrix (in a minute and 
a half) sufficiently to make the baptismal injection also 
done gently; then he quickly completed the thorough 



extraction of everything contained in the uterus." 

(It may be well for me to add that the method described 
is the one always followed nowadays by medical 
men. The novelty consists not in the injection but in 
the meaning attached to it). 

We have much reason to thank the Lord that the 
Sun of Righteousness will now soon arise and dispel the 
fogs of theological obscurantism and of "science, falsely 
so called." 

Our eyes, dear Brother, are indeed blessed, for they 
see the light while the darkness is still covering the earth. 
This light is getting brighter and brighter as the perfect 
day draws near. We have much to be thankful for. 

The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be ever with you 
I am, yours in the Lord, JOHN EDGAR. 



R3621 : page 264 

"A PECULIAR PEOPLE." 

"Ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, a holy 
nation, a peculiar people; that ye should show forth the 

praises of him who hath called you out of 
darkness into his marvellous light."— 1 Pet. 2:9. 

DURING the Gospel age, which is now drawing to 

a close, the Lord has been making ready a peculiar 

people for a very peculiar and very glorious 

purpose. The purpose is nothing less than that of a 

joint-reign with Christ for a thousand years, by means of 

which, not only shall "all the families of the earth be 

blessed," but angels also shall be brought to a righteous 

judgment and reward, and all things in heaven and in 

earth will be brought into perfect harmony with and conformity 

to, the divine will, and universal peace and joy 

and praise shall abound to the glory of God. 

This peculiar people is a new and chosen generation. 
They were first chosen out from among men, "through 
sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth." (2 Thess. 2: 13.) 
Or, in other words, having believed the message 
of salvation through Christ the Redeemer, and having 
gratefully accepted the same, and being earnestly desirous 
of perfect personal conformity to the divine 
will, and having, therefore, humbly submitted themselves 
entirely to God, they were chosen of God to be his peculiar 
people. 

That which renders this people peculiar as compared 
with all other people in the world is a very radical change— 
a change of nature from the human to the spiritual. (2 Pet. 1:4.) 
This change of nature has been brought about by 
the power of the Truth, which leads those who are rightly 
exercised by it to a full consecration of heart and life to 
the will and service of God, even unto death. This change 
of nature is, however only begun in the present life, and consists 



as yet only of a change of mind and a consequent 
change of character and action in harmony with the new 
hopes, aims and aspirations generated by the "exceeding 
great and precious promises." No wonder is it that a people 
actuated by such hopes and aims should be a peculiar people 
—a people separate from the world— in the world and 
yet not of it. 

They are indeed a new "generation"— i.e.,— a new race, 
of a new and noble nature, distinct and separate from 
the human race, although as "new creatures" they 
are as yet only begotten and developing in the embryo 
state, the full development, or birth, being due at 
the resurrection. Wonderful indeed is this truth— "Ye," 
brethren, "are a chosen generation"— a new order of beings 
and chosen of God as the heirs of his special favor. 
And not only so says the Apostle, but ye are a priesthood, 
a royal priesthood— a people to be clothed with authority 
and power to stand between God and fallen humanity; 
to lift humanity up from its degradation and restore it to 
the divine likeness and favor. Ye are indeed a royal 
priesthood, whose power and glory will appear in due 
time, to the glory of God and the blessing of all the families 
of the earth. 

But further, says the Apostle, Ye are "a holy nation." 
In what sense can this people be called a nation? A nation 
is a body of people united under one government and 
having common interests and bound by mutual obligations 
and mutual consent, either expressed or implied, to 
conserve those interests. Truly such a people, such a nation, 

R3621 : page 265 

are we under Christ Jesus our King, and our interests 

are indeed one: they are the interests of the truth concerning 

the establishment of Christ's Kingdom in all the 

earth. Our national policy is aggressive, and contemplates 

the complete subjection of every other power; but 

its object, unlike that of all other ambitious powers, is not 

the glorification of selfishness, but the exaltation of meekness 

and righteousness and the establishment of universal 

peace and happiness. Every loyal citizen of this nation is 

deeply interested in its politics, and is ready to take up 

the sword for its defense at any moment. However, we 

remember that the weapons of our warfare are not carnal; 

but they are mighty, through God, to the pulling down of 

strongholds. Our sword is "the sword of the Spirit, 

which is the Word of God," and an every-day exercise 

and drill in its use makes us able soldiers. 

Let all the members of this "chosen generation," this 
"royal priesthood," this "holy nation," this "peculiar 
people," seek more and more— by vigilance, by faithfulness 
and by holiness— to separate themselves from the 
spirit of the world, to submit themselves to the transforming 
influences of the Spirit of God, and to discipline and 
drill themselves in the use of the sword of the Spirit, that 
so they may "show forth the praises of him who hath called 



them out of darkness into his marvellous light." 
"BABES IN CHRIST" 

This peculiar people the Apostle likens, in the beginning 
of their life of faith, to babes. Though they may be 
men of mature years, they are but babes beginning a new 
life. And the Apostle counsels them, as new-born babes, to 
earnestly desire and seek for the sincere milk of the Word 
of God— the simple truths, the foundation doctrines. 
These are the plain clear statements of the Scriptures— (1) 
of the original perfection and glory of humanity, created 
in the image of God— Gen. 1:27,31; (2) of the fall of 
Adam and the race represented in him in trial— Gen. 3; 
1 Cor. 15:22; (3) of the death penalty-Gen. 2:17; 3:19; 
Rom. 6:23; (4) of the redemption of Adam, and therefore 
also of the race represented in him, by the payment 
of an equivalent price— the sacrifice of "the man Christ 
Jesus who gave himself a ransom for all"— 1 Cor. 15:22; 
1 Tim. 2:6; (5) of the actual deliverance of the redeemed 
race in God's due time and order.— Acts 3:19-21. 

Those who in simple faith accept these truths and who, 
laying aside all malice, and all guile and hypocrisies and envies 

R3622 : page 265 

and all evil speaking, endeavor to live worthy of this 
salvation, esteeming it as only a reasonable service to devote 
themselves thenceforth to the service of God, are 
accepted of him as sons and heirs— as spiritual sons. And 
precious indeed are these little ones in the Lord's sight. 
It was with reference to such that the Lord said to Peter, 
"Feed my lambs"; and again that he gave warning to false 
teachers, saying, "Whoever shall ensnare one of the least 
of these who believe in me, it would be better for him 
that a millstone were hanged about his neck and that he 
were sunk in the depth of the sea." (John 21:15; Matt. 18:6, 
Diaglott.) And again, under the figure of a tender 
shepherd caring for a weak and straying lamb, he shows 
his tender solicitude for these babes of the family, saying, 
"It is not the will of your Father which is in heaven that 
one of these little ones should perish."— Matt. 18:14. 
But while the babes in Christ, because of their very 
feebleness and inexperience, have much special care bestowed 
upon them, and are dearly beloved of the Lord, 
and while their meek and teachable spirit is commended 
to all (Matt. 18:4), it is not the will of God that they 
should always remain babes. The very object of his commending 
to them the milk of the Word is that they may 
grow thereby out of this infantile state up to the maturity 
of spiritual life— "that we be no more children, tossed to 
and fro and carried about with every wind of doctrine." 
(Eph. 4:14.) There should come a time in the experience 
of every healthy growing child of God when he should be 
able to leave the principles of the doctrine of Christ— 
the foundation doctrines— having them firmly established 



and settled in his mind, and therefore not needing to dig 
them up and lay them over again— and go on growing in 
grace and in the knowledge of the Truth unto perfection. 
-Heb. 6:1. 

The Apostle Paul reproved some of his day because 
they did not thus grow; saying, "For when for the time 
[spent] ye ought to be teachers, ye have need that one 
teach you again which be the first principles of the oracles 
of God; and are become such as have need of milk, and 
not of strong meat: for every one that useth milk [only] 
is unskilful in the word of righteousness, for he is a babe." 
(Heb. 5:12,13.) We are not to live continually on the 
milk diet, "but by every word that proceedeth out of the 
mouth of God." (Matt. 4:4.) Some of these words are 
the simple truths above noted— the milk; and others are 
deeper truths, the strong meat for those who, nourished by 
the pure milk, had grown and had developed considerable 
firmness and strength of Christian character. This "solid 
food," says the Apostle (Heb. 5:14), is for adults— for 
those possessing faculties habitually exercised in the discrimination 
of both good and evil. He also warned them 
of the dreadful result to them if they should fall away.— 
Heb. 6:4-6. 

If the babes in Christ are fed on adulterated milk— a 
confused mixture of truth and error concerning the above-mentioned 
foundation doctrines— the result will be that 
they will sicken and die, unless the unwholesome diet is 
speedily removed and the sincere, pure milk is sought after 
and used. As a general thing there is not sufficient care 
on the part of the babes in Christ about seeking the pure milk 
of the Word; and many of the adults are too careless about 
setting the impure milk before them. Let those who are 
truly the Lord's little ones bear in mind the Apostle's 
counsel to desire and seek after only the pure milk of the 
Word, and resolutely to discard all else. Any theological 
views which will not rest squarely upon the above-named 
foundation doctrines, so plainly enunciated in the Scriptures, 
but which attempt to pervert and to shift and to 
make them void, do not constitute the pure diet for the 
Lord's children. Let them cautiously beware of all such 
adulterations, and feed only upon the pure milk, and by 
and by upon the more solid food— that is food indeed to 
those who have their faculties exercised— and thus grow up 
to maturity, to a full development of Christian character 
and faith. 

R3622 : page 266 

The Apostle then shows (1 Pet. 2:4-8) that such consecrated 
and faithful children of God have the privilege of 
becoming members of a grand spiritual house, of which 
Christ Jesus is the head. The shape of the building to 
which reference is made is evidently that of a pyramid, 
and was probably suggested to his mind by the words of 
the Prophet Isaiah (28:16) to which he refers, saying, 
"Behold, I lay in Zion a chief corner-stone, elect, precious; 



...the same is become the head of the 
corner, and a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense, 
even to them which stumble at the Word, being 
disobedient, whereunto also they were appointed." 

The chief corner-stone in a pyramid is the top stone, 
which is also the model after which the whole building is 
being fashioned. The Prophet Zechariah (4:7) calls it 
the head-stone, and Isaiah (28:16) calls it a foundation-stone. 
At first thought these figures seem incongruous, 
but they are not really so when we consider that this building 
is not an earthly, but a heavenly building, having a 
heavenly foundation, and that it is held together, not by 
earthly, but by heavenly attraction. And it is in accordance 
with this thought that we are invited to come unto 
Christ, the chief corner-stone, to be built up under him 
and to be fashioned for our places as living stones in this 
building, in accordance with the lines and angles seen in 
him who is the model. 

The great work of preparing these living stones for 
their places in this building of God is still in progress, although 
it is almost completed. This is the painful part of 
the work to every one of the stones. The blows of the 
hammer and the chisel— the hard discipline of experience 
—are not desirable except for the effects— the peaceable 
fruits of righteousness. And if we would have the results 
we must patiently submit to the painful processes, and see 
to it that no cross-grained wilfulness on our part shall interfere 
with the work; for such interference would sooner 
or later be the occasion for abandoning us, and the Builder 
would substitute another stone more pliable and easily 
worked; for the time is short, and what is to be done 
must be done quickly. 

The Prophet further showed that the foundation stone 
of this great building would be a stone of stumbling and a 
rock of offense to many until the time of its exaltation. 
Those who will stumble over it, says the Apostle, are not 
those faithful and loyal to the Word of God, but those 
who stumble at the Word, being disobedient, and who will 
not accept its plain and simple teaching relative to the 
great foundation of our faith— Christ Jesus, who gave his 
life a ransom for many. (Matt. 20:28.) And this class, 
he assures us, were appointed to stumble— that it does 
not happen so, but that God designed that they should 
stumble, because they are unworthy to stand, being 
disobedient. 

God lays great stress upon loyal and loving obedience 
on the part of all his children. It was only a little matter 
of disobedience that cost Adam and his posterity so dearly, 
and that will bring similar results to all those who, 
having once escaped the condemnation of death through 
faith in Christ the Redeemer, thereafter refuse to stand 
before God in the robe of his righteousness, but prefer to 
appear in their own. All such were appointed to stumble; 
but blessed are the meek, for they shall stand. "The 
Lord knoweth them that are his." 



R3623 : page 266 

A BROKEN VOW--A FULFILLED PENALTY. 

-2 CHRONICLES 36:11-21.-SEPT. 3.- 

Golden Text:— "Be sure your sin will 
find you out."— Numbers 32:23. 

ZEDEKIAH, the last king on the throne of David, 

was exalted to his position by Nebuchadnezzar 

and reigned eleven years, until the overthrow 

of the dynasty. He was given the throne upon his taking 

a solemn oath of faithfulness as a vassal to the 

king of Babylon. The taking of that oath was the immediate 

cause of his downfall. The matter is so stated 

in Ezekiel's prophecy.— Ezek. 17:11-21. 

The folly of the king's course in this matter is but 
an illustration of the general folly of all who reject the 
Lord as their counsellor. Our lesson relates how the 
Lord through Jeremiah his prophet had warned the 
king respecting reformation and the keeping of his oath 
and the certainty that the king of Babylon would vanquish 
him. Self-willed and unbelieving and careless of 
his oath, the king, abetted by the princes and his counsellors, 
took the course which proved to be the way of 
folly and which led to the utter overthrow of the nation. 

This reminds us of our text for the year, "The 
wisdom that cometh from above is first pure, then 
peaceable, easy of entreatment, and full of mercy and 
good fruits." It was, of course, not the privilege of 
Zedekiah or others living at that time to have the guidance 
of the holy Spirit in the sense that spiritual Israel 
may enjoy it now. Nevertheless they had what to 
them was a very fair substitute, all things considered, 
namely, God's direct revelations through his prophets. 
But now as then an evil heart of unbelief is inclined to 
lean to its own understanding, its own wisdom— earthly 
wisdom, which often, as the Apostle declares, is sensual 
and devilish. This is the meaning of much of the war 
and commotion which we see about us in the world, 
especially amongst so-called "Christian nations." Nor 
should we too severely censure the world for not acting 
along the lines of faith and trust in the Lord when we 
remember that they know him not and see him not as 
do his spirit-begotten children— "Blessed are your eyes 
for they see and your ears for they hear." For those 
who do see and do hear and do know the Master's will 
to proceed along worldly lines would certainly be much 
more reprehensible than for the natural man to take 
the same course. The Lord looketh upon the heart, 
and where the privileges are small the requirements will 
be correspondingly lenient; where the privileges are 



R3623 : page 267 

great, as with us, we can only reasonably expect stricter 
requirements at the Lord's hands. 

"THE LORD WILL JUDGE HIS PEOPLE" 

In Zedekiah's case the Lord allowed the natural 
consequences of his wrong course to follow, and they 
were severe indeed. His sons were slain before his 
eyes, then he was blinded and carried to Babylon, 
where he was a prisoner until his death. We infer from 
this that he never came to a properly repentant attitude 
of heart before the Lord. On the contrary his 
father, the previous king, Jehoiachim, who was taken 
a prisoner to Babylon eleven years before, was subsequently 
released from prison and granted many favors 
at the hands of the king of Babylon. 

These high ones in nominal Israel may properly 
enough represent the more highly favored ones of the 
Lord's people in spiritual Israel, and we may draw the 
lesson that the unfaithful, like Jehoiachim, might be 
chastened and afterwards treated with leniency; but 
that those who violate the oath of their covenant, their 
vow to the Lord, breaking that vow, will suffer loss in 
every sense of the word— they shall thenceforth be 
blinded by the Adversary to the blessings they had 
once enjoyed and they will subsequently die the Second 
Death. Everywhere the Scriptures uphold the thought 
that a vow, a solemn compact with the Lord, is a most 
binding obligation. It is under such an obligation that 
all the members of the New Creation have been granted 
the first fruits of the spirit. Disloyalty or renouncement 
of this vow to us could therefore mean nothing 
short of the Second Death. 

CALAMITY AND RUIN 

The calamity and ruin which came upon Jerusalem 
and Judea, at the time described in our lesson, doubtless 
seemed to many to indicate God's lack of power, his 
lack of ability to protect the nation which he had 
specially planted. Not so. The Scriptures assure us 
that God foresaw the calamities which then came upon 
his chosen people; he foretold them through the prophet 
and he permitted them to come upon the nation. The 
lessons he had sent them in the nature of milder chastisements 
had availed little. The example he had shown 
of scattering the ten tribes on account of their idolatry 
had not properly been taken to heart by the two tribes 
with whom his favor still remained. Now he would 
scatter them all and leave the land desolate for a period 
of seventy years— a period long enough to allow nearly 
all of them to die in exile, a period in which those who 
loved idolatry might go their way, as it is written, 
"Ephraim is joined to his idols, let him alone." It was 



a period, too, in which those who still reverenced the 
Lord— as for instance Daniel, and others mentioned— 
would in a foreign land look back longingly to the land 
of promise, read more attentively than ever the records 
of the Lord's dealings with their nation, and see how 
he had predicted this very trouble which they now were 
experiencing, and lead them thereby to a better condition 
of heart and to the instruction of their children 
in the right ways of the Lord. 

As a matter of fact this was the result. At the close 
of the seventy years' desolation of the land the Lord 
raised up Cyrus, the King of Media and Persia, who, 
having conquered the Babylonians, offered liberty to all 
of the Jews who desired to return to their own land. 
That proclamation would have little influence upon the 
vast majority of the Israelites who had gone into captivity. 
Those idolatrously inclined had undoubtedly 
forgotten all about Jehovah and the covenant made 
with their fathers, and were fully amalgamated with the 
heathen by intermarriage, etc. The indifferent Israelites 
settled in the foreign land realized that it would be 
to their disadvantage in temporal matters to leave their 
Babylonian homes to go back to Palestine, there to begin 
life afresh and to battle with the inconveniences, 
the wilderness condition, of their once fertile land. 
Consequently of all the hosts of the twelve tribes that 
went down to Babylon in various captivities only about 
50,000 accepted the offer of Cyrus to return. Only a 
very few of these had ever seen Palestine; they had 
merely heard of it through their parents and the few 
aged ones of their number. These, however, had learned 
well the lesson which their fathers refused to learn. 
From the day of the return from the Babylonian captivity, 
we have not a record of further idolatry in Jerusalem 
and Judea. 

DESOLATED SEVENTY YEARS 

The last verse of our lesson tells us how the land 
lay desolate three score and ten years to fulfil her 
Sabbaths, as the Lord had foretold by the mouth of 

R3624 : page 267 

his prophet Jeremiah. Here we see clearly marked the 
time when the seventy years began, that it was at the 
time of the carrying away of Zedekiah and not at the 
time of his father's captivity, eleven years previously. 
We see distinctly that it was not seventy years' captivity 
but seventy years' desolation of the land, and 
apparently the land was not desolate during the eleven 
years of the reign of Zedekiah. This is an important 
point in history, and one which has misled many in 
their chronological reckonings. It is an important point 
in the reckoning of the Jubilees, but for a fuller statement 
of this matter we refer the reader to MILLENNIAL 



DAWN, Volume II., Chapter VI. 

The Lord had appointed a jubilee arrangement by 
which every seventh year would be a Sabbath year of 
rest to the soil, and every fiftieth year a Jubilee of restitution 
for all the people, to all the inhabitants throughout 
Israel. It would appear that this divine arrangement 
fell into neglect or was only partially observed for 
a time. Doubtless the princes and nobles and wealthy 
thought they saw an error in the divine program and 
that they could improve upon God's arrangement. At 
all events there is no record of the keeping of the Jubilees, 
and the Lord here declares that they were neglected— 
either they were not kept at all or they were observed 
in so perfunctory a manner as to constitute neglect from 
the divine standpoint. Nevertheless we have no record 

R3624 : page 268 

of the Lord having chided the people on this score. A 
lesson for us would be that every feature of the divine 
law is of importance, that every regulation should be 
observed, that there is a blessing in the arrangement 
whether it so appears to human judgment or not, and 
that the Lord will require an account from us eventually 
respecting our knowledge and obedience. 

Turning to Leviticus 26:33-35, we find that the 
Lord through Moses had foretold this very failure to 
observe the year Sabbaths and Jubilees, and that it was 
on this account that the whole nation was cast out of 
the land of promise so that it received in the seventy 
years of its desolation the full number of Jubilee years 
—"For as long as it lay desolate it kept Sabbath to 
fulfil three score and ten years." 

This thought, that each of those years that the 
land was desolated represented a Jubilee year which had 
not been properly observed by Israel, furnishes one of 
the keys by which we may estimate the whole number 
of Jubilees from the entrance of the children of Israel 
into the land of Palestine down to the grand consummation 
when the Kingdom of Messiah will be established 
and the actual Jubilee, the antitypical Jubilee, 
will begin. These calculations carried out show that 
we are already living in the great antitypical Jubilee, 
which will last for a thousand years. As the priests 
were to blow the silver trumpets in the beginning of the 
typical Jubilee year announcing its beginning, so now 
all who are of the Royal Priesthood are commissioned 
by the Lord to blow upon the silver trumpets of truth, 
and to make known to all who have a hearing ear in 
spiritual Israel our present times and seasons, and that 
the great Jubilee, the times of restitution of all things, 
has begun. This implies, as we have already shown, 
that the great King is now taking unto himself his 
great power, and that his reign over the nations will 
soon begin, precipitating the time of trouble such as was 
not since there was a nation, the result of which will be 



the overthrow of all human institutions and the opening 
of the way to the establishment of the Kingdom for 
which we pray, "Thy Kingdom come," under whose 
ministrations all the families of the earth will be blessed, 
and every evil institution and thing suppressed, and 
every good and true matter brought forward to the 
light, established. 

Thank God for the great blessing and privilege of 
living in our day under these favorable conditions. Let 
us be faithful to our vow and for the present be submissive 
to the powers that be, waiting for the Lord in his 
own time and way to establish his Kingdom and to 
fulfil all the gracious promises of his Word. Let us 
who realize that we are now in the antitypical 
Jubilee be faithful to the blowing on the trumpets. 

"Blow ye the trumpet, blow 
The gladly solemn sound; 

Let all the nations know, 
To earth's remotest bound, 

The year of jubilee is come, 

Returning ransomed sinners home." 



R3624 : page 268 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDY FOR SEPTEMBER. 

--SEE PREFACE OF WATCH TOWER BIBLES 
AND WATCH TOWER, MARCH 1, 1905.- 

BROTHERLY KINDNESS (BROTHERLY LOVE) 

11. How should brotherly love exercise itself in seeking 
opportunities for service? Z. '98-228 (2nd col. 

par. 1,2); 229, (1st col. par. 1,2). 

12. How should brotherly-love manifest itself "in honor 
preferring one another"? Rom. 12:10; Z. '97-264 

(2nd col. par. 4); Z/05-139 (1st col. par. 1). 

13. How should we "consider one another to provoke 
unto love and to good works"? Heb. 10:24; F.308, 
par. 1,2; Z/05-106 (2nd col. par. 1). 

14. How will brotherly love exercise itself in "laying 
down our lives for the brethren"? 1 Jno. 3:16; 
Z/98-228 (1st col. par. 3); Z.'01-4 (1st col. par. 3); 
Z/01-150 (1st col. par. 1); F.468, par. 1, and 469. 

15. How should we manifest brotherly -kindness toward 
the weaker brethren? 1 Thess. 5:14; Z/98-183 

(2nd col. par. 1); F.236, par. 1; F.304 to 306. 

16. How will brotherly love sympathize with the more 
demonstrative brethren? F.134, par. 2. 

17. How should brotherly -kindness deal with the self-seeking? 
F.296, 297. 

18. How will brotherly -kindness deal with brethren who 
lack self-control? F.148 (par. 2) to 150 (par. 1). 

19. How should brotherly-kindness seek to avoid "busy-bodying"? 



1 Tim. 5:13; 1 Pet. 4:15; F.583 to 
586. 

20. How should brotherly-love control the tongue? F.291, 
par. 2;F.292,par. l;Z.'98-85 (1st col. par. 2,3); 
Z/98-86 (1st col. par. 2,3); F.586 to 588; F.406 
(par. 1). 



R3624 : page 268 

THE LIFE-GIVING STREAM. 

-EZEKIEL47:1-12.-SEPT. 10.- 

Golden Text:— "Whosoever will let him take 
of the water of life freely."— Rev. 22:17. 

EZEKIEL'S prophecy is full of symbolism, and 
has appropriately been termed the apocalypse 
of the Old Testament. It was written in 
Babylonia in the Chaldaic language. 

Ezekiel was one of the captives of Judah taken to 
Babylonia by King Nebuchadnezzar on the occasion of 
his first invasion, when he placed Zedekiah on the 
throne, eleven years before his later invasion, when 
the city was destroyed. The captives taken at that 
time included many of the chief men of the Jewish 
nation, princes and nobles, the brightest and the best. 
His object in taking these seems to have been to 

R3624 : page 269 

strengthen his own empire, for the captives were not 
treated as slaves, but were granted great liberty, some 
of them, as in the case of Daniel, rising to positions 
of very high honor in the kingdom. Ezekiel had great 
liberty, and his prophesying was done for the Jews of 
the Babylonian captivity— exiles. The Lord's testimony 
through this prophet was undoubtedly intended 
to cheer and comfort those of his people who were 
Israelites indeed, and to fan the spark of faith which 
still remained in their hearts— to lead them, as in the 
case of Daniel, to hope for the return of God's favor 
and the end of their captivity with the end of the appointed 
seventy years' desolation of the land. 

The matter of our lesson as heard by the Jews in 
exile undoubtedly was pictured as referring to earthly 
Jerusalem, and the blessings as appertaining to the 
Jews as a nation. The restoration of Jerusalem and 
the Temple are clearly and explicitly foretold, and no 
doubt the hearts of the captives leaped with joy as 
they thought of the future blessings, and no doubt 
also, their faith and hope were encouraged. But so 
surely as Ezekiel's prophecy was the Word of the Lord, 
so surely the prophecy did not relate to blessings to 



be conferred upon that people at the time of their restoration 

from the land of Babylon, for the predictions 

of Ezekiel's prophecy were never fulfilled. Just so 

surely they belong to the future. Spiritual Israelites 

may realize that the prophecy not only related to 

natural Israel but also to spiritual Israel, not only to 

a deliverance from literal Babylon but also a deliverance 

from mystic Babylon, "Babylon the great, the 

mother of harlots," whose power is soon to be completely 

overthrown as precedent to a full deliverance 

of all who are Israelites indeed and the establishment 

of the Kingdom.— Rev. 18. 

THE RIVER OF LIFE 

Our lesson deals particularly with one of Ezekiel's 
visions, which predicted the springing into existence of 
a wonderful river whose waters would bring to the 

R3625 : page 269 

land of Palestine and to the Dead Sea verdure and 

life instead of drouth, desolation and death. The ordinary 

interpretation of this lesson is that the Gospel 

is represented in this river, which now for a considerable 

time has been flowing onward and bringing life. 

We cannot accept this interpretation, for several reasons: 

First, the description is in such close agreement 

with the Millennial age blessings of Revelation 21 and 

22 as to leave no doubt that the same thing is referred 

to. In Revelation we see that the Church is the Bride, 

and the Church glorified is symbolized by the heavenly 

Jerusalem and the river of the water of life, whose 

leaves are for the healing of the nations and whose 

fruit is for their sustenance and whose water is the 

water of life, living water. There can be no doubt 

that the two rivers are identical. And since the Church 

is not yet complete, and has therefore not yet been 

glorified, the river of life has not yet proceeded from 

the glorified Church, and hence the whole matter must 

be future. 

The same thought is in this lesson as Ezekiel gives 
it. He first sees the Temple and then beholds the 
glory of the Lord entering the Temple through the eastern 
gate, and that gate closed after the Lord. This 
represents the closing of the door at the end of this 
age, as our Lord portrayed it in the parable of the ten 
virgins. The door will be shut, the glory of the Lord 
will have entered into the Temple. It is subsequent 
to this shutting of the door that the prophet is shown 
the issuing of the water from under the threshold. 
The lesson, therefore, is clear and explicit to the effect 
that not until the glory of the Lord shall have entered 
his Temple, not until the Church shall be glorified, not 
until that door shall be forever shut, will the water of 
life issue forth. 



The stream is shown as rapidly increasing. Issuing 
as a rivulet it speedily becomes ankle deep, a little 
further along waist deep and a little further beyond a 
man's depth to ford. Thus is indicated the rapid increase 
of the blessings of the Lord as soon as his time 
shall have come; but, as we have heretofore pointed 
out, there is no such river of life now, our Master himself 
being authority for this in his statement respecting 
his disciples, saying, "The water I shall give him shall 
be in him a well of water springing up to everlasting 
life." Ours is not an invitation to drink of a river of 
life, but an invitation to have a wellspring of water of 
life started in our hearts by the impartation of the 
holy Spirit. As already pointed out it will be after the 
river of the water of life flows from the glorified Church 
that the Spirit and the Bride will say to the world of 
mankind, Come. Then whosoever will may come, 
whereas now no man can come "except the Father 
which sent me draw him." 

A REFRESHING PICTURE 

Thus seen, God has rich blessings in store for mankind 
in general in the day when his Kingdom shall be 
established amongst men, in Immanuel's day. The restitution 
of that time is pictured in the leaves of the 
trees; the abundance of instruction and nourishment, 
mental, moral and physical, is represented in the fruit 
of the trees. More than this, wherever the water of 
this river went life resulted, until finally it emptied 
itself into the Dead Sea with the effect that the waters 
of the latter were healed. Fishes thrive well in sea 
water, but the water of the Dead Sea is about five times 
as strongly pregnated with salts, and as a consequence 
fish taken from the Mediterranean and put into the 
Dead Sea die in a few minutes— hence its name, Dead 
Sea. 

It would not at all surprise us if, in the beginning 
of the Millennial age, not only the nation of Israel would 
receive the blessing of the Lord lost at the beginning 
of this Gospel age and become his representative people 
in the world— the Church having been taken from the 
world, glorified spirit beings— but neither would it surprise 
us if, in the Lord's providence, some miracle were 
wrought by which the Dead Sea would become connected 
with the Mediterranean, possibly refreshed also 

R3625 : page 270 

by some such river as is here described by Ezekiel, a 
picture of the symbolical river of life flowing from the 
New Jerusalem. But however interested we might be 
in the thought of such a literal fulfilment of this prophecy, 
our interest is still greater in the fulfilment of it 
as a symbol in accord with the river of Revelation. 
From this symbolical standpoint the Dead Sea represents 



the dead world, and the coming of life-giving 
waters would represent the resurrection power of the 
Lord and the Church exercised amongst men during the 
Millennial age. As the Apostle expresses it, it would 
mean, for the Gentiles, life from the dead. 

But while it is refreshing and exhilarating to look 
down into the future and think of the blessings to come, 
it is important that we draw practical lessons and apply 
them to ourselves, and see to it that we do all in our 
power now to make our calling and our election sure, 
that we may be of that New Jerusalem class, the Bride 
glorified, from whom the river of the water of life will 
issue. There is no doubt that it will all be accomplished, 
because the Word of the Lord has spoken it. The whole 
question for us is whether we or others will be the Lord's 
ministers, servants, honored agents in causing the blessing 
of the Lord to fill the whole earth. The more we 
love the glorious prospects set before us in the Word, 
the more we will strive for present participation in the 
sufferings of Christ, in laying down our lives for the 
brethren, and for future participation in the glories of 
Christ in the blessing of all the families of the 
earth. 



R3625 : page 270 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS. 

MR. C. T. RUSSELL, 
BROTHER BELOVED:- 

I have just read in your booklet, "Protestants Awake," 
these burning words: "Some even admit that their personal 
views differ from those they preach, and are endeavoring 
to have their conferences and synods allow them to 
preach what they conceive to be truth and desist from what 
they believe to be error; dishonorable, ignoble, hypocritical 
and slavish though such a course is," etc. This is not all 
true in my case, but sufficiently so to cause the words dishonorable, 
ignoble, hypocritical and slavish, to strike me 
with tremendous force, and in deep agony of spirit, born of 
condemnation, I cry unto God, What shall I do? I most 
certainly believe your interpretation of the blessed Word. 
My soul longs for freedom; I am helpless— chained by environment. 
Tell me what to do? I doubt not there are hundreds 
in my condition. They saw the truth too late. What 
they possessed of this world's goods has been willingly sacrificed 
to an all-absorbing, but false purpose. Their means is 
gone; their physical force is spent; their years are well nigh 
numbered. "Their righteous souls are vexed from day to 
day in seeing and hearing." Conscious helplessness augments 
their bitter agony. They are handicapped by dependent 
families. To withdraw from their denominations means 
to cut off their bread. Your system offers no support to the 
helpless. Their minds are constantly harrowed by the light 



of the new revelation. Their spirits chafe and fret like the 
caged eagle yearning for the liberty he sees but cannot enjoy. 
There seems to be no open door of opportunity, and 
again I ask, in God's name, What shall we preachers do? I 
would be willing to sink out of sight from the world. 

If I could dispense with all responsibility toward my 
family, I would gladly submit to any sort of humiliation, 
criticism or persecution, and would feel that the liberty for 
which my heart and mind so yearns would be cheap at any 
cost to myself, but alas, alas! Brother, pray that a door 
may be opened unto me— that deliverance may come, in 
God's own way. 

Yours in bonds and fellowship, 



REPLY 

MY DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

Your pathetic letter of the 18th is at hand. You have 
my sympathy, indeed, dear brother. I rejoice that you have 
a conscience and a heart to which the truth does appeal. Be 
of good courage! Our heavenly Father lives; our Redeemer 
lives; his power is as great as it ever was. All of his Daniels 
are safe from the lions. All of his Elijahs shall be fed. All 
of the widows shall be supplied with meal. The condition 
is faith, trust, obedience. 

But the Lord's favor cannot be expected unless the 
step of obedience has been taken. Then man's extremity 
will constitute the terms on which the Father will be pleased 
to cause all things to work together for his good. The command 
is, "Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers 
of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues." 
Those who discern the real Babylon condition, those who 
discern the errors of "Christendom," are more responsible 
than the others in Babylon who discern not; and if they will 
not come out of her, if they will not stand up for the truth 
and the Lord, they are demonstrating that they are not 
worthy to be his disciples in the special sense in which that 
word is properly to be used during this Gospel age. It is not 
for us to say that those who do not come out will lose all, 
but we have the assurance that they will lose the Kingdom 
position, the great prize of our high calling of God in Christ 
Jesus; and their position would be, through greater tribulations, 
in the "great company" of Revelation 7, "before 
the throne," instead of in it; with "palm branches," instead 

R3626 : page 270 

of "crowns;" "servants," instead of "the Bride." 

Dear brother, if you have my sympathy, much more 
you may be sure you have the Lord's sympathy, and as soon 
as you shall have learned the lesson and taken the proper 
steps he will manifest his love and care and blessing toward 
you. Exercise the faith; overcome the spirit of fear and 
bondage, and thus be in heart an overcomer. The Lord will 
do the rest. It may not be in your way, nor in my way, but 



in the Lord's way he will supply all your need. 

The question before your mind should not be, Shall I 
come out of Babylon? but that being settled affirmatively, 
the question should be, How would the Lord have me come 
out of Babylon? I offer you a few suggestions along this line, 
which I trust may be helpful. 

I advise firmness and courage, blended with moderation 
and love. The truth of itself is sufficiently strong, without 
our adding to it any of our weight in the way of invective or 
sarcasm. "Preach the Word," says the Apostle; "Speak 
the truth in love." Begin at once to preach on the good 
tidings of great joy which shall be unto all people, showing to 
all people of the Lord, and all others who will hear, something 
of the lengths and the breadths, the heights and the depths, 
of the love of God which passes all understanding. After a 
few discourses of this kind have filled their hearts with a 
high estimate of the divine character, preach a discourse on 
the meaning of the word "hell" as found in the Old Testament; 
another discourse on the meaning of "hell" as 
found in the New Testament. Nothing in these sermons can 
conflict with any reasonable or proper denominational 
limitations. Get your sermons out of the usual rut, and 
more into Bible studies, doing the talking yourself, of 

R3626 : page 271 

course, but appealing to your congregation, not so much 
through oratory, as through reason and references to the 
Scriptures. Thus gradually, from Scripture to Scripture, 
you may draw the attention of your own hearers, and 
those in your vicinity, to what the Scriptures do say, and 
they doubtless reverence God's Word. If later a conflict 
with the creed shall be thrust upon you, you can appeal 
to the congregation as to whether they desire to be bound 
by a creed of men, or whether their consecration to the Lord 
was to be faithful to him, in harmony with his Word. Stand 
up courageously, dear brother, and if this shall mean (what 
it doubtless will in the end) the rejection of your message 
and of you, God will bless those Scriptures to your comfort, 
and the enlightenment, perhaps, of others in that vicinity. 

As you say, the Lord in his providence is not arranging for 
a paid ministry, after the ordinary fashion, but in the present 
movement toward the methods of the early Church paid 
ministry is abandoned, and the original methods of laboring 
with hands and preaching the truth, as strength and opportunity 
will afford, is coming into vogue amongst those who 
are hearing the Shepherd's voice. 

When faithfulness to the truth shall have led you outside 
of all sectarian lines (as it is sure to do, for, as the Apostle 
declared, "the time is coming when they will not endure 
sound doctrine"), we would be pleased to have you serve 
the Society as a colporteur, and will be glad to do what we 
can to co-operate in the use of your talents in some such 
manner, in the service of the truth, carrying the message to 
those who have not as yet heard it. 

Meantime, remember, dear brother, that you have our 



love, and sympathy, and prayers, and that we shall be always 
glad to hear from you. 
As ever, 

Your brother and servant in the Lord, 
C. T. RUSSELL 



PASTOR C. T. RUSSELL, 
DEAR SIR:- 

I wish to thank you for the tracts and the paper. I will 
send the money as soon as I get it in the fall. I did not 
know I would enjoy it so much, but it is the only pleasure I 
have, as there are no Dawnists here and no one is in sympathy 
with my belief. I sent for the tracts to distribute 
among friends, intending then to canvass for MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. I am sure I could do the work well, but my parents 
will not allow me for fear the churches would turn against 
us. They think because I am not eighteen that I do not 
realize what is right. When I left our Church they thought 
I was crazy, but I know it was God who sent me the DAWN 
books. It is very hard to be able to reap in the harvest and 
yet be held back by authority. 

But I realize in all things that my life is in God's hands 
and I am content to go through the fire since He leads me. 

I wish I could tell you how I appreciate the blessed 
knowledge of MILLENNIAL DAWN! You will some day know 
how we all feel about it. Oh, how I rejoice in my loneliness 
to know there are hundreds of "like precious faith" around 
me though I do not know them, and I hope they remember 
in their assemblies the isolated ones. 

I would be glad if you would write me some words of 
comfort and remember me in your prayers, for sometimes I 
do feel so lonely; and God bless you. 
Yours in consecration, 
111. 

REPLY 

MY DEAR YOUNG SISTER IN CHRIST:- 

I am glad to hear from you, and to know of the depth 
of your consecration to the Lord, and of your appreciation 
of his glorious plan. I rejoice that you will now have the 
regular visits of the WATCH TOWER, which will compensate 
to some extent your lack of personal fellowship with others 
of like precious faith. It is apparently the Lord's arrangement, 
by which many of his people are enabled to follow the 
advice of the Apostle, in Heb. 10:25, "Forsake not the assembling 
of yourselves together." Our hearts meet together 
in the study of the Word, in connection with the WATCH 
TOWER helps for Bible study, as well as meeting at the 
throne of grace. Through this means the Lord seems to be 
blessing, refreshing, strengthening and instructing and preparing 
for the Kingdom, some of his dear "Jewels." 

You are quite right in respect to your duty: so long as 
you are under age you have no discretion in the matter of 



obedience to your parents, except in the case of any demand 
in violation of your conscience, and this is not your present 
situation. 

Be assured, dear sister, that faithfulness to the Lord 
under the trials and difficulties, as they are permitted to 
come to you, will, in his providence, work out blessing. He 
is able to keep us; he is able to open and close the doors of 
opportunity. Let us trust him fully. Ultimately we will see 
more and more of the lengths and breadths and heights and 
depths of the wisdom and riches of his grace. May the Lord's 
blessing continue with you. 

Your brother and servant in the Lord, 
C. T. RUSSELL. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Greetings to you in the Lord. 

I wish I were able to tell you of the intense joy and 
blessing I received from the Dayton Convention. It was a 
day long to be remembered, and may our blessed Lord and 
Chief Reaper give the increase to that seed sowing, as the 
Dayton friends and yourself so zealously have done the 
planting and watering. It brings to my imagination some of 
the scenes that must have taken place when our dear Savior 
spake as never man spake to the crowds that pressed him. 
Glorious ministry! to be co-laborers together with Him! 

In your comments in a TOWER of recent date on John 12:24, 
you said that our Lord's going down into death 
brought forth much fruit— the first fruits— the Church, the 
144,000. Thinking on this it occurred to me, Will not the 
Church as so many grains of wheat (by virtue of our Heavenly 
Father's blessed arrangement in Christ) going down into 
death, bring forth the same amount of fruit in proportion? 
Reasoning thus, I found that if one brought forth 144,000, 
that number would bring forth 144,000 times 144,000, or 
20,736,000,000. Ah! I thought, here is where Brother Russell 
must get his twenty thousand millions to which he refers so 
often in his sermons as representing earth's dead, and specially 
mentioned in the Tract, "Millennial Hopes Examined." 
Now, dear Brother, is this a mere coincidence or did you use 
this method in addition to the one mentioned in the Tract? 

The light of His parousia is growing brighter and 
brighter as the Truth shines from the blessed Word; how 
much (and yet how little) I appreciate the various lightning 
flashes that come from the TOWER, (the "sign" of the Son of 
Man in heaven); how they clear up and purify the murky 
atmosphere that has surrounded the Word these many centuries, 
and wonderful miracle as it were, like of old, the 
thunder came in the harvest. So here in this "harvest" the 
thunders have uttered their voices with no uncertain sound, 
and verily to-day are shaking the very foundations of Ecclesiasticism, 
and by the time the last one speaks so that all 
hear, only those things will remain that cannot be shaken, 
God's blessed, glorious Truth. To Him be glory and honor and 
praise through Christ Jesus throughout all ages. Amen. 



Your Brother in the one Hope, 
C.B. S.,Ohio. 

IN REPLY:- 

I am glad to have your suggestion respecting the proportions 
of the fruit of our Lord's death as represented in 
the Church of the First-born (144,000) and the afterfruit of 
these, 20,736,000,000. I had not noted this correspondency, 
and hence it had nothing whatever to do with my calculations 
of the world's dead. 

Yours in our Lord, C. T. RUSSELL. 



page 273 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVI. SEPTEMBER 15, 1905. No. 18 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 275 

Zionism's Split on the Line of Faith 275 

Keeping the Lord Informed 275 

Missionary Motives Set Forth 276 

Mob Violence Increasing 276 

Germany's Religious Turmoil 277 

The Work for a Converted Will 278 

Good Purposes of Heart 279 

The Power of Faith 281 

Defiling the Temples 282 

The Lord is My Keeper 282 

Weighed in the Balances 283 

The Master's Touch (Poem) 285 

Some Interesting Questions 285 

page 274 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 



they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



GENERAL CONVENTION, PORTLAND, OREGON, SEPT. 8-10 



All sessions of the Convention (except the Sunday afternoon 
public service) will be held in the "Woodman's Hall," 
corner of East Sixth Street and E. Alder Streets. Brethren 
arriving over the S.P. line on Friday morning, Sept. 8th, 
should get off the car at E. Morrison St. station and come 
direct to the hall, thus saving carfare as well as any inconvenience 
through transferring. All other brethren arriving on all 
other lines at any time should come to the Union Depot 
where arrangements will be made to meet them and direct 
them to Hall and accommodations. All cars crossing "Morrison 
Bridge" pass within one or two blocks of the Hall. To get 
to Hall from Union Depot:— Take "M" car one block south, or 
"S" car, southbound, three blocks south on Sixth St., ask for 
"Morrison Bridge" transfer when paying fare, get off at Third 
and Yamhills Sts. and take any car crossing bridge. Get off 
at Grand Ave. and look for banner showing location of Hall one 
block north and one east. 

The public service, Sunday afternoon at 3, will be held in 
the First Methodist Church, corner Third and Taylor Sts., 
easily reached from all car lines without transfer. 

Entertainment.— Good rooms can be obtained in the vicinity 
of the Convention Hall for 50c, 75c and $1.00 per night for 
each person, two, three and four in a room. Meals at nearby 
restaurants can be had for 20c and 25c. Special room rates can 
be obtained for families or unencumbered brothers or sisters 
three or four in a room. 

It is important that all brethren who anticipate attending 
the Convention should notify Wm. A. Baker at Couch St. Dock, 
Portland, Ore., at least two weeks in advance, so that accommodations 
can be secured. After writing thus for accommodations 
you may depend upon their being secured and should not attempt 
to secure rooms for yourselves. This would greatly interfere 
with arrangements we would make for you. 

Letters should state price of rooms desired, number in 
party, etc. Arrangements will also be made for brethren who 
cannot afford to pay for accommodations but who can pay their 



fare to Convention, but in such cases it is also necessary to be 
advised before date of Convention. Some of the brethren have 
already written relative to bringing tents and others as to bringing 
their own blankets, which they can do without extra cost as 
baggage. All who feel it to their advantage to do so will be 
taken care of, and where brethren cannot afford to take furnished 
rooms it is a very good plan. Compliance with the 
above will greatly facilitate work of the Entertainment Committee 
and add to the general harmony of the Convention at 
the opening session. 

Railroad Rates.— The regular excursion rate of all roads 
entering Portland, with tickets on sale at all times, is one and 
one-third fare, with a thirty-day limit. Parties of ten on one 
ticket, ten-day limit, one fare for round trip. "Coach parties" 
from any one locality are made special excursion rates, averaging 
considerably less than one fare for the round trip. It is 
suggested to friends in the northwest that they may be able to 
make joint arrangements with the local committees of the other 
two Associations (National Letter Carriers' Association and the 
"Hoo-Hoos" or Lumbermen) holding their conventions at 
Portland at this time, for "coach parties," and thus get the advantage 
of the lowest possible rate. 

GERMAN HYMN BOOK 



We have issued a small book of German hymns, with music, 
99 numbers, suitable for general worship, public and social 
meetings. Uniform with "Zion's Glad Songs." Price, 5 cents, 
postpaid. 



R3627 : page 275 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
ZIONISM'S SPLIT ON THE LINE OF FAITH. 



THE recent division of the "Zionists" into two parties 
is evidently along the lines of faith and unbelief 
—a sifting. Dr. Herzl's death prepared the 
way. Zangwill, one of the principal subsequent leaders, 
favored the acceptance of the offer of the British Government 
of a large and fertile tract of land in Africa, nearly 
a thousand miles south of Palestine. He threw the weight 
of his influence toward it and swayed a considerable number, 
who doubtless, like himself, viewed the Zionist 
movement merely from the humanitarian standpoint. 
It is to the credit of the movement as a whole that it 
rejected the proposal. It proves that the Zionist movement 
is not merely for social betterment of the Russian 
Jews, but mainly a race regeneration built upon faith in 



the divine promises which attach to Palestine— the Land 
of Promise. It is worthy of note that not one American 
representative joined the Zangwill split, though he visited 
this country specially to advocate the acceptance of the 
British offer. 

THE MOVEMENT'S GROWING FORCE 

It is worthy of note also that each year this Zionist 
movement gains favor with the Jews. At its start a few 
years ago the learned generally scoffed at it. Now we read 
that, notwithstanding the death of the able leader, Dr. 
Herzl, the last congress held at Basle, Switzerland, was one 
of extra power intellectually. The movement is in accord 
with prophecy, and delay will only enkindle the desire 
and hope and faith necessary to a successful entrance into 
the land when once the Turks grant the privilege of so 
doing and some degree of self-government. 

In a signed statement Professor Warburg of the Berlin 
University, an eminent Zionist and economist, says:— 

"The East African resolutions are not a backward step. 
The fact that Zionism can afford to decline the British offer 
is a proof of its strength and determination to remain steadfast 
in adherence to its basic principles. Zionism does not 
contemplate an economic experiment, but the renewal of national 
life by the Jewish peoples, whose future lies in the 
Orient. The world must realize that the Zionists are bent 
on the restoration of Palestine to Israel." 

A press report of the conference thus describes some 
of its features: 

Herzl was called the new Moses, at first derisively, but 
now he deserves the name in earnest. His words are quoted 
everywhere as those of the new prophet of regenerated Israel. 

Delegates from the intellectual aristocracy of the world 
were there. It is doubtful if any parliamentary body ever 
held equalled it in brain power. The flower of the Jewish 
people were there. The orators spoke in English, German, 
Russian, French and classic Hebrew. All physical types 
were represented— giants, dwarfs, Jerusalem rabbis in Oriental 
robes, speaking to English baronets, all bound together 
by the common idea of re-building the Jewish State in Palestine, 
where the Jews, now crushed by Cossack rule, shall show 
the world what the race can accomplish through concerted 
effort. Scholars and writers galore were there; the foremost, 
Nordau and Marmock of Paris, Warburg of Berlin and Zangwill 
of London. 

Nordau, pale with emotion, opened proceedings, standing 
near Herzl's vacant seat. Sobs were audible throughout 
the hall as, with admirable oratory, Nordau eulogized the 
dead leader to an immense audience standing with bowed 
heads, the Jewish mourning attitude. 

Nordau stigmatized the selfishness of the Jews who, although 
best able to second Herzl's efforts, were holding 
aloof. He pictured the Jewish people as a family divided 
against itself. He exclaimed, "Our people had Herzl, but 
Herzl, alas, had no people." 



Addressing Herzl as though present, he invoked the 
dead leader's emperor-like personality. He said: "Rest in 
peace, for what you built we shall forever treasure." 

KEEPING THE LORD INFORMED. 



Bishop Potter (Episcopalian), of New York "subway 
tavern" fame, promptly prepared the following prayer for 
his people on the eve of the Russo-Japan Peace Conference. 
From the wording of the prayer the Lord may be 
expected to infer that the arbitrators are "saints" and 
representatives of saintly nations. The mention of the 
Millennium, when swords will be beaten into plowshares, 
seems a trifle strained in view of the fact that armaments 
on land and sea are increasing as never before and wars 
are multiplying, and presumably the Bishop is a pre-Millennialist 
whose hope is the conversion of the world by 
the preaching which has accomplished so little in nineteen 

R3627 : page 276 

centuries. The Millennium is near indeed, but coming 
through wars and anarchy such as never yet have 
been— coming by the interposition of Immanuel as King 
of kings and Lord of lords, in power and great glory. 
The Bishop's prayer follows:— 

"Almighty God, whose is the spirit of unity and concord, 
and who makest men to be of one mind in an house, be, we 
beseech thee, with thy servants who shall soon assemble on 
these shores to seek for a basis of peace. Overrule their deliberations 
with thy heavenly wisdom, fill them with the 
spirit of brotherhood, and so hasten the day when all men 
shall beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into 
pruning hooks, when thy children shall be taught of the 
Lord and when great shall be the peace of thy children. 
All of which we ask through Jesus Christ, our Lord. Amen." 

MISSIONARY MOTIVES SET FORTH. 



The following letter will be read with interest by 
many. It appears that Secretary Barton, of the American 
Board of Foreign Missions, communicated with Mr. J. D. 
Rockefeller, requesting his contribution to the work being 
done by the Board, and Mr. Rockefeller commissioned 
his Private Secretary to look into the matter and to report. 
It was on the strength of that report (see the letter below) 
that Mr. Rockefeller contributed the $100,000, the acceptance 
of which made such a stir last spring. Whether Secretary 
Barton's share of the donation was one-half (the 
amount allowed solicitors in some other similar societies) 
we are not informed. 

The letter, or "report," it will be noted, deals with 



Foreign Missions from the standpoint of Civilization rather 
than Christianization. It appeals to morals and trade and 
dollars, rather than, as of old, to flames and devils and 
torments. Mr. Gates' report to Mr. Rockefeller runs 
thus: 

THE VALUE OF FOREIGN MISSIONS 

"We have had long interviews with Dr. Barton, and we 
have examined each item of proposed expenditure presented 
by him in detail, with maps before us. We have given it 
careful attention, both here at the office and at my home in 
Mont Clair. In every instance we were satisfied that the 
money asked would be wisely expended and would fill a real 
need and perform substantial service for mankind. 

"No one can observe foreign peoples at all without being 
impressed with the great need of foreign people in education, 
medicine and surgery, morals and religion, applications 
of science to agriculture, manufacture, transportation, hygiene, 
civil and social institutions and in all things which 
tend to relieve man from misery and make for health, happiness 
and progress. 

"A vast amount of good has been done. Statistics of 
mere converts furnish no sort of measure. The fact is that 
heathen nations are being everywhere honeycombed with 
light and civilization and with modern industrial life and applications 
of modern science through the direct or indirect 
agencies of the missionaries. Look at Japan, for illustration. 
Quite apart from the question of persons converted, the mere 
commercial results of missionary effort to our own land is 
worth— I had almost said a thousand-fold what has been 
spent. 

"For illustration: Our commerce today with the Hawaiian 
Islands, which are now Christianized and no longer 
take missionary money, is, I am told, $17,000,000 a year. 
Five per cent, of that in one year would represent all the 
money that was ever spent in Christianizing and civilizing 
the natives. When the missionaries went there the Hawaiians 
were cannibals, without a dollar of exports or imports. 
Today these islands are composed of great wealth. What is 
true of Hawaii is true of Japan. Missionary enterprise, 
therefore, viewed solely from a commercial standpoint, is immensely 
profitable. From the point of view of subsistence 
for Americans, our import trade, traceable mainly to the 
channels of intercourse opened up by missionaries, is enormous. 
Imports from heathen lands furnish us cheaply with 
many things, indeed, which we now regard as necessities. 

"Gladstone declared that modern applications of steam 
and modern machinery had multiplied the productive power 
of each man in England by (was it not?) 600 over what it was 
200 years ago. Never mind the exact figure. We know the 
multiplication is great. Missionaries and missionary schools 
are introducing the application of modern science, steam and 
electric power, modern agricultural machinery and modern 
manufacture into foreign lands. The result will be eventually 
to multiply the productive power of foreign countries 



many times. 

"This will enormously enrich them as buyers of American 
products, and enormously enrich us as buyers of their 
products. We are only in the very dawn of commerce, and 
we owe that dawn, with all its promise, more than to anything 

R3628 : page 276 

else, to the pioneer work and the channels opened up 
by Christian missionaries. Missionaries are largely influential 
today in the diplomacy of the Orient. The value to 
America, therefore, of missions is simply incalculable. The 
fruitage is only in its beginning. 

"So I think the subject of foreign missions should command 
the interest of patriots and philanthropists, men of all 
creeds and of no creed, men of commerce, manufacture, 
finance, of bankers, importers and exporters of our country, 
and of all who have the well-being of their own country or 
of mankind at heart. In the long run it will be found that 
the effect of the missionary enterprise will be to bring to them 
the peaceful conquest of the world." 

MOB VIOLENCE INCREASING. 



We have all noted the increasing tendency to mob 
violence, anarchy, disregard of law, in our own land, 
especially in connection with strikes and lock-outs. The 
same spirit grows everywhere, as evidenced by the following 
late press cablegrams: 

FINNISH MOB THREATENING 

Viborg, Finland, Aug. 15.— The court-martial which 
tried Prokope, who killed Col. Kremarenke, Chief of Police 
of Viborg, July 21, today sentenced him to be hanged. A 
regiment of dragoons has arrived to reinforce the garrison, 
as the mob threatens reprisals. Prokope refused to plead unless 
tried by a Finnish court, and the witnesses summoned by 
the prosecution said they would testify only before a Finnish 
Judge. A crowd of 5,000 persons made a demonstration outside 
the Governor's house here yesterday against the trial by 
court-martial. 

BALTI PROVINCES ALARMED 

St. Petersburg, Aug. 15.— The situation in the Baltic 
provinces becomes daily more terrible. The Slav population, 
exasperated against the landed proprietors, for the most 
part nobles of German blood, is constantly making attacks 
on life and property. The upper classes and higher bourgeoisie 
are hastily leaving the country. The Government 
has appointed an extraordinary commission to report on the 
situation and the necessary measures to be taken. 



5,000 HUNGRY MEN IN ARMS IN SPAIN 

Seville, Spain, Aug. 15.— A commission of landed proprietors 
and farmers have laid before the authorities the conditions 
prevailing in and about Osuna in Andalusia. They 
estimate that there are 5,000 workmen armed with rifles 
roaming about the country. The municipal authorities disclaim 

R3628 : page 277 

responsibility for this condition of affairs. The jails 

are crowded with persons who have committed no offense, 

but who have surrendered to the police on the pretense of 

having committed crimes in order to get shelter and food. 

The charitable societies have exhausted their resources, and 

government action is awaited. Hunger riots are of daily occurrence, 

and are becoming more and more serious. Theft 

and pillage are common, and it is impossible to maintain 

order. Reinforcements of the civil guard are needed in 

every town and village. Not a drop of rain has fallen in 

that district since March, and the summer and autumn crops 

will be ruined unless rain falls soon. It is feared that the 

peasantry will take the law in their own hands, and even now 

signs of open revolt are plentiful and exasperation at the 

Government's inaction is becoming daily more pronounced. 



This is the spirit which must be expected more and 
more to develop during the next few years, according to 
the Scriptural forecast— "Every man's hand against his 
brother and no peace to him that goeth out nor to him 
that cometh in." 



R3628 : page 277 

GERMANY'S RELIGIOUS TURMOIL. 

"MORE than one solemn voice is being raised 
within the Protestant churches of Germany, 
voices of warning, seriously asking 
the Church to prepare for the coming of evil days. 
Three terrible enemies beset the Reformed faith; and 
these carry on a war of the most ruthless character, 
and give absolutely no quarter, just as they expect 
none. 

"There is, first, the old enemy, Rome, ceaselessly 
on the watch perpetually pushing forward her advanced 
positions, taking advantage of every slip and 
error in the opposite camp, sleepless, indefatigable, unscrupulous 
in her methods. The organization of the 
Church of Rome in Germany is far superior to anything 
which the Evangelical churches can show. The 
discipline of her clergy is perfect. These are apparently 



not bothered by racking doubt as to the faith that is 

in them. They have no questions to decide about theological 

chairs, and 'positive' and 'liberal' professors. 

Their supply of divinity students is not falling off. 

Their exchequers are full to overflowing, and a recent 

report of the Archbishop of Ratisbon boasted that 

never before in the history of German Catholicism has 

so much been subscribed by the faithful for purposes of 

religion. Their associations for young men and young 

women show a full list of members, and are all financially 

sound. And their great annual political gatherings, 

at which they send messages to Pope and Kaiser 

and receive congratulations in return from both these 

potentates, are full of enthusiasm and give unmistakable 

evidence of an advancing cause. 

"What is being done by the Evangelical churches 
of Germany to weaken the Church of Rome, either spiritually 
or politically? I fear absolutely nothing. There 
are Gustavus Adolphus associations and Protestant Alliances, 
and many another society with resounding 
names: but what are they doing? Where are the 
proofs of their progress? One asks in vain, and the 
fact remains that throughout the land Rome is united, 
compact, strong, growing stronger, militant; while the 
Protestant churches are torn with internal troubles, 
feeble, presenting no united front, and above all distracted 
by religious doubts. 

SOCIALISM VERSUS CLERICALISM 

"Arrayed against Protestantism to probably a far 
greater extent than against Catholicism is the whole 
force of the Social Democrats. Few people outside 
Germany have any conception of the hatred with which 
the Socialist leaders follow the Evangelical churches. 
To a very large extent their hatred is returned with 
interest by the leaders of the Church. The feeling of 
hatred against the Church is easily enough explained. 
It exists in all countries with a State Church, but in 
Germany to a still greater extent than— say, in England. 
In England, although parson and squire had 
common interests and were invariably united against 
the poor man, there was always, even at the worst of 
times, an eminently respectable residuum which threw 
in its lot with the poor man, and defended him against 
his oppressors. But in Germany, especially in Prussia, 
this residuum has hardly existed, and the great landowner 
and the great manufacturer have invariably had 
the pastors at their back. 

"The pastors in Germany, with few exceptions support 
every measure which tells against freedom. They 
support universal military service, and are identified in 
every way with the crushing military life of the country. 
They support the antiquated electoral system of Prussia, 
which practically excludes every poor man from the 
poll. During the exciting times of four years ago, when 



the proposed new taxes on breadstuffs rent the country 
into two warring camps, I do not remember a single 
clerical voice raised on behalf of cheap bread and 
against the utterly selfish agrarianism of the big landlords. 
In a word, they are opposed to reform as the 
people understand reform, and in consequence there is 
a gulf fixed between the representatives of the working 
classes and the representatives of the Church which it 
is impossible to bridge over. At almost every election 
throughout the country the pastor's candidate is opposed 
by a Socialist, the two men representing diametrically 
opposite ways of political thought. 

PROTESTANT UNBELIEF A FOE 

"But no enemy of the Protestant Church in Germany 
is so potent and destructive as unbelief. Were 
only unbelief removed, Rome and Socialism might 
vainly unite their forces. The believing Church is invincible 
against all attacks; the unbelieving Church 
falls a prey to any and every enemy. What can we 
think of the controversy which has been raging lately in 
a portion of the Protestant Church press as to the 
exact number of 'positive' and 'liberal' professors of 
theology in German universities? By 'positive' is 
meant those who believe in Christ as very God; by 

R3628 : page 278 

'liberal' is meant those who do not believe either in the 
divinity of his person or of his teaching. It is significant 
of the whole situation that these leading Protestant 
journals are busily engaged in collecting such statistics. 
And what do these statistics reveal? A very 
terrible state of affairs, viz., that the number of unbelieving 
professors far surpasses the number of believers 
—96 liberals and only 79 positive. This is a state of 
affairs causing jubilation in the ultramontane camp. 
Hear the leading and most popular Roman Catholic 
journal in Germany:— 

'"We can, however, still believe that of those 
Protestants who still interest themselves in Church affairs 
there is probably a 'positive' majority. The most 
remarkable thing about this classification into 'liberal' 
and 'positive' is that both parties belong to one and 
the same Church. And yet here are two totally distinct 
religions, as distinct as Lutheranism and Catholicism. 

R3629 : page 278 

Ninety-six 'liberals' and seventy-nine 'positives' 
adorning the same Church, teaching the same doctrines 
—the former absolutely agnostic, the latter anything 
the government wishes them to be.' 

"And listen to another voice from the press: Inside 
the Lutheran-Evangelical churches there seems to 



be a perpetual war of factions, each eager to obtain an 

ascendancy over the other, and this chiefly with a view 

to the loaves and fishes. It is not which can do God 

the best service, or which can do most to promote 

God's Kingdom at home and abroad; it is not which 

faction or section can do most to elevate the masses, to 

make their homes happier and brighter. Instead of 

these laudable subjects for emulation and rivalry, we 

have petty disputes about the Canon of Scripture and 

the authenticity of the Gospels, and endless and rancorous 

quarrels about the filling of certain theological 

chairs. It is always a thankless task to prophesy, but 

we can safely assert that if things go on for another 

twenty years as they have been going, there will be no 

theological chairs to fill in any Protestant German University.' 

This extract is from a secular paper well 

known for its moderation and fairness. 

INFIDELITY RAMPANT IN GERMANY 

"The works of agnostic professors and their followers 
are flooding the country and are being eagerly read. 
In the windows of every book-shop one passes they are 
displayed in rows. Quite a sensation is being made 
with a book by Dr. Daniel Wolter, 'Egypt and the Bible.' 
The author proves to his own satisfaction that 
the 'myths' of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph and Moses 
are directly derived from Egyptian sun myths; and 
that consequently these Old Testament worthies were 
simply characters from these mythological tales of the 
Egyptians, filtered through a Hebrew imagination. 

"There is another still more dangerous class of 
book engaged in discussing 'the historical Christ': and, 
under a vast show of learning and much appearance of 
critical fairness, the authors one and all come to the 
conclusion that no such person as Jesus Christ ever existed; 
and that if he did, he certainly does not deserve, 
owing to the imperfections of his character and teaching, 
the adoration of mankind. This is the whole trend 
of Eduard von Hartmann's 'The Christianity of the New 
Testament,' which is now in everyone's mouth. The 
eminent philosopher sees nothing in Christ's teaching or 
character. He describes him as 'an amiable and modest 
young man, who, through a remarkable concatenation 
of circumstances, came to the idea, at that time 
epidemic, that he was the expected Messiah, and who 
perished in consequence.' According to Hartmann, some 
of his ideas were admirable, some doubtful, some eminently 
trivial; but even the most admirable of them 
have no claim to immortality, and have been better expressed 
and more powerfully brought home to men by 
other teachers, both before and after him."— M. A. M., 
in The London Quarterly Register. 



R3629 : page 278 

THE WORK FOR A CONVERTED WILL. 

"The hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be found in the 
way of righteousness. He that is slow to anger is better 
than the mighty, and he that ruleth his spirit 
than he that taketh a city."— Prov. 16:31,32. 

TO BESIEGE and capture a city is a great undertaking, 
because every city has its massive defences 
of law and force, and is built with all the 
probable contingencies of attacks from enemies in view. 
In olden times the defenses were walls and gates; but 
now they are of the improved order of governmental 
arrangements. Cities and communities of immense 
proportions are now banded together into great nations 
for mutual cooperation and defense, so that to attack a 
city now is to attack a nation, and to be withstood 
with all the defensive armory of the nation; and in no 
instance can one undertake it single-handed and alone. 
He who would undertake it must be backed by other 
powers equal, or at least apparently equal, to the emergency. 
And the victory of such a general will depend 
on his superior skill and ingenuity in utilizing the various 
forces and advantages in his possession against those 
employed by the defenders of the city. 

Such ability as is thus required in a great general 
is quite rare. It indicates indomitable purpose, methodical 
planning and skill in execution, though these good 
qualities are often exercised in a bad cause. Such ability 
has always been highly esteemed among men, and 
the aspirants for fame have, therefore, in times past, 
sought it chiefly along this line, though they gained their 
laurels at the expense of the blood and groans of millions 
of their fellow-men. 

While the exercise of these successful qualities along 
the lines of human ambitions is required of earthly 
heroes, the exercise of similar qualities along the lines 
of God's appointment is required of those who would 
be heroes in his estimation. If there were not a similarity 

R3629 : page 279 

in kind of the effort and success the comparison 
would not be instituted. Let us first notice the similarity, 
and then the difference, that we may see clearly 
what the Lord here commends. 

To rule one's spirit (mind, disposition) implies a 
conflict similar to that of taking a city; for, no matter 
when we begin, we find entrenched therein many armed 
and opposing powers. They have possession by heredity 
—they are there as the result of the fall. And, if we 
have passed the days of youth, they are the more entrenched, 
and it requires the greater skill and generalship 
to rout them. But, whether he begin early or late, 



he that would rule his own spirit must war a good warfare 
—he must "fight the good fight" of faith down to 
the very end of the present existence. If a man would 
rule his own spirit, he must not only storm all the fortresses 
of inherited evils which seem to be almost a part 
of his nature, but, having gained possession and taken 
his seat upon the throne of this symbolic city (viz., the 
will), he must thereafter be continually on the defensive; 
for the old enemies are constantly on the alert, and 
ever and anon seeking to regain possession, so that he 
that continues to rule his own spirit is one who not only 
has routed the enemy, Sin, from the throne of his being, 
but who continues to keep him at bay. 

To rule one's own spirit is by no means an easy 
task; and, as in the illustration, it cannot be done single-handed 
and alone. Consequently, the wise general 
will invoke all the assistance at his command, remembering 
the words of the Apostle— "We wrestle not 
against flesh and blood, but against principalities and 
powers, against the rulers of the powers of this world, 
against spiritual wickedness in high places." These 
powers of the world, the flesh, and the devil are all 
closely allied; and, therefore, he who plans for conquest 
and an established reign thereafter must seek alliance 
with another and a stronger power; which power is tendered 
to all who earnestly undertake the great work. 
This power is none other than the almighty arm of our 
God, who says to all who accept his strength, "Greater 
is he that is for you than all they that be against 
you;" gird yourselves like men, fear not, be strong. 

The ruling of this symbolic city— one's own spirit 
—never will be done until first the commanding general, 
the Will, has decided to change his allegiance from Sin 
to God, and to rout the rebels who resist the change. 
But, in the words of a trite saying, "Where there is a 
will there's a way"— for good or for evil. God will assist, 
through various agencies, toward good; Satan, 
with various agencies, toward evil. If the Will says, It 
must be done, it calls in the needed and available help, 
and forthwith it sets all the other faculties of the mind 
at work, first to subjugate and then to rule and regulate 
the entire being. The Conscience is commanded to 
keep a vigilant watch over all the mental operations; 
and the Judgment, under the influence of the Conscience, 
must decide as to righteousness or unrighteousness 
and report to the Will, which is under the same 
moral influence. Thus we have the three departments 
of government established— the legislative, which should 
always be the Conscience; the judicial, the Judgment; 
and the executive, the Will. And in every well-regulated 
or righteously ruled mind all the other faculties 
must make their appeal to this Congress, and that, as 
the Will insists, in due and proper order. Their appeal 
to the Will to execute their desires before submitting 
them first to Conscience and then to Judgment should 
never be tolerated; but, when approved there, they may 



freely urge their claims upon the executive power, the 
Will. But the Will governs; and, if it be weak, the 
government is slack, and the appetites and passions and 
unholy ambitions of the whole man take advantage of 
the situation: they seek to overbalance Judgment and 
to silence Conscience; and loudly clamor to the Will to 
have their own wild way. If the Will be weak, yet 
striving to keep under the influence of Conscience and 
sound Judgment, it will be fitful and irregular in its 
rulings, and the government will be unstable and ultimately 
wholly at the mercy of the appetites, passions 
and ambitions. The condition of such a soul is one of 
anarchy, which, unless its wild course be speedily arrested, 
hurriedly sweeps the whole being toward 
destruction. 

It is all-important, therefore, that the Will be consecrated 
to God and righteousness; and, secondly, that 
it strengthen itself in the Lord, and in his name and 
strength rule with a firm hand, cultivating as its assistants 

R3630 : page 279 

Conscience and Judgment, in determining the good 
and acceptable and perfect will of God, as expressed in 
his Word. 

The Will has the most difficult office to fill; and the 
Lord's commendation is to the man of resolute Will, 
under the influence of a divinely-enlightened Conscience 
and Judgment. Blessed is the man who sets his house 
in order, and who maintains that order to the end of his 
days. Truly, to such a one the hoary head is a crown 
of glory. The warring elements of his nature having 
been brought into subjection, the arts of peace have 
been cultivated, and now they flourish and adorn his 
character; and as Mr. Whittier beautifully expressed it— 
"All the jarring notes of life 

Seem blending in a psalm; 
And all the angles of the strife, 

Now rounding into calm." 



R3630 : page 279 

GOOD PURPOSES OF HEART. 

-DANIEL 1:8-20. -SEPTEMBER 17.- 

Golden Text:— "Daniel purposed in his 
heart that he would not defile himself." 

THE BOOK of Daniel, as we have it in our common 

version of the Bible, corresponds to that 

which was accepted by the Jews, but attached 

to it were three stories ("Bel and the Dragon," "The 

Song of the Three Hebrew Children," "The Story of 



Susannah"), which have nothing whatever to do with 
Daniel, and which bear no marks of being his production 
nor give any evidence of inspiration. These are excluded 
by the Hebrews as apocryphal, but they are incorporated 
in the Roman Catholic version of the 
Scriptures. 

This book is one against which the higher critics 
have thrown and are still throwing the weight of their 
influence. As with the criticisms of nearly all the other 

R3630 : page 280 

books of the Bible so with this— they claim it was not 
written until long after the time of Daniel and was 
merely given his name. The particular ground for this 
criticism is a misinterpretation of the prophecy, which 
applies it to the times of Antiochus Epiphanes. Strangely 
enough these grounds of objection become to us, who 
have a different view of the meaning of those prophecies, 
one of the strongest evidences possible of the inspiration 
of the writer. Certainly no prophet ever described more 
particularly the great events of universal history, certainly 
none ever marked more clearly and distinctly 
than did Daniel the precise time of the first advent of 
Messiah. The prophecy of the seventy weeks (490 years) 
was most remarkedly fulfilled. The last, the seventieth 
of those weeks of years, began with Messiah the Prince, 
began at the time of our Lord's baptism and anointing 
with the holy Spirit. His cross marked the middle of 
that week, as the prophet predicted— "In the midst of 
the week Messiah shall be cut off, but not for himself." 
The close of that prophetic week marked the end of 
special favor to the Jew and the opening of the door to 
the Gentiles, Cornelius being the first Gentile convert 
ushered into the favors and blessings of Spiritual Israel. 

Our Lord undoubtedly referred to the beginning of 
the seventieth week of this prophecy when he sent forth 
his disciples to preach, saying, "The time is fulfilled." 
What time was fulfilled? We answer the sixty and nine 
weeks of Daniel's prophecy had expired, and the seventieth 
week, which was to usher in the advent of Messiah, 
had come. No time could be fulfilled unless it had been 
foretold, and we know of no other prophecy which distinctly 
foretold the time of the Lord's advent. And 
again, it should be noticed that our Lord distinctly referred 
to Daniel, calling him by name and quoted a 
part of his prophecy, giving us the assurance that it 
would be fulfilled in the future. That future fulfilment 
has not yet come, but we believe is near, even at the 
door— "A time of trouble such as was not since there 
was a nation." Our Lord adds to the prophecy the words, 
"No, nor ever shall be." (Dan. 12:1; Matt. 24:15-21.) 
The prophet Ezekiel, Daniel's contemporary associated 
in the exile, twice referred to him in his prophecy, classing 
him with Noah and Job. He mentions expressly 
Daniel's great wisdom. (Ezek. 14:14-20; 28:3.) However, 



as stated at first, those whose eyes of understanding 
are now opened to see the meaning of Daniel's prophecy 
and to read the fulfilment of many parts of it in the 
events of history have no need of any outside evidence 
or testimony or proof that it was written under divine 
instruction, and will have no question that the remaining 
portions of it will be fulfilled with equal accuracy. 

FOUR NOBLE YOUNG MEN. 

As already noted, the first captivity by Nebuchadnezzar 
included the very cream of the Jewish nation. 
Amongst them were four young men of about sixteen 
years of age whose names implied a parentage that was 
reverential, loyal to God. Thus Daniel signified, "God 
is my judge," Hananiah, "Jehovah is gracious," Mishael, 
"God-like," Azariah, "Jehovah has helped." The fruit 
of godly training is manifest in the course pursued by 
these young men, as related in the present lesson. Their 
captivity doubtless seemed to them and all concerned 
a great hardship, a sore trial, and yet in God's providence 
it was overruled to be to them a great blessing, and that 
blessing has come down through the ages to fortify, 
strengthen and encourage even the spiritual Israelites. 

The four boys mentioned were chosen by King 
Nebuchadnezzar, because of their brightness and general 
intelligence, to be specially educated with others in a 
class from which he drew his assistants and councillors 
of state. One of the first things done was the changing 
of their names: Henceforth Daniel was known amongst 
the Chaldeans as Belteshazzar, Hananiah was named 
Shadrach, Mishael was named Meshach and Azariah 
was named Abednego, these names implying relationship 
or servitude to the deities of Babylonia. 

But changing their names by no means changed 
their hearts, just as their transporting from the land of 
promise to Babylon did not turn them from loyalty to 
the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, the God in whose 
existence they believed and whose promises they revered, 
and whom consequently they desired to please and to 
serve. Daniel would appear to have been the foremost 
or leader amongst them, but the courage and fidelity of 
all were fully attested, Daniel's by his experience in the 
lion's den and the other three in their experiences in the 
fiery furnace. 

GOOD BLOOD FROM CHEAP FOOD. 

The school or college into which these four young 
Hebrews were introduced was maintained by the king 
and supplied with wines and various dainties usual to 
the table of the king and his nobility; but Daniel purposed 
in his heart that if possible he would choose plain 
food and not defile himself with the king's dainties and 
wine. Therefore he early made a request for the simple 
food here called pulse, a general name no doubt for 



vegetables, but particularly for the varieties we now 
know as peas, beans, etc. 

The expression, "defile," was doubtless of double 
application: first, the meats and dainties of the heathen 
were usually dedicated to their deities in some manner, 
and this to a certain degree would defile in the estimation 
of those who would recognize that there was one 
living and true God whose blessing alone they might ask 
upon their food and drink and every interest. But the 
separate descriptions, meats and wines, rather implies 
that there was more than sentimental defilement connected 
with the matter. It seems to imply that Daniel 
recognized that his own health of mind and body would 
be clearer and better if he abstained from many of those 
delicacies and wines commonly in use. Both were good 
arguments— good reasons for avoiding, if possible, that 
class of food and taking the simple diet. We might here 
remark that it is a recognized fact in the light of the 
closest scrutiny that peas and beans and wheat contain 
all the necessary elements for the development and support 
of the human body— bones, muscle and brain. 
Those competent to speak with authority on the subject 
assure us that beans will yield to the human system a 
larger amount of muscular strength than the best of 
beefsteak. We are not teaching vegetarianism, but it is 
well for all to know that they have in a vegetable diet 
all the necessaries of life. This is important in view of 
the increasing price of meat, and it may be of still greater 
importance to remember in the future. 

Daniel was evidently of a kind to make friends with 
good people under all circumstances, and it does not 
surprise us to find the statement of verse 9 that he soon 
was in favor and "tender love with the prince of the 
eunuchs," who was the steward having charge of the 

R3631 : page 281 

students of this college. Daniel's appeal was made to 
him, but was met with the objection that if by reason of 
such a change of diet those under his charge should be 
dwarfed or stunted or physically impoverished it might 
not only cost him his position but his very life— "endanger 
his head." 

REWARDED WITH GOOD HEALTH. 

Daniel, however, was fully convinced that the plainer 
diet would be none to his injury, and urged a ten days' 
test, on the results of which he was willing to rest his 
request. The plan was followed, and at the end of the 
ten days Daniel, and his companions who joined him in 
the request, were found to be in better flesh and every 
way brighter and more intelligent than their associates 
who were eating of the richer fruits and wines. As a result 
they were permitted to continue their abstemious 
diet, no doubt much to the amusement of their associates 



in the school, who without doubt would consider them 

foolish for thus choosing simple fare when they might 

have the king's food. It undoubtedly did cost some self-denial 

to all of these young captives to forego the pleasures 

of the palate, to endure the sneers of their companions, 

to be thought strange, peculiar, to be cut off in 

a measure, ostracised, from those who would be inclined 

to consider them common people without the cultivated 

tastes of the aristocratic. The effects, however, were 

good everyway, and it will be well for all of the Lord's 

people to draw a lesson here in respect to their diet as 

well as in regard to other affairs of life which have so 

much to do in the formation of character, the character 

which is so all-important for those who would be heirs 

of the Kingdom. 

It is undoubtedly true that those who are given to 
gluttony and the use of alcoholic liquors stupefy their 
brains and are, therefore, to a certain degree disqualified 
for whatever business or other matter which may come 
before them. Some of this class may get along well in 
the world, but doubtless they would get along better 
so far as clearness of intellect is concerned if they were 
abstemious. However, it must be conceded that to 
mingle with the world, to conform to its habits and 
customs, to be the "hail-fellow-well-met" with the 
children of this world is the surest way to worldly success, 
honor of men and worldly prosperity under present 
conditions, while Satan is still the prince of this world. 
On the other hand, the abstemious course, self-denial, the 
practice of self-restraint, though disesteemed and 
sneered at by the world, is all-important in the upbuilding 
of the character likeness of Christ, and all who are 
seeking to walk in the footsteps of Jesus should remember 
this, and should endeavor to fight a good fight 
against their own appetites, their natural desires and for 
the upbuilding of themselves as New Creatures possessed 
of the new mind, the spirit of a sound mind, which associates 
with and relates to all the affairs of life, food, 
raiment, etc. 

THE POWER OF FAITH. 

Daniel and his associates, under the influence of the 
promise made to Abraham and his seed, were looking 
forward to the glorious Kingdom of the future when 
Immanuel would be King over all the earth. They were 
seeking to develop characters in accord with the will of 
God, that thus they might have a share in the better 
resurrection. We are glad for them, and are sure that 
when the new dispensation shall open up, the high 
positions which those ancient worthies will be granted 
in the earthly phase of the Kingdom will more than compensate 
them for the little self-denials which at the 
moment were no doubt severe tests of character and 
heart loyalty. And if this is true of those who are the 
heirs of the earthly phase of that Abrahamic Covenant 



how much more important to us who by the grace of 
God are living during this Gospel age and have been 
called of the Lord to joint-heirship with the Lord in the 
Spiritual Kingdom. As ours will be the still higher reward 
and the still higher station, it follows that the trial 
of our faith will be still more crucial than that of the 
ancient worthies. The Lord places us frequently where 
we have opportunities of choosing between this and that, 
and where, therefore, it becomes a matter of character 
or principle with us which we should choose. There is 
no virtue in choosing that which alone is possible to us. 
As the Scriptures declare, "The Lord your God proveth 
you, to know whether you love the Lord your God with 
all your heart and with all your soul." (Deut. 13:3.) 
In proportion to our love for the Lord will be our obedience 
to him, and obedience to him means obedience to 
the principles of righteousness for which he stands and 
which are inculcated by his Word; and principles obediently 
followed develop character, which in turn, by 
patience, perseverance, must be crystallized, become 
firm and fixed and unwavering. 

THE BLESSING OF THE LORD. 

God's blessing was upon those boys and their fixity 
of principle. He blessed them with superior wisdom, 
knowledge and grace, so that not only the eunuch perceived 
his favor in them but their companions also, and 
ultimately the king. The course of training in that 
college required three years (v. 5). At the end of that 
time the king called all the students before him and 
conversed with them, asking questions, etc. The superiority 
of the four young Hebrews was very manifest, 
and they were at once selected for officers of the king's 
court and subsequently reached very high positions of 
influence and power in the kingdom as governors, etc., 
especially Daniel. Nevertheless, as might be expected, 
this favor with God and with the king meant to a considerable 
degree the jealousy and enmity of their associates. 
We see this, for instance, in the reporting of 
Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego to the king; we see it 
also in the casting of Daniel into the lions' den, the result 
of a conspiracy amongst the various officers and wise 
men of the kingdom against Daniel. 

DARE TO BE A DANIEL. 

Here we have illustrated our Lord's words to us his 
followers, "Whosoever will live godly in this present 
time shall suffer persecution"— opposition from the 
world, the flesh and the adversary. This opposition is 
so great that many would not think for a moment of encountering 
it; they therefore are not of the special class 
whom the Lord is now seeking. Others more courageous, 
more loyal to the Lord, essay to fight the good fight, 
but when they come to realize something of the opposition 



and its weight and force and how it touches all the 

affairs of life, their hearts fail them, because they have 

not the sufficiency of faith in the Lord nor the sufficiency 

of love for him. The faithful, like Daniel, will set themselves 

for the attainment of their object at any cost. 

Their faith tells them that their object is worthy of their 

R3631 : page 282 

effort; their love inspires them, or, as the Apostle would 
say, constrains them to obedience even to the extent of 
laying down their lives in the Lord's service; neither 
count they their lives dear unto them that they may win 
Christ and be found in him. 

But there is another side to this question. There are 
compensations to be had on the Lord's side and the side 
of righteousness. Sobriety, self-denial, do not mean 
merely disappointments, trials, deprivations, oppositions, 
but they mean also the King's favor. They mean the 
satisfaction of the heart, the mind; they mean peace 
with God and peace with our own consciences, and they 
mean additionally clearness of mind and restfulness of 
heart. 

DEFILING THE TEMPLES. 

Daniel's determination not to be defiled with certain 
food reminds us of the words of the Apostle, "If any 
man defile the Temple of God, him will God destroy." 
In one sense of the word the Temple of God is the Church, 
which is now in process of construction as our Lord 
shapes, fashions and polishes the living stones for places 
therein. Whoever introduces into the Church that which 
is defiling, whoever does injury to any of its living stones, 
is an evil doer in the highest sense of that term, in that 
he is defiling, injuring the body of Christ, which is the 
Church. If all could realize this how careful all would 
be in respect to the bringing in of different errors and 
false doctrines, misinterpretations of Scripture, etc. How 
careful each then would be to see that he speaks the 
things which he does know, that he would confine himself 
to the things written in the Word of the Lord. In 
proportion as those who are right at heart see this they 
will be careful that they do nothing to defile or stumble 
or injure any of the Lord's little ones. 

In another phase of the subject the Apostle speaks 
of each body, each member of the New Creation, as a 
Temple, a Tabernacle, in which for the time being the 
holy Spirit dwells. From this standpoint we should be 
careful to have our bodies as clean, as pure, as holy as 
possible. We cannot transform our flesh to make perfect 
that which was born in sin and shapen in iniquity, but 
in proportion as the holy Spirit is received by us and in 
proportion as it has the control of us, in that same proportion 
there will be a gradual transforming power of 
the holy Spirit to work in us to will and to do God's 



good pleasure. Such should remember the instruction 
of the Apostle to all of this class, that they should purge 
out the old leaven of malice, hatred, envy, etc., and 
again his admonition that we cleanse ourselves from all 
filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit— perfecting holiness 
in the fear of the Lord.— 2 Cor. 7:1. 

We firmly believe that all who receive that grace of 
God into good and honest hearts will surely experience 
a cleansing work— that the Truth will tend to make them 
cleaner physically as well as mentally. We are not advocating 
outward cleanliness as godliness, but an inward 
cleanliness which will do all it can to accomplish an outward 
cleansing. And very generally it succeeds— the 
filthiness of the flesh in various senses of the word begin 
to disappear. In proportion as the spirit of righteousness 
and truth and love enter into the heart, filthy words, 
filthy conduct, filthy habits, filthy appearance, all begin 
to come under the control of the transformed mind. 

The Apostle distinguishes between the filthiness of 
the flesh and that of the spirit, the outward and manifest 
filthiness and the inward and secret filthiness; and, while 

R3632 : page 282 

both are important works, the latter undoubtedly is the 
more important of the two— to be cleansed from the 
filthiness of the spirit, filthiness of the mind. This refers 
not only to licentious thoughts, but to evil thoughts and 
inclinations of every kind; hatred, malice, strife, revenge, 
backbiting, evil speaking, all these come under this head 
of filthiness of the spirit. The poor tongue that utters 
the bitter words and voices the animosities is merely the 
servant of the heart, for out of the abundance of the 
heart the mouth speaketh. If there were no bitterness 
in the heart how could the tongue shoot out arrows, 
even bitter words— especially against the righteous, 
against those who are seeking to walk in the Lord's ways, 
however imperfectly— against those whom the Lord has 
covered with the robe of his righteousness? The Lord 
grant us more and more of this cleansing of the spirit, 
that we may be more and more filled with his spirit of 
love and sympathy and compassion, which does not 
readily impute evil but is full of mercy and good fruits. 



R3632 : page 282 

THE LORD IS MY KEEPER. 

-PSALM 121:5.~SEPTEMBER24.~ 

AS THE LAST lesson of the quarter this is a 
review. We can profitably look back over the 
lessons of this quarter and note that the key 
to every one of them has been the keeping power of 



God. In the first lesson we had the period of the kingdom 
under Hezekiah at the time of Sennacherib's invasion, 
and how the Lord graciously heard the prayer 
of his people and delivered them from so mighty a 
foe, before whom they trembled. The second lesson of 
the quarter showed God's power to keep the individual 
who trusts in him— that he is not only a God of nations, 
but is willing to exert his power on behalf of a solitary 
individual who reverences him and who looks to him 
in prayer. Hezekiah's deliverance from death and the 
prolongation of his life for fifteen years point this lesson, 
and while we may not similarly pray for continuation 
of the earthly life— having exchanged it, its interests 
and its concerns for the heavenly— we may 
pray for the still higher, the spiritual life, its protection, 
its prolongation everlastingly. 

The third lesson on the keeping power of God related 
to Christ's sacrifice and Isaiah's visions of Messiah's 
sufferings. Here again the keeping power of 
God, his salvation for his people, for all who have 
trusted and who, having heard of his fame, by and by 
shall trust him, are brought prominently forward. Nor 
was it, as we saw, a desertion of his son in the time of 
trial, but even his sufferings were overruled and caused 
to work out his subsequent blessing and glorious exaltation 
to the Kingdom glory. Surely he was kept 
by the great Jehovah and surely the interests of mankind 
were preserved by him. 

The fourth lesson was respecting the outcome of 
God's keeping, the blessings which he has kept in store, 

R3632 : page 283 

in reservation, which are not yet revealed except to the eye 
of faith through the promises— the Millennial blessings 
which may be enjoyed in proportion as we are able to 
exercise faith in God, the great Covenant Keeper who 
has promised and who will not fail in his promises— yea, 
who delights to be gracious— and the knowledge of 
whose glory and goodness shall soon fill the whole 
earth. 

In lesson five we had a further demonstration of 
God's mercy and power to keep as manifested toward 
Manasseh on the occasion of his repentance and prayer 
for help. In lesson six we have an illustration of God's 
power to keep those who are seeking to do his will. 
Josiah, the good king, was blessed and kept. In lesson 
seven we have a demonstration of God's power to keep 
his Word, the finding of the book of the Law. And in 
this connection also we perceive the power of the Law 
of God reflexly to keep those who hold it faithfully in 
harmony with himself. 

Lesson eight gives us a suggestion on the opposite 
side, of the loss which is sustained by those who scorn 
the Lord's Word— Jehoiakim's loss of judgment, the 
loss of his kingdom through scorning the divine messages 



sent him through Jeremiah. 

In lesson nine we again have illustrated God's power 
to keep, for he kept Jeremiah even when cast into the 
dungeon and caused his release, and thus we have 
again illustrated the fact that he is as able to keep 
today and is as willing to protect and more willing 
even to assist those who are of Spiritual Israel. 

In lesson ten we again have an illustration of a 
loss through disobedience to the Lord— Zedekiah's loss 
of the kingdom, a loss which appertained to the whole 
nation of Israel. And yet on the other hand we see 
God's faithfulness as represented in his gracious promise 
that after the kingdom of Israel had been overturned, 
overturned until the due time, it shall ultimately be 
given, as originally promised, to the great Messiah, 
the Root and Offspring of David. 

Lesson eleven is another illustration of the keeping 
power of Jehovah. The water of life which is by 
and by to issue forth is all the provision of divine love 
and mercy through Christ. God has been keeping some 
of the richest of his blessings; the world has yet known 
little of the love of God. The only revelations that have 
yet been made of God's love are in connection with the 
death of Christ, which the worldly see not in the true 
light and appreciate not, but by and by they shall see 
indeed that God has graciously kept the best of his 
blessings for a future manifestation. 

In lesson twelve we have again the keeping power 
of Jehovah as manifested in his care over Daniel and 
his associates— those who were faithful to him, loyal 
to him. And surely as Spiritual Israelites, in view of 
all these lessons of the past, we may have strong consolation 
who have fled for refuge to lay hold of the 
hopes set before us in the Gospel. We who have fled 
for refuge to Jesus, and whose hope is anchored in him 
beyond the vail, surely we shall be kept by the power of 
God through faith unto salvation, ready to be revealed 
in the last time. 



R3632 : page 283 

WEIGHED IN THE BALANCES. 

-DANIEL 5:17-30.-OCTOBER 1.- 

Golden Text:— "The face of the Lord is 
against them that do evil."— Psalm 34:16. 

DANIEL must have been an old man of nearly 
ninety years at the time of the present lesson. 
Nebuchadnezzar was dead; Nabonidus, his son 
was probably also dead, and Belshazzar, the grandson 
of Nebuchadnezzar, had but recently come to the throne 
of Babylonia. Babylon was the capital city, and from 



all descriptions must have been by far the most wonderful 
city of the world up to that time, and in some 
particulars has had no rival since. It was a very wealthy, 
luxurious city, enriched not only by the plunder of the 
palaces and temples of the nations conquered round 
about, but further enriched by the tributes paid by 
those nations year by year and by its mercantile traffic 
with all the nations of the world. 

It was not only the largest city in the world but 
the strongest fortress. The great plain on which it lay, 
a paradise of fertility and cultivation was intersected 
by countless canals, both small and great, serving alike 
for irrigation and navigation. Babylon, built on this 
fertile plain, was fourteen miles from north to south 
and fourteen miles from eat to west, and the walls 
surrounding it were 350 feet high. It had one hundred 
gates. The river Euphrates flowed through it, and was 
banked high on each side the stream with solid massive 
walls and intersected with water gates made of bronze. 
The historian says, "Babylon was the strongest fortress 
in the world. Even a small force of brave men could 
have held it for years." It would be the natural effect 
of having such riches and strength under his control 
to make the King Belshazzar proud and self-confident. 

At the time of our lesson the army of the Medes 
and Persians under the command of king Cyrus was 
besieging Babylon. This was the Cyrus whom the Lord 
through one of his prophets declared should set free his 
people, the Hebrews. To all human appearance his 
besieging of the city of Babylon would be a hopeless 
task, a failure, so strong was that fortress. Yet the 
Lord had timed the fall of Nebuchadnezzar's empire, 
and no doubt providentially guided to the accomplishment 
of the matter at the time intended. While Belshazzar 
and the people of Babylon were holding high 
revel, banquets, etc., convinced of the security, the 
impregnability of their city, Cyrus and his army were 
building a trench above the city into which in due time 
the waters of the Euphrates river were turned, and 
then, in the darkness of the night, the soldiers were 
marched through the bed of the river and gained an 
entrance to the city while its unsuspecting defenders 
were banqueting. 

VANITY AND SACRILEGE. 

On this same night the king gave a banquet in his 
chief palace to a thousand of his nobles, and lords and 
ladies of the empire residing in the city. The enemy 
was little thought of. On the contrary, Belshazzar 

R3633 : page 284 

boasted of the impregnability of the fortress, and declared 

that the gods of the Babylonians were superior 

to all others. He pointed to the subject nations surrounding 



as evidences of this, and in derision called for 

the holy vessels that had been brought by his grandfather 

Nebuchadnezzar from the Jewish Temple, that 

he and his lords might drink from these to do the honor 

of the gods of Babylon. 

It was in the midst of this blasphemy and profanation 
of the holy vessels of Jehovah's Temple that a hand 
appeared and wrote in letters of fire upon the wall of 
the palace the words, Mene, Mene, Tekel, Upharsin. 
The king, his counsellors, his nobles, the aristocracy of 
the world, were astounded and numbed. The apparition 
convinced them at once that some dire calamity 
impended. It was recognized as being of superhuman 
origin. The wise men, the astrologers, etc., were 
sent for to give an explanation and interpretation. They 
came, but failed. 

The King's mother remembered Daniel and his 
relationship with Nebuchadnezzar. She had probably 
heard of the wonderful interpretation of Nebuchadnezzar's 
vision by Daniel when all others had failed. The 
prophet was evidently well known, and not far off, 
probably still engaged in some department of the government 
service and near the palace. He soon appeared, 
and his courage on this occasion is worthy of 
remark. He had a most painful duty to perform toward 
his superiors— the king, as an autocrat, had the 
power of his life at his tongue's end. 

The king had offered both wealth and honor to the 
wise man able to give the meaning of the remarkable 
writing, but the Lord's prophet showed that he was not 
mercenary and that his interpretation was not influenced 
by any such considerations. His answer was, 
"Let thy gifts be to thyself and give thy rewards to 
another; nevertheless I will read the writing unto the 
king and make known to him the interpretation." 

Daniel briefly rehearsed to the king his knowledge 
of his grandfather's experiences— his great honor and 
dignity and success, and subsequently his loss of reason, 
when for seven years he became an outcast from 
society and was reduced to the level of the brute 
beasts; how, then, the Lord had compassion on him 
and restored his reason, and he had confessed Jehovah 
to be the true God, saying, "Now I, Nebuchadnezzar, 
praise, extol and honor the king of heaven, for all his 
works are truth and his ways judgment; and those who 
walk in pride he is able to abase." (Dan. 4:33-37.) 
King Belshazzar, knowing this, should have humbled 
himself and been reverential toward Jehovah God, and 
in so much as he had defied and boastfully and knowingly 
dishonored him, the writing upon the wall was a 
message from Jehovah to him announcing the end of his 
dominion as a just punishment for his sacrilege. 

How wonderfully timed was the whole matter! 
While these things were proceeding Cyrus' army was 
investing the city. While Daniel was explaining the 
meaning of the handwriting on the wall to be "Thou 



art tried in the balances and found wanting," the soldiers 

for the retribution were at work. King Belshazzar 

evidently recognized the truthfulness of the prophet's 

words and the justness of the divine decision. It is to 

his credit that instead of attempting to do violence to 

Daniel he honored him and made him the third in power 

in the kingdom. In a very little while the enemy was 

upon them, the king was slain, the government was 

transferred to the hands of Cyrus, and the honored 

Jew, Daniel, found in a position of trust, was made an 

officer in the new government of Medo-Persia, which 

by this overthrow of Babylonia became the second 

universal empire of the world, represented in Nebuchadnezzar's 

dream of the image by the arms of silver. 

LESSONS TO BE DRAWN. 

One lesson to be drawn from this narrative is that, 
although God had no covenant relationship with the 
other nations of the earth but only with Israel, nevertheless 
he exercised a general supervision of the other nations 
—not to the extent of chastising them and displacing 
them in the same manner that he did his covenant 
people, the seed of Abraham, but to the extent that 
they should have at least general lessons along general 
lines, that they might hear of his name although they 
had never been called to be his people, although no invitation 
was extended to them and no covenant of grace 
or peace proffered them. They were, as the Apostle 
subsequently described them, "without God, having no 
hope in the world," aliens, strangers, foreigners to the 
commonwealth of Israel. All that while the Lord hid 
from the Gentiles and from all people the ultimate purposes 
of his grace, the blessing of all the families of the 
earth. It was not yet due time either to redeem the 
world or to inform the world of the blessings that 
should ultimately flow from the great redemption that 
in the divine plan should be accomplished at Calvary. 

Another lesson is that God does actually balance, 
weigh the conduct of people; that while grace is the basis 
of all his dealings, nevertheless the grace is dispensed 
according to certain principles of righteousness and justice 
and obedience to conditions, while punishments are 
executed upon the contrary class who neglect or ignore 
the divine instruction. It was so with Belshazzar, it 
will be so with all others eventually. 

The Lord's dealings at the present time with nations 
no doubt pursue much the same lines that we see exemplified 
in Belshazzar's experiences and still further 
in the land of Canaan, when the Lord drove out the 
Canaanites, etc., when their cup of iniquity was full, and 
not before. Doubtless the Lord still deals with nations 
along these lines. For instance, the nations which have 
dealt unjustly with the Jews have been punished. Look 
at Spain, see Russia, and the nations which have persecuted 
the Spiritual Israelites. Undoubtedly these have 



received some measure of chastisements, even though 
they were long after the crime. 

If the Lord's dealings were with the individuals 
of the race— if he judged every individual, punishing 
the evil doers and rewarding the well doers promptly, 
what a change it would make in the world and how 
speedily that change would be effected. This we see 
is not the case in the present time, nor according to the 
Scriptures has it been the case in the past. The prophet 
points out the fact that the eyes of the wicked stand 
out with fatness and they have more than heart could 
wish, while some of the Lord's faithful ones are permitted 
to be in straits, in difficulties, almost in want. 
This arrangement is necessary to the divine plan for 
the present time, to the intent that the Lord's people 
must walk by faith and not by sight— to the intent 
that those who love not the Lord with all their heart, 
soul, mind and strength shall not be attracted to him 

R3633 : page 285 

by merely the hope of escaping punishment nor by the 
hope of receiving temporary rewards. The Lord seeks 
now to deal with those who can and will exercise faith 
in his gracious promises of a life to come. 

By and by, when the Kingdom shall have been established 
and the Lord's will shall be done on earth as 
in heaven, all this will be changed. Then, as the Apostle 
tells us, he that doeth righteousness shall live, and he 
who wilfully does unrighteousness shall suffer, and, 
persevering, will eventually be destroyed in the second 
death. 

The Lord's favor to Daniel in permitting him to 
have a high position in Babylonia and subsequently in 
the Medo-Persian empires is contrary to his dealings 
with Spiritual Israelites of the present time. He deals 
with us not according to the flesh but according to the 
spirit. Consequently the rewards we get for faithfulness 
to him are spiritual rewards, "much advantage 
everyway." The Lord expects that the heavenly hopes 
and prospects set before us of a participation in the 
heavenly Kingdom as joint-heirs with our Lord, the 
Messiah, will be esteemed by us as of greater value than 
the honors and dignity conferred upon the prophet 
Daniel in the past. And we, too, so esteem the matter. 
Let us continue to thus view things from God's standpoint, 
until by and by he shall say, Enough, come up 
higher. 

The poet Heine has pictured the scenes of the lesson 
as follows:— 

"In the monarch's cheeks a wild fire glowed, 

And wine awoke his daring mood. 

With daring hand, in his frenzy grim, 

The king seized a beaker and filled to the brim, 

And drained to the dregs the sacred cup, 



And foaming he cried as he drank it up, 

'Jehovah, eternal scorn I own 

To thee— I am monarch of Babylon.' 



"The yelling laughter was hushed, and all 

Was still as death in the royal hall. 

And see! And see! on the white wall high 

The form of a hand went slowly by, 

And wrote, and wrote, on the broad wall white, 

Letters of fire, and vanished in night." 



R3635 : page 285 

THE MASTER'S TOUCH. 

"In the still air the music lies unheard; 

In the rough marble beauty hides unseen: 
To make the music and the beauty, needs 

The Master's touch, the sculptor's chisel keen. 

"Great Master, touch us with Thy skillful hand; 

Let not the music that is in us die! 
Great Sculptor, hew and polish us; nor let, 

Hidden and lost, Thy form within us lie! 

"Spare not the stroke! do with us as Thou wilt! 

Let there be naught unfinished, broken, marred; 
Complete Thy purpose, that we may become 

Thy perfect image, Thou our God and Lord!" 



R3634 : page 285 

SOME INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 
THE THREE PARTS. 



Question.— Please explain the meaning of the "three 
parts" of Zech. 13:8,9: "In all the land, saith the Lord, 
two parts shall be cut off and die; but the third part shall 
be left therein, and I will bring the third part through the 
fire, and will refine them as silver is refined, and will try 
them as gold is tried. They shall call upon my name, and 
I will hear them; I will say of them, It is my people; and 
they shall say, The Lord is my God." 

Answer.— These three parts are not stated to be 
thirds or equal parts; hence we are not to so interpret 
this passage. We understand three classes to be referred 
to: the two classes that will be cut off and die we understand 



to be the "little flock" and the "great company," 

all of both classes being consecrated unto death— the one 

class, the little flock, going into death in a voluntary manner, 

sacrificing; the other class, the great company, going 

into death under adverse circumstances which would test 

their loyalty to the Lord, and prove their willingness to 

serve him even at the cost of life itself, even though they 

had not that consuming zeal which would lead them, according 

to their covenant, to self sacrifice. 

The third part that will be brought through the fire, 
refined, etc., we understand to represent the world of 
mankind, which will pass from death conditions to life 
conditions as human beings during the Millennium— 
quite probably also a large proportion of the living nations 
at the time of the establishment of the Kingdom will pass 
over and become subjects of the Kingdom without going 
into the tomb. The whole human family, except the few 
who are vitally connected with Christ, are already reckoned 
dead with Adam and they all will be granted an 
opportunity for coming, through the divine processes of 
the Millennial age, back to the full perfection of human 
life lost by father Adam's transgression. All such as are 
thus returned to harmony with God will indeed recognize 
him as such, and he will recognize them as his people. 

PERFECT, WITH LIMITED KNOWLEDGE. 



Question.— A question sometimes brought up which 
I am a little at a loss to answer, is: If Adam was perfect 
how could he sin? This question is usually followed by a 
statement that a perfect person cannot make a mistake. I 
usually answer that there is a difference in perfection of 
being and perfection of character, but they usually reply 
that if Adam's character was not perfect then he was in a 
state of imperfection, requiring evolution to perfect him. 
It is here that I feel unable to answer, unless by saying 
that only omniscience could secure perfection of character 
even with perfection of being. 

Answer.— You have answered the question well. 
Adam was perfect as a man, but lacked experience. We 
must not however, say that he was perfect in knowledge 
for this would be a fallacious statement, a misuse of 
the word perfect. The man is one thing and his 
knowledge is another thing. When mankind shall have 
reached perfection in the end of the Millennial age it will 
not mean that it has attained all knowledge on every subject. 
Quite to the contrary, we may reasonably suppose that to 
all eternity mankind will be privileged to progress in his 
knowledge of the greatness, goodness and wisdom of God. 
The only thing necessary to Adam's trial was that he 
should understand that obedience was required, and that 
the penalty of disobedience would be the loss of his life 

R3634 : page 286 



privileges. He would have this degree of knowledge, and 
he therefore sinned intelligently. As the Apostle declares, 
"Adam was not deceived." 

We are to remember that the perfect Adam had a good 
character in the sense of having a well-balanced judgment, 
pre-disposed to righteousness by virtue of his organization in 
the image and likeness of his Creator, but he was not created 
a machine. If we make a perfect machine it cannot 
fail to do exactly the thing it was intended to do, because 
it is entirely without ability to do otherwise. But God 
made man in his own likeness, a free moral agent— free to 
choose his own way, whether of obedience unto life or of 
disobedience unto death. The very fact that he was given 
such a choice proves that he was perfect, that the ability 
for either right doing or wrong-doing was his; his reason 
for choosing the wrong way was, evidently, as you suggest, 
his lack of knowledge. Had he been omniscient, like 
his Creator, able to comprehend the end from the beginning, 
undoubtedly he would not have transgressed. But 
it was not God's purpose to make an omniscient being, 
and Adam was not omniscient, neither will the perfectly 
restored human family be omniscient. God's requirement 
of his creatures is not that they must know as well as he, 
but that they should have confidence in him, should trust 
implicitly to his judgment, and realize that thus in him 
they live and move and have their being. Their perfection 
will never be divine, but human perfection, subjected 
to and guided by divine wisdom and revelation. 

OUR FEELINGS RE GOD'S CALL. 



Question.— Does the fact that I do not feel so great a 
craving for the gift of immortality as some others express, 
indicate that I have not been called to the high calling, 
but to the earthly calling, to restitution? My desire seems 
to be to live justly, righteously, rather than to live saintly 
and sacrificingly. Is this a further indication along the 
same line as the above? 

Answer.— No; our feelings or aspirations are not the 
call. Otherwise it would imply that we do our own calling. 
Speaking of our priesthood, the Apostle declares, 
"No man taketh this honor to himself but he that is called 
of God," (Heb. 5:4), and the place to ascertain what is 
God's call is not in our feelings but in God's own Word 
of revelation. He declares through the inspired Apostle, 
"Ye are all called in one hope of your calling." (Eph. 4:4.) 
This contradicts the thought that there might be two callings, 
an earthly and a heavenly, from which we might choose. 
Our feelings depend largely upon our natural constitutions, 
influenced by the experiences of life, and hence they are 
unreliable except as they are regulated or created by the 
inspiring and transforming influences of the Scriptures. 
In other words, our spiritual hopes are begotten in us by the 



word of grace. What we must do is to let this truth, the 
divine promise, dwell in our hearts more and more richly, 
and as the Apostle says, "Think on these things." As 
you do so they will enlarge before your mental eye, and 
you will gradually come to see more of their richness and 
value. 

We have heretofore pointed out that we are living in 
the harvest or end of the Gospel age, and that the Millennial 
age in some measure laps on to this harvest and has a 
beginning here. We have also shown that in this harvest 
time, and especially in the great time of trouble with 
which it will end, God is dealing with a restitution class. 
But to deal with and prepare a class for the restitution favors 
is a wholly different matter from extending such a call. 
To our understanding no such call to restitution blessings 
will ever be issued. In God's due time restitution laws 
will prevail in the world and whoever obeys then will begin 
to experience actual restitution; whoever rejects will 
promptly receive retribution. If a restitution call were now 
in progress it would imply that whoever accepted it would 
begin at once to experience the blessings of restitution- 
relief from aches and pains, and from mental and physical 
imperfections and weaknesses— legitimate restitution 
work, such as we expect will progress during the Millennial 
age as soon as it shall be fully ushered in and the laws and 
judgments for that age have been promulgated.— Acts 3:25. 

As for us who have now tasted of God's grace, it is 
not for us to dictate to the Lord what portions of blessing 
we prefer, but rather to accept thankfully such favors as 
he shall be pleased to tender us, and he has tendered us 
the exceeding great and precious things, far better than the 
restitution privileges of the race in general. 

Your desire for a life of righteousness is a proper one. 
This is the first lesson we are to learn as soon as we find 
out that we and others of our race are fallen and imperfect 
creatures by heredity. As soon as we have learned of our 
own blemishes and look to the Lord, he points us to 
Christ as the only way of approach to him, "the Way, the 
Truth, the Life." Realizing our need of just such a Savior 
to justify us from sin and to help us out of its miry 
clay and to put our feet upon the Rock, we gratefully accept, 
lay hold of the Lord by faith. We are thus justified 
freely from all things through faith. Then we start to live 
the justified life, a life of righteousness, soberness, honesty, 
truth, godliness. We proceed but a short time ere 
we learn that such a reasonable and consistent life will 
cost us something— that it will involve self-sacrifices, self-denials, 
misrepresentations, etc., because the mass of those 
around us know not the Lord and seek not to walk in the 
ways of righteousness. The darkness that is in them 
comes speedily into conflict with the light that has come 
into us, and hence our Lord's statement, "Whosoever will 
live godly shall suffer persecution." This means the 
place of turning back for quite a good many who espoused 
the Lord's cause. It means the time of forsaking the 
principles of righteousness, truth, etc., a time for compromises, 



with the world, the flesh and the devil, for the sake 

of peace and earthly prosperity, and alas! too many yield. 

But those who are loyal to the Lord and the principles of 

righteousness thus reach a crisis point, and those who decide 

that they will follow righteousness, follow the Lord 

whatever the cost, thereby take the step of full consecration 

—whether they realize that it is another step or not. 

In other words, the maintenance of justification by faith 

will sooner or later mean consecration, self-sacrifice. We 

are not to expect that we will love the experience of sacrificing, 

at least not in the beginning of our experience. 

We love the right principles and are learning to sacrifice 

rather than violate them, but no chastisement, no 

discipline, seemeth at the time joyous, but rather grievous. 

R3635 : page 287 

Nevertheless, in the Lord's providence, those who 

make such sacrifices for principle's sake are blessed by him 

with keener and deeper insight into the word of truth 

by the spirit of adoption which he bestows upon those 

who are thus exercised; and those clearer insights into 

things which God hath in reservation for them that 

love him, eventually outweigh the trials and difficulties of 

the pathway, so that with the Apostle we are enabled to 

say, "I count all things but as loss and dross that I may 

win Christ." The sufferings of this present time are not 

worthy to be compared with the glories that shall be revealed 

in us; but, as before stated, this is the experience 

only of those who have made considerable progress in the 

new way, and whose sacrifices of self interest have brought 

to them the Lord's providence, blessings of head and of 

heart, which none can appreciate fully except those who 

have experienced them. 

So then, in summing up, let us say that our failure 
to rightly appreciate the great blessings which God has 
attached to the call of this Gospel age is not a sign that 
we have not received the call, but it is a sign that we have 
not clearly and fully appreciated it. We are to credit 
ourselves for a great deal of ignorance, and to correspondingly 
trust the Lord's wisdom, just as little children should 
realize their own inexperience to judge of values and 
should look to their parents to judge for them. The 
Scriptures point out our ignorance on this subject, saying, 
"Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it entered 
into the heart of man the things that God hath in reservation 
for them that love him." 

The Lord has chosen for us the things which he is 
pleased to offer to us, and those who come to a clear 
knowledge of the Truth and who then deliberately reject 
the grace of God, would seem to do despite to the Lord's 
favor. This the Apostle seems to imply when he says, 
If we neglect so great salvation how shall we escape?— 
what assurance would there be that we would not reject a 
lesser favor? We cannot appreciate either except as the 
Lord instructs us respecting their values. 



WHO MAY PROPERLY MEMORIALIZE? 



Question.— Is it correct to say that the "sacrament," 
the Memorial Supper, symbolizes the appropriation of 
Christ's righteousness by faith in his sacrifice? If so, has 
not a person who is justified by faith, but who has not yet 
made a consecration, a perfect right to partake of the 
emblems? 

Answer.— The only object of justification in this present 
age is to fit or enable the justified one to make his 
consecration and whoever does not so use his justification 
as to obtain thereby consecration and begettal to the new 
nature is to that extent receiving the grace of God in 
vain— failing to make use of it. Just as though a wealthy 
friend should give a poorer one an order on his store for 
goods, saying: "Upon the presentation of this order by 
John Blank or Mary Blank at my store at any time during 
the year 1905, he shall be privileged to purchase such 
goods as he may desire at one-tenth of their actual price, 
ninety per cent, of all their purchases being charged to 
me." If John Blank or Mary Blank failed to present this 
order during the year, and thus failed to buy any goods 
during the specified period, the order would be practically 
valueless to them, because they did not take advantage of 
its favorable terms. Just so now, any who are justified by 
faith have the privilege of consecrating themselves and being 
accepted in the Beloved, and thereby the privilege of 
obtaining the exceeding great and precious promises at 
the small cost of sacrificing present privileges; and whoever 
does not so use his justification during this age to 
obtain the high calling may be said to have profited nothing 
by it, for it lapses with the end of this life, and must 
be renewed, if at all, in the next life, upon the same conditions 
and terms as to all the remainder of humanity. 

Applying this to the Memorial Supper: the Memorial 
Supper not only represents the eating of the bread, the 
symbol of our justification, but it also represents the partaking 
of the cup, fellowship in the sufferings of Christ. 
These two thoughts are linked together in the symbol, 
and may not be sundered in our application of it. It 
would not, therefore, be proper for any to participate in 
the Memorial Supper except such as have not only been 
justified by partaking of Christ's righteousness, but who 
additionally have become joint-heirs in sacrifice with him, 
drinking of his cup. 

JUSTICE A PART OF CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT. 



Question.— In Proverbs 16:11 we read, "A just weight 
and balance are the Lord's." Should we not, therefore, 
seek to develop the characteristic of love, rather than of 



justice, leaving the matter of justice until such times as 
we shall be perfected and enthroned, and thus be enabled 
to act upon the principle of justice, the foundation of 
God's throne? 

Answer.— We should apprehend the principle of justice 
now without waiting until we are made perfect. We 
should seek to note the operation of divine justice and the 
operations of justice and injustice in humanity, with special 
notice and criticism of ourselves. He who fails to 
appreciate justice must of necessity proportionately fail to 
appreciate mercy, for mercy is merely the difference between 
love and justice. We are to seek to note the principle 
of justice in our dealings with others, and to "deal 
justly and keep judgment," as the Lord directs, but we 
are to compensate for our own imperfection and the imperfection 
of others by permitting love to govern, and to 
cover all the multitude of faults in those with whom we 
have to do. Nevertheless, we are to seek to view our own 
conduct in the light of justice, and with as few allowances 
as possible for our own imperfections. 

SANCTIFICATION OF THE SPIRIT. 



Question.— Please explain the latter part of 1 Pet. 1:2, 
"Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, 
through sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience 
and the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ." 

Answer.— None are to be considered of the elect who 
have not experienced sanctification of the spirit— of the 
mind, of the will; and more than this, it must be such a 
sanctification as will lead on to obedience— a desire to 
know and to do the will of the Lord to the extent of 
our ability. And this obedience would not be sufficient 
to commend us to God, because we are weak through the 
fall. It needs, therefore, additionally, in compensation 
for our blemishes, the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus— 
the merit or covering of his righteousness made available 
to us by his death and appropriated by our faith. 



page 289 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVI. OCTOBER 1, 1905. No. 19 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 291 

Romanism's Losses and Gains 291 

Church and State in France 291 

To Abandon Sovereignty 292 

"The Sun of Righteousness Shall Arise" 292 

"Devils Also Believe 293 

The Editor's Western Tour 293 

Bible Study for October 295 

"Greater is He that is on our Part" 295 

The Prayers of a Righteous Man 297 

The Angel of the Lord Delivered Him 299 

In the Wilderness (Poem) 300 

Returning from Babylon 300 

"Come Out of Her, My People" 301 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers 302 

page 290 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R3635 : page 290 

ABOUT PAPER-COVERED DAWNS. 



Since the exclusion of paper-covered DAWNS from cheap 
postage privileges the cost of mailing has been almost equal to 
the price of the books; hence we have made a special effort to 
bring the cloth and leather editions before the friends, partly 
because the price is little more than the present rate would be 
on the paper bound books, and partly because those better 
bound are much more substantial as well as attractive in 
appearance. 

There will therefore be no further edition of DAWN printed in 
book form in paper covers. If orders for same are received we 
shall have to hold for further instructions, or return the 
remittance. 

Since, however, there is need for a cheap edition of Vol. I. 
for missionary purposes, we issued, as a special number of the 
WATCH TOWER, Vol. I. in magazine form. This edition is not 
an abridgement; it constitutes the entire book, except the 
"Appendix" and Scripture Index, and is excellent for introducing 
the Truth to those who show some interest. We have 
plenty of these on hand to fill orders. The price is 5c each, 
postpaid, in U.S. or Canada; 9c each to other foreign countries, 
in any quantity, to one or various addresses. This 
edition is published both in English and in German. 



R3636 : page 291 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
ROMANISM'S LOSSES AND GAINS. 



WHILE Roman Catholicism has been steadily 
losing ground in priest-ridden lands— Italy, 
France, Mexico, etc.,— it has of late been making 
headway in Protestant countries— Great Britain, 
Germany and the United States. 

President Roosevelt's latest appointee to his cabinet, 
Secretary Bonaparte, a Roman Catholic, is the 
attorney who was influential in securing a large sum 
from the Indian funds for Catholic schools. At the recent 
Young People's Christian Endeavor Society's gathering 
in Baltimore, Secretary Bonaparte, who represented 
the President, was one of the special attractions. 

SECRETARY TAFT'S TRIBUTE 



Manila, Aug. 10.— "I do not think I can illustrate 
better the character of Theodore Roosevelt than to say 
what he has said: 'I wish as President of the United 
States to act toward the Roman Catholic Church as I 
would have a President who was a Roman Catholic act 
toward the Protestant churches,'" said Secretary Taft 
tonight, responding to the toast, "The President," at a 
dinner given to the male members of the Taft party by 
Archbishop Harty. 

Mr. Taft said the relations between the United 
States government and the Roman Catholic Church have 
been made closer by the government's occupation of 
the Philippines and Porto Rico, where formerly Church 
and State were intimately connected. Although the separation 
of the Church from the State was necessitated, 
he said, nevertheless an association between the two 
was established thereby which has never before existed. 

KAISER GREETS ROMAN CATHOLICS 

Berlin, Aug. 10.— Emperor William, alluding to 
Polish discontent in a speech made yesterday at a dinner 
at Gnesen, Prussia, said he wished each Roman 
Catholic Pole to know that his religion was honored by 
his emperor. 

"In my last visit to the Vatican," said his majesty, 
"the great Leo XIII. held me with both hands and, notwithstanding 
that I am a Protestant, gave me his blessing. 
You are my fellow-workers, and Germanism 
stands for culture and for freedom for every one in religion, 
in thought and in achievement." 

CHURCH AND STATE IN FRANCE. 



"The passing of the bill for the separation of Church 
and State in France, an event of first-class importance, 
has hardly secured the attention from the press of this 
country to which it is entitled. The Chamber of Deputies 
gave a majority of upward of a hundred in favor of 
the measure, which will not become law until it has received 
the approval of the Senate, from which, however, 
no serious difficulty appears to be anticipated. 

"Thus the concordat entered into between Napoleon 
and Pius the Seventh in 1801 has been practically 
abolished. This instrument regulated the relations between 
the government and Protestants and Jews, as well 
as Roman Catholics. The Protestant pastors, the Jewish 
rabbis, and Roman Catholic priests and bishops have 
received stipends from the government since 1804 under 
its provisions, though the vast preponderance of the 
latter gave them the advantage. The new measure is 
an approach to absolute religious freedom, but not entirely 
so, for the government contemplates the payment 



of stipends to those who at present draw salaries, but 

new priests and other religious functionaries will henceforth 

be compelled to rely upon their congregations for 

support. The government claims the ownership of religious 

edifices, but will lease them to local associations 

and to groups of local associations forming episcopal 

sees. 

"Whatever may be the practical working of the 
measure it undoubtedly implies a loss of ecclesiastical 
prestige, as the protest of the five cardinal archbishops 
and the French bishops practically admits, when it 
cries out for the preservation of the concordat. Italy 
bears testimony to the same tendency. There the 
Pope has issued an encyclical, under the terms of which 
Italian Catholics are declared to be at liberty to exercise 
their political rights, and the non-expedit policy of 
Pius the Ninth and Leo the Thirteenth is thus reversed. 
The Pope says: 'Catholic activities must find 
a field in the promotion of all those practical measures 
which are dictated by the study of social and economic 
science, by the condition of civil affairs, by the political 

R3636 : page 292 

life of the state.' After this it is not surprising 
that negotiations should be reported as being carried 
on between the Vatican and the Quirinal looking to the 
surrender of the temporal power in consideration of 
the payment of the arrears accumulated under the 
guarantee laws. These, the annual sums guaranteed 
by the Italian government and refused by the Pope's 
predecessors, now aggregate about twenty-two millions 
of dollars. There appears to be little doubt that a basis 
of agreement will be reached, and that the Pope 
will resign all claims to temporal sovereignty. 

"So, little by little, power passes from the hands 
of the Popes of Rome."— San Francisco Argonaut. 

TO ABANDON SOVEREIGNTY. 



"No matter what is said in Vienna, I have positive 
information that Emperor Francis Joseph will go to 
Rome in the fall to visit King Victor Emmanuel, and 
will stay for several days in the Quirinal as the guest of 
the king, and before he returns to Vienna he will visit 
the Pope in the Vatican. 

"Pope Pius, who is anxious to end the long feud 
between the Church and State in Italy, and who also 
would like to see the difficulties which have arisen between 
Italy and Austria smoothed over, has personally 
arranged this visit. 

"The importance of this visit cannot be overlooked, 
as it means that His Holiness has definitely decided to 
abandon all claims to the old temporal sovereignty of 



the Church and to accept a fact which was established 
thirty-four years ago— the consolidation of the Italian 
kingdom, with Rome as its capital. 

"After October at least there will no longer be a 
'Prisoner of the Vatican,' and Romans will see Pope 
Pius walking or driving through the streets of Rome 
and making a friendly call upon the king and queen in 
the Quirinal."— Jean de Bonnefon, Paris. 

WHY HE WAS NOT A CHURCH-MEMBER. 



Rev. Hiram C. Hadyn, referring to the late Secretary 
of State, John Hay, said in a sermon in Cleveland, 
O., recently:— 

"Hay was not, so far as I know, a member of any 
church. Once he stated his reason. It is characteristic. 
He said: 'My faith in Christ is implicit. I am a 
believer. I am in fullest sympathy with all that the 
Church mainly stands for, but I feel that to unite with 
it formally I should be in full accord with its methods, 
creeds and aims, and I cannot go that far.'" 

Whether Grant, Lincoln, Hay and other men of 
recognized character had too much heart or too much 
head, or too much of both with too much honesty, to 
join any of the sects and subscribe to any of their 
creeds we know not, but we surmise the latter. 

INSANITY AFTER REVIVALS. 



An investigation made by the State Board of Control 
of Charitable Institutions, Topeka, Kan., during the 
last week shows that the counties in which lengthy religious 
revivals have been held during the last year have 
the high records for the number of insane persons sent 
to the State asylum. 

"Insanity," says H. C. Bowman, a member of the 
board, "seems to have followed the religious revivals 
like an epidemic. Reno county, where there was a protracted 
revival early last year, has sent 32 insane persons 
to the State asylum in Topeka in twelve months. 
I find that this epidemic of insanity has also followed 
the revivals which were held in Topeka, Arkansas City, 
Winfield, Wichita and other places." 

"THE SUN OF RIGHTEOUSNESS SHALL ARISE." 



The Women's Board of Foreign Missions has published 
the diagram which we reproduce below. It 
speaks of their appreciation of the difference between 
the Darkness and the Light. And yet it shows too 



brightly. There are really no such light spots as the 

illustration shows. The civilized communities thus represented 

are but drab at very most, not white. The 

very few who in the Lord's esteem are white are those 

of whom the Apostle says, "The righteousness of the 

Law is fulfilled in us who walk not after the flesh but 

after the Spirit." 

R3637 : page 292 

"For the happy beam of day 
That shall chase their gloom away- 
Waiting! Waiting!" 

DARKNESS 
AND LIGHT 
IN 
AFRICA 

"The restless millions wait 
The light whose dawning 

Maketh all things new. 
Christ also waits— 
But men are slow and late. 
Have we done what we could 

Have I? Have you?" 

Alas! how much darkness prevails in the mind of 
the one who wrote that stanza. She evidently knew 
not or forgot that God has promised a glorious Day, 
which shall chase sin's shadows quite away. The 
writer intimates that "Christ also waits" for the poor 
puny arm of flesh which in nineteen centuries has accomplished 
so little. 

Ah, no! Thank God for a better hope, the hope of 
the Gospel, which as an anchor to our souls enters 
within the vail, fastened to Christ, the power of God 
unto salvation to every one that believeth. Our hope began 
in God's Oath-bound Covenant to Abraham, "In 
thy Seed all the families of the earth shall be blest." 

We see Christ Jesus our Redeemer as this "Seed," 

R3637 : page 293 

and we see the work of the Spirit during this Gospel 
age calling, drawing, gathering from among men "the 
very elect" to be "the Bride, the Lamb's wife," and we 
hear the Apostle's testimony, "If ye be Christ's then are 
ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise." 

Glory to our God! We rejoice not only that all 
the world shall yet "come to a knowledge of the truth 
that they may be saved," but that Christ is not "waiting" 
on us, but is selecting, or electing, his Church to 
be his co-workers as the "royal priesthood" in Kingdom 
glory, to do the work of instructing and judging (Rev. 5:10) 
and uplifting and restoring (Acts 3:20,21) all who 



prove willing and obedient "in that day." We are glad 
to note also that the called and chosen are in "the 
school of Christ" now, for their development and testing, 
and that our light afflictions may thus "work out 
for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of 
glory." (2 Cor. 4:17.) Would that all of God's true 
children could see these things eye to eye with us! And 
we believe that they will very shortly now; that the 
Lord's plan will shortly be hid only to the perverse or 
cold hearted. 

"DEVILS ALSO BELIEVE." 



We remember the above statement of Holy Writ, 
and also the fact that demons once cried out to our 
Lord, "We know thee whom thou art, the Holy One of 
God," and further how a damsel possessed of a demon 
followed Paul and Silas certain days crying: "These be 
the servants of the Most High God, which show unto 
us the way of eternal life." 

These are proofs that the demons keep in touch with 
earth's affairs, and that at times they have attempted 
to make capital out of their knowledge: for we are not 
to suppose that they really sought to serve the Truth 
or to proclaim it except with selfish, evil intentions. 

The above thoughts came to us as we recently read 
the predictions of some noted astrologers, whose information 
we credit to the spirit demons and not to ability 
to read destiny in the stars. One of these in particular 
closely touches dates and incidents on the line of 
our Scriptural expectations as follows:— 

ASTROLOGICAL PREDICTIONS OF OUR TIME 

"In a dozen publications of this present springtime 
over all Europe astrologers agree that an extraordinary 
period is approaching. In the first place Saturn enters 
the sign of the Fishes in April, 1905, to remain there 
during 1906 and 1907. He will come out only in July, 
1908. And these conjunctions, most rare in astrology, 
promise to be particularly hard on France. 

"Each year the sun remains in the Fishes from 
Feb. 20 to March 20. It will be then in conjunction 
with Saturn, therefore, in 1906, 1907 and 1908. Combined 
with divers halts in the signs of the Crab and the 
Scorpion, this move of the sun threatens internal war 
and revolution for France, ending in the fall of the republic. 
The great troubles will commence in 1907 in a 
'people's revolt.' There will be pillages, burning cities, 
massacres and the temporary domination of the 
lower orders. 'The year 1907,' declares one astrologer, 
'will see the triumph of the populace and the reproduction 
of the worst days of the first revolution. I will 
add that this year, which seems marked as one of the 



most fatal in the history of all times, reproduces all the 
conjunctions of 1572— the year of the massacre of St. 
'Bartholomew!' Twice only have the same conjunctions 
happened since— in 1793-4, the year of the terror, 
and in 1848, that other year of revolution in France. 

"For France, at least, peace will not be reestablished 
until 1914, when a 'warrior king'— 'he who is to 
establish the reign of good'— will set things to rights. 
This 'Caesar imperator,' realizing the astral reproduction 
of Napoleon I., will commence to manifest his 
presence in 1914, and will be definitely crowned in 1916 
or 1917. Until then— alas! poor France!"— Sterling 
Heilig. 



R3637 : page 293 

THE EDITOR'S WESTERN TOUR. 

STARTING on the evening of August 29th, we 

were speeded with kind wishes to ourselves 

and all the dear household of faith whom 

we hoped to meet later by twenty-five of the "brethren," 

fully half of whom were of the Bible House family. 

As we parted the song floated out, "God be with 

you till we meet again." 

The next morning found us in Chicago, where about 
200 friends had assembled, waiting for us— including 
some from nearby places. We addressed them on the 
subject of "Consecration," and subsequently fourteen 
symbolized their vows in water baptism. 

The afternoon session was attended by about 400, 
whose attention was directed to the words of the Apostle 
Peter, "God resisteth the proud, but showeth favor 
to the humble; humble yourselves, therefore, under the 
mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due 
time." 

Although we took the midnight train for St. Louis, 
nevertheless about a dozen of the dear friends were 
there to see us off and bid us God-speed. May divine 
mercy and grace and peace be their portion too. They 
assured us that their hearts and prayers went with us, 
though they could not go farther in person. 

ST. LOUIS OUR NEXT STOP 

We had a warm welcome at St. Louis, too, and the 
attendance was excellent, notwithstanding the fact that 
we did not get the announcement into the WATCH TOWER, 
and hence but few came from nearby towns. 

The morning session was in the "Christian Church" 
edifice. The topic was "Consecration," and following it 
nine symbolized full consecration by water baptism. 
Among the number was Brother Alexander Stewart, 
well known throughout the South for the active and 



prominent part he took in the war of the Rebellion, 
as the leader of "Stewart's Cavalry." General Stewart 
is of advanced years, but clear of intellect. He 
has been a "soldier of the Cross" for some time, and 
deeply interested in "Present Truth" for several years. 
He expected to be symbolically baptized at the time of 

R3637 : page 294 

the Chattanooga Convention, but was prevented by ill 
health. 

After leaving the water Brother Stewart was heard 
to express great satisfaction at having thus outwardly 
confessed his blessed Lord and his full devotion to Him 
and His cause. Brother Stewart already had joined the 
army of the Lord, but by this act of public confession 
he, so to speak, donned his regimentals and joined the 
forces "on the firing line." May he loyal prove and 
true to the end of the way, and with all the faithful receive 
the crown of life which fadeth not away. 

How sectional lines, race and party prejudices and 
all the distinctions of wealth and fame gradually fade 
from the minds of those who become by God's grace and 
truth members prospective of the royal priesthood, the 
holy nation, the peculiar people, called for a purpose, 
even to show forth the praises of him who called us out 
of darkness into his marvellous light! 

With this erstwhile warrior, but more recently college 
president and later U.S. Commissioner, none others 
of the nine were of the same rank or education, yet they 
all were on the same level of divine mercy through Christ 
—justified and sanctified through the grace of our Lord. 
The assorted company well illustrated the Apostle's 
words, "Not many great, not many wise, not many 
learned, hath God chosen." 

One of these nine was a child of twelve years, a 
very unusual sight with us. Child though she was she 
gave good evidence of a clear appreciation of what she 
did, so that we could not question her acceptability with 
the Lord. We could not help a mental reflection on 
how extremes meet in the family of God— in the body 
of Christ. The tall man, full of years and ripe in the 
learning of this world, and the little girl, on the threshold 
of life every way, had both heard the voice of Jesus 
say, Come unto me and have your sins forgiven, and 
find rest for your souls and find eternal life. "All of the 

R3638 : page 294 

Lord's followers meet on this common level. "All ye 
are brethren," "One is your Master, even Christ." 

Some may have almost envied the great man, but 
we doubt not he almost envied the little child, who, 
starting thus early to follow the footsteps of Jesus, had 
apparently reached nearly the same point at the 
same time by the shorter journey. "They that seek 



me early shall find me"— the more easily. Nevertheless, 

the General's learning and influence may be turned 

to the greater advantage if wisely used in the service of 

our King. May he, may we all, prove faithful to the 

cause of him who loved us and bought us with his precious 

blood. 

Again we took a night train— this time for Kansas 
City. Again a crowd escorted us to the depot and bade 
us God-speed. Joined by two at the start and two more 
at Chicago our party now numbered five, and we learned 
that others would join us further on. 

AT KANSAS CITY 

We had a splendid time at Kansas City, Mo. The 
dear friends gave us as warm a reception as did the 
weather, which is saying a great deal for them. The 
morning session was a praise and testimony meeting 
and many availed themselves of the opportunity to 
show forth the praises of him who "called us out of darkness 
into his marvellous light." 

In the afternoon about one hundred and fifty were 
present at a gathering for the interested only and not 
advertised to the public; many of them were from other 
parts of Missouri, and from Iowa, Nebraska and Kansas. 
Our subject was, "The called ones according to his purpose," 
and how to these all things work for good if received 
in faith and obedience and love. 

The evening session was for all— the public included 
—"To Hell and Back. Who are there? Hope for many 
of them." We had the closest of attention from a 
packed audience of about 600, and left them in haste 
by a side door just in time to get our train for Denver. 
As we left, the friends united in the song-prayer, "God 
be with you till we meet again," a sentiment fully reciprocated 
by our hearts. 

THE DENVER TWO-DAY CONVENTION 

A ride of a night and day brought us to Denver 
on Saturday night at 10.30 o'clock, where a group had 
been keeping vigil for us for over seven hours, because 
our train was delayed. Meantime five more had joined 
our party. We were cordially received, and although 
the G.A.R. encampment had brought hosts of people 
our bespoken quarters were soon at our disposal, and, 
with the Lord's blessing, we awoke Sunday morning 
refreshed for further service for the "King" and his 
"brethren" and the "household." 

Brother Hall opened the services with an address 
of welcome from the Denver Church and introduced 
Brother Harrison (Pilgrim) as the permanent chairman 
of the Convention. The latter made some fitting remarks 
and soon after threw the meeting open as a 
prayer, praise and testimony service, according to 
program. 



The afternoon service was advertised and public 
the topic being "To Hell and Back," etc. A fine audience 
was present and excellent attention was given. 
It is hoped that some of the audience of 475 got some 
further opening of the eyes of their understanding respecting 
our Creator's gracious character, testified to by 
the glorious plan he has outlined for us in his Word. 

The evening discourse had for its text the story of 
Gideon and his band, typical of Jesus and his faithful 
followers and their ultimate victory over the forces of 
evil, typically represented in the hosts of Midian. This 
discourse many of our readers already have, as it was 
reported in the Pittsburgh Dispatch. 

MONDAY'S SESSIONS 

Monday's services were held in the South Broadway 
Christian Church. At 9 o'clock we had another 
praise and testimony service, followed by a discourse 
by Brother Harrison on "By his knowledge shall my 
righteous servant justify many." (Isa. 53:11.) The 
speaker showed how important is knowledge. Without 
it Adam failed, with it Christ Jesus was a victor. Likewise 

R3638 : page 295 

knowledge is necessary to the followers of Jesus who 
would make their calling and election sure. Knowledge 
is not the end but closely connected as a part of 
the means of our victory over sin and death and 
selfishness. 

Our afternoon discourse was on "Baptism: true 
and false"— a review of the topic presented in MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, Vol. VI. The baptistry was at our service, 
and 20 symbolized the full surrender of their wills to 
the Lord— the immersion of their wills into his will in 
all things and their rising to newness of life, to be attained 
perfectly in the First Resurrection. 

This was the last session of the Convention proper, 
and, bidding the dear friends adieu and God-speed in 
hope of meeting in the Kingdom, we were just in time 
for the 6 p.m. train for Ogden, Utah, our next appointment. 
However, as the building was at our disposal, 
it was decided to hold a post-Convention meeting in 
the same place, and Brother Harrison, missing the 
Ogden stop, remained for this meeting also. 



R3638 : page 295 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDY FOR OCTOBER. 

-SEE PREFACE OF WATCH TOWER BIBLES 
AND WATCH TOWER, MARCH 1, 1905.- 



BROTHERLY KINDNESS (BROTHERLY LOVE) 

21. How should brotherly-love treat a slanderous report 
against an elder or other brethren? F.293 (par. 1) 

to 294 par. 1,2; Z/02-200 (1st col. par. 1). 

22. How should the Church exercise brotherly-kindness 
toward those who "walk disorderly"? 1 Thess. 5:14; F.292, 
par. 2; F.298,299; F.303, par. 1; F.307, 

par. 2; Z/02-198 (2nd col. par. 1), to 199 (1st and 
2ndcols.);Z.'02-311 (1st col. par. 1). 

23. How should the Elders exercise brotherly-love in 
reproving the "unruly"? Z. '03-189 (1st col. par. 
2);F.300,301. 

24. How may we avoid judging one another as individuals? 
Matt. 18:15-18; Z/99-41 (1st col. par. 3, 

and 2nd col.); F.289-292; Z/00-217 (1st col. 

par. 1,2); F.402, par. 2, to 406; F.414, par. 2, to 417. 

25. How should brotherly -kindness be exercised toward 
brethren who have doctrinal "hobbies"? Rom. 14:1; 

F. 317, par. 1, and 318, par. 1. 

26. What is the relation between brotherly-kindness and 
"the unity of the faith"? Eph. 4:11-16; F.239, 

par. 1, to 240, par. 1; F.326 to 328; Z/01-295 (1st col. 
par. 1); Z.'03-6 (1st col. par. 3, and 2nd col. par. 1,2). 

27. How should brotherly-kindness deal with serious 
offenders in the Church? F.302; F.417, par. 2 and 
418. 

28. By what rules are "false brethren" to be judged? 
See Topical Index of Watch Tower Bible, under 
"Brethren." 

29. What should be our attitude toward "sittings" 
among the brethren? 1 Cor. 11:19; Z/98-334, 
(2nd col. par. 1) and 335. 

30. What should be the attitude of all "true sacrificers" 
toward each other and toward those who have 

left "the Holy"? T.62, par. 1,2,3; F.478, par. 2, 
and 1st half of par. 3. 



R3638 : page 295 

"GREATER IS HE THAT IS ON OUR PART." 

-DANIEL 6: 10-23. -OCTOBER 8.- 

Golden Text:— "The angel of the Lord encampeth 
round about them that fear him, and delivereth them." 
-Psa. 34:7.- 

KING Darius of this lesson has not yet been located 

in profane history, consequently higher critics 

hold this as against the authenticity of the book 

of Daniel. However, it is but a short time since they 

denied the reality of Belshazzar of our last lesson: only 

recently his name was found on some of the monuments 



of that period. Doubtless the same will be true in regard 
to "Darius, the Mede." Our surmise is that he may have 
been Cyrus the Mede, and that the name Darius was 
merely an official title— as, for instance, in Germany 
Emperor William is called the kaiser, and in Russia 
Emperor Nicholas is styled the czar. Similarly, Cyrus 
may at times have been called Darius, just as subsequently 
in history we read of Darius Hystaspes; or, 
since the Medo-Persian empire with the addition of 
Babylon was now large, possibly Darius may have been 
vicegerent of Cyrus in Babylon. At all events we will 
stick to the Scriptural account, confidently expecting 
that sooner or later its truthfulness will be demonstrated. 
When the Medo-Persian empire succeeded Babylonia 
as the world empire, and Daniel was found occupying 
a place of importance and high honor, his qualifications 
were promptly recognized; and when the then 
civilized world was divided into one hundred and twenty 
provinces, with a governor over each, there was a court 
of three superior governors who had the charge of the 
whole as the king's representatives or ministers, and Daniel 
was the chief of these three. How wonderful this appears! 
How we must admire that element of candor 
and evident desire for good government which led the 
kings of Babylon and Medo-Persia to exalt to place and 
power those who were found competent and trustworthy! 
The same conditions were manifest in the case of Joseph 
in Egypt. Evidently the history of the world marks a 
contention between the good and the evil in the fallen 
race. There is a desire for that which is right and just 
and true in very many, but in opposition to this is the 
selfishness which overrules and overrides everything 
that is contrary to its interests, as we find illustrated 
in the lesson we are now considering. When the new 
conditions of the Millennial age prevail we may have no 
reasonable doubt that the majority of mankind, cut off 
from conditions which now prompt to selfish invasions 
of the rights of others, will appreciate and enjoy the 
righteous conditions which will then prevail. As the 

R3639 : page 296 

Lord has declared respecting that time, "The Desire of 
all Nations shall come." 

FOR ENVY THEY DELIVERED HIM. 

Selfishness, a prominent trait of fallen humanity 
everywhere, is the basis of all graft, dishonesty, wherever 
it is found in every nation. Probably there is very little 
superiority of conscience in one part of the world over 
another; but in Europe and America the light of public 
criticism and the power of civil liberty combat fraud and 
dishonesty in public officials in a manner and to a degree 
unknown in eastern countries— in Turkey, Russia, China, 
etc. The standard of honesty is higher with us probably 



on this account. In oriental countries it is the custom 
for government officials to receive bribes, and to more or 
less pervert justice accordingly. 

Daniel's high position in the empire was doubtless 
accorded him to a considerable extent because of his 
opposition to unjust practices and because he was esteemed 
by the king to be unimpeachable in his honesty. 
We can readily understand that his associates in the 
directory of the empire, as well as the governors of the 
various provinces, being hindered by him from pilfering 
and from disposing of valuable franchises and privileges 
to their own profit, would have no kindly feelings toward 
Daniel. On the contrary, they hated him, not so much 
because he was good, honest, just, faithful, for these 
qualities all men to some extent no doubt admire; but 
they hated him because he stood in the way of their 
schemes and projects and aggrandizement. 

LOVE ENVIETH NOT. 

Additionally they no doubt envied Daniel. He was 
not a Mede, he was not a Persian, he was not even a 
Chaldean; he was a Jew, a man whose very nation had 
withered and disappeared from amongst the nations. 
With him out of the way they would all have better 
opportunity for attaining their ambitions— not only 
would one of them get his higher position but all would 
profit by his fall. As he scrutinized all the affairs of the 
kingdom, and was permitted to call to account every 
failure of duty, they concluded that he must be humiliated: 
he must have weaknesses and faults also, he must 
be subject to bribery of some kind if it could only come 
to him from the right standpoint. They felt sure of this, 
judging him according to the standards of their own 
hearts. Their first endeavor was to corrupt him, to detect 
him in some dishonesty and thus to humiliate him. 
But they failed. Loyal to God, and doing all things as 
unto the Lord, they found no fault in him— nothing that 
they could bring against him as a real charge, a crime; 
but they still hated him— without cause— except that he 
was honest and sincere, true, and that the brightness of 
his character discredited theirs and put them to shame. 

Thus it has always been, as the Lord expressed it— 
"The darkness hateth the light." Thus bad men dislike 
the company of the pure in heart, as it continually condemns 
them; they do not feel the same freedom in the 
presence of those who are pure in heart. Thus the Lord 
again said— "Marvel not if the world hate you; ye know 
that it hated me before it hated you. If ye were of the 
world, the world would love its own; but now ye are not 
of the world, for I have chosen you out of the world; 
therefore the world hateth you." "Let your light so 
shine before men that they may see your good works 
and glorify God." Daniel's enemies did not glorify 
God on his behalf at the time; nevertheless God was 
ultimately glorified by his course before the king and 



before the people. So it may be with us: for the time all 
things may seem to work unfavorably, but if we are faithful 
in letting our lights shine our Lord's promise will be 
fulfilled: "Commit thy way unto the Lord; trust also 
in him, and he will bring it to pass. He shall bring forth 
thy righteousness as the light, and thy judgment as the 
noonday."— Psalm 37:5,6. 

Envy and hatred are set down in the Word of God 
as works of the flesh and of the devil, antagonistic to 
everything that is good and right and approved of the 
Lord. These are amongst things which the Apostle assures 
us must be rooted out of our hearts if we would 
ever be of the Kingdom class. Many unconsciously use 
false measures when judging of righteousness and unrighteousness: 
many who would roundly condemn in 
unmeasured terms the thief and the seducer, pass lightly 
over envy and hatred in their own hearts. From the 
divine standpoint matters are different, for hateful and 
atrocious as the former crimes are, they are the results 
of sin working in the mortal body, while envy and hatred 
are sins more of the mind and indicate a perversity of 
will, which is a far more serious matter everyway than 
a perversity of the flesh. Thus the Scriptures tell us that 
God looketh upon the heart. It may be a new thought to 
some of the Lord's consecrated people, who have long 
harbored more or less of envy and hatred, that their condition 
is really more reprehensible in the sight of the 
Lord than that of some who, while better in heart, are 
in public prisons because of wickednesses of their flesh. 

To discern this clearly means a proper sympathy 
with the poor world in general, the "groaning creation," 
and it will mean also prayer and fasting before God in an 
endeavor to purge out the old leaven of malice. We may 
be sure that envy and hatred cannot abide in the heart 
in which the Spirit of the Lord abides, for the two are 
opposites everyway— the Spirit of the Lord is the spirit 
of love, which thinketh no evil, is not envious, has not 
hatred. We would not say that a feeling of envy or 
hatred in the heart was a sure sign that the Lord's Spirit 
had already departed, but we could say with confidence 
that the two spirits are in antagonism, and that one or 
the other must conquer. There can be no peace, no 
progress in the spiritual life while the heart entertains 
envy, bitterness, hatred for others. 

THE TRAP LAID FOR DANIEL. 

Not successful in detecting wrong doing in Daniel 
his associates took the opposite turn and concluded to 
entrap him in his well doing. They had learned of his 
strength of character, and rightly concluded that he 
would not swerve from the course his conscience approved 
—and their plans were laid accordingly. 

All the great kings of ancient times posed as gods, 
or, more properly, as the chief priests and vicegerents of 
their gods— just as the popes of Rome, each in succession, 



claim to be the vicegerents and representatives of 

Christ, Pontifex Maximus or chief priest. This same 

title, Pontifex Maximus, was held by the Roman emperors, 

and our lesson indicates that the same thought 

prevailed in connection with Darius— that he was "a 

very god on earth," as was said of Pope Martin. The conspiring 

princes knew well the weakness of humanity for 

praise and honor and homage. They affected a great 

reverence for the person of Darius and argued that it would 

have a salutary effect throughout the empire for all the 

people to recognize his office from the high religious 

R3639 : page 297 

standpoint— that he was the vicegerent and representative 
of the gods, and that homage and honor and loyal 
sentiments would be increased by a decree that all worship 
should be rendered to him personally for a month. 
The king, susceptible to flattery and to reasons of State, 
fell in with the proposition. 

Flattery and vanity have been the tools of the Adversary 
for the injury of the Lord's people and cause 
many a time, and all who recognize this fact should be 
specially on guard accordingly. True, none of the Lord's 
consecrated ones are likely to be placed on a pinnacle of 
fame or of power as was Darius, nor are they likely to be 
offered literal worship; yet there are little worlds, little 
empires, so to speak, little circles of acquaintance, in 
which the same principles may more or less operate. 

In every little group of the Lord's people there may 
be one or more who, because of talents or other providential 
circumstances, may properly have a prominent 
place in the love and esteem of the company, and the 
Word of the Lord indicates that this may not only be 
reasonable but just. If they are faithful stewards they 
should be loved and honored for their works' sake. But 
it should be remembered that they are still brethren, 
and that in no sense should they be given the honor or 
reverence which belongs to the Lord only. No confederation 
of Church or State can interfere with this principle, 
that God should be recognized as in every way the Chief, 
the one alone worthy of worship. The brothers and sisters 
of the Church, while esteeming faithful leaders very 
highly, should see to it that they do not flatter or puff 
up or in any other manner excite the vanity and thus 
lead to the undoing of those whom they may properly 
appreciate as servants of the Lord and of his flock. Likewise 
every leader in any capacity in the families of God 
should be on guard against the insidious influences of 
pride and fond desire and ambition, and against accepting 
to himself the credit which is due to God for the 
Truth and the knowledge of it and for some ability in 
presenting it to others. Humility is undoubtedly one of 
the most important of our lessons— those who in any 
degree neglect it will surely find trouble as a result. 



R3640 : page 297 

THE PRAYERS OF A RIGHTEOUS MAN. 

Public praying is much more common in the East 
than it is here. The Mohammedans are very numerous 
in all parts of the East, and at certain hours of the day, 
at the striking of the clock, all business is suspended and 
every Mohammedan engages for a moment in worship. 
Some fall on their knees, others stand with bowed heads 
and closed eyes, others stand with the face turned upward 
in prayer. The spirit of reverence appears to prevail 
more generally with them than with us, and the 
man who has no gods, no religion of any kind, is greatly 
disesteemed. It was, therefore, not at all contrary to 
usual custom that Daniel, who like others of the time 
was on the first floor, had an upper chamber for quiet and 
rest and prayer from the remainder of the house, and 
reached usually by an outside staircase. 

This little pavilion had its windows to face toward 
Jerusalem, for the prophet remembered the words of 
the Lord through Jeremiah that, at the end of the seventy 
years of desolation, Israel would be brought thither 
again; and we may be sure that, trusting the great 
Abrahamic Oath-Bound Covenant, he was expecting 
great things eventually for his nation. It was his custom 
to go to this little room three times a day to kneel before 
the Lord in prayer and thankfulness. Ordinarily nothing 
would be thought of such a matter, but the conspiring 
princes, who had already noticed this, concluded that 
Daniel was so thoroughgoing, so truthful, so honest, so 
bold, that the decree which they got the king to sign, 
that all worship should be to him alone for thirty days, 
would not change Daniel's course one iota. They were 
quite correct in their surmises, and Daniel, hearing of the 
decree, undoubtedly understood that the purpose and 
object of it was to entrap him and cause him to be devoured 
by lions— thus to get rid of him, thus to put out 
his light, thus to free themselves from his surveillance 
and honesty, thus to secure to themselves liberty and 
prosperity in their program of graft. 

Daniel continued to worship the Lord as before. He 
would not sell his conscience, he would not deny his God 
he would not pretend that he was praying to or worshipping 
Darius. Had the king's decree been of a different 
kind, Daniel's course might properly have been a 
different one. For instance, had the king decreed that 
none should worship in public or in the sight of others 
any other god, then Daniel might consistently have 
worshiped in private; but since all worship other 
than that of Darius was forbidden, the question was 
different and no compromise was possible. All of the 
Lord's people should be extremely careful about compromising 
the conscience. Our consciences may require 
education, because through the fall our judgments may 
be warped and twisted and need to be corrected; but 



conscience must be followed in any event. As the education 
comes in modifications may result, but no change 
or modification must be made that conscience will not 
approve; any other course than this would not be safe 
for the Lord's people to-day or at any time. 

Another thought connected with this is the propriety 
and necessity for prayer. We have been surprised occasionally 
to hear of some professed follower of Christ 
urging the impropriety of prayer— that all of life should 
be a prayer, and that there should be no formal kneeling 
before the Lord in worship and thanksgiving. Such a 
proposition is astounding to us— the logic of it is incomprehensible. 
True, indeed, we are to pray without ceasing. 
Our entire lives are to be so devoted to the Lord 
and to his cause, and our minds are to be so filled with 
appreciation of his goodness, and our faith in him is to 
be so constant and so bright, that we will always have 
in mind his will in every matter, and thus be in the praying 
attitude of heart continually; but we hold that no 
Christian can maintain this heart attitude without going 
to the Lord in a more particular and formal manner, and 
preferably upon the knees, and if possible sometimes at 
least in solitude— "Enter into thy closet and pray to 
thy Father who is in secret." 

Nothing in this, however, would interfere with the 
thought of family prayers, nor with the still further 
thought of prayers in the Church, which is the Lord's 
family circle. Our Lord gave his sanction to this, not 
only by going aside for private prayer but also at times 
by praying with and for the disciples. For instance, the 
prayer recorded in John 17 and the words of the apostles 
commend praying in the Church, and even call attention 
to the propriety of praying in such a tone and voice 
as could be understood by the others present. Those who 
contend to the contrary, the Apostle intimates, are doing 
so about matters which they do not understand. However 
capable such may be they should be given no place 

R3640 : page 298 

of prominence in the gatherings of the Lord's people. 
First, let them learn before calling upon them to be 
leaders in the flock. The same principles apply to those 
who contend against the observance of Baptism and the 
Lord's Supper. They should be kindly treated, for even 
our enemies should be kindly treated, but none should 
be selected as servants in the Lord's flock who have not 
a respect for and a knowledge of the faith once delivered 
to the saints, and a respect for all the institutions established 
by the Lord and his apostles. 

THE KING WAS TROUBLED. 

Shortly after the signing of the decree the princes 
reported Daniel as having violated its terms, and then 
and there the king's eyes were opened and he beheld the 



trap into which his vanity had gotten him. In accord 
with the theory that the king was the vicegerent of his 
god was the law of the Medo-Persian empire that every 
decree by its king was inviolable— unchangeable. No 
doubt there was a policy behind the establishment of 
such a law. No doubt the great men of the empire desired 
fixity, so that when the king had made a positive 
promise or decree respecting them he could not at the 
instance of another change the arrangement and thus 
subject his princes and counsellors to his caprice. The 
king was greatly displeased with himself that he had 
fallen into this trap, and was displeased undoubtedly 
with the princes who had entrapped him. The words 
"with himself" are lacking from some of the reliable 
manuscripts, which makes the displeasure all the broader 
to include his counsellors. He appreciated Daniel as a 
man of God and as an able servant of the empire, and 
set about at once to do everything in his power to annul 
his own decree— "he labored until the going down of the 
sun to deliver him," but he found no excuse. 

Ordinarily, when the kings desired to be released 
from some decree, they called upon their wise men and 
magicians, who usually were skillful in suggesting a way 
out of the dilemma; but in this case it would appear that 
there was a combination of all the wise men and rulers 
of Babylon against Daniel. They now had him in their 
power, and would suggest nothing in the way of release. 
On the contrary, they held up before the king that he 
was bound by his decree and that he could not do otherwise 
than execute it, because a failure to do so would 
mean a dishonor to the empire in having broken its laws 
and would endanger his throne, etc. Perceiving the king's 
endeavor to rescind the decree, the counsellors called 
upon him in a body to impress the necessity for its 
execution. In compliance Daniel was cast into the den 
of lions. It was probably a lion pit surrounded by high 
walls, just as we have to-day in some parts bear pits. 
The entrance to this pit from certain protected enclosures 
was through a door, and there the lions were enclosed 
at night by a stone, which, pushed across the 
entrance to the pit, served as a door and was fastened. 
The king's sealing wax was placed upon this and also 
the seal of his counsellors, thus indicating that the pit 
might not be opened except with the consent of both 
the king and his counsellors. 

What must have been the feelings of the aged 
prophet and ruler as he realized the condition of things, 
and as the king talked with him and told him of his inability 
to gain the consent of his counsellors to any 
change in the decree, and of his deep sorrow in connection 
with the execution of the sentence. How well 
Daniel had let his light shine is evidenced by the words 
of the king in this address— "Daniel, thy God whom 
thou servest continually, he will deliver thee." We may 
reasonably suppose, too, that a man so firm and strong 
in his faithfulness to the Lord and to principle could go 



to the lions' den without fear. Some one has said that 
one with God is a majority; the Prophet has said, "Greater 
is he who is on our part than all they that be with 
them." Although Daniel did not live under the favored 
conditions of this Gospel age and its influences of the 
holy Spirit, he did have what by the Lord's arrangement 
is common to all mankind, namely, strength and 
courage in proportion to his honesty of heart and 
faithfulness. 

On the one hand he knew that God was able to deliver 
him from the lions if he chose to do so; on the other 
hand he knew that if the Lord permitted the lions to 
devour him he could give him strength and courage to 
endure the pain and trials, with other Jews who looked 
forward in hope and anticipation to the glorious Millennial 
time when Messiah should reign, when all of his 
faithful will be blessed, yea, when all the families of the 
earth will receive a blessing. Why should such a man 
have special fear or dread as respects a den of lions? 
Much more, why should we, if likewise faithful to our 
trusts and obligations to the extent of our ability, and 
if living in the enjoyment of our privileges and with the 
still greater light upon the divine plan— why should we 
fear or quake under such circumstances? God is able to 
deliver us from every evil, and has promised that whatever 
may come to us shall work for our good, because 
we love him and are called according to his purpose. 
It requires faith to pass through such an ordeal triumphantly, 
and it requires character and obedience behind 
that faith to give it strength; and above all it requires 
that behind the faith and the character shall be the 
realization that Christ is our sufficiency, that he not 

R3641 : page 298 

only has redeemed us with his precious blood but that 
he lives to succor us. 

Bunyan, in his story of how Christian fled from 
the City of Destruction to Paradise, tells us how he was 
attacked in the way by two great lions, and how he 
trembled and expected to be destroyed, until ultimately 
he discovered that the lions were chained and could go 
so far and no farther against him, and that he had room 
to pass between. This allegory illustrates to us our own 
experiences in life as Christians. Lions great and small 
threaten the Lord's people in the present time, and, as 
in Daniel's case, the threats are generally with the view 
to turn us aside from duty and the service of the Lord. 
These are tests that come to us. If we yield to them we 
are proving that we are not of the overcoming class; if 
we stand faithful to the Lord they will demonstrate 
that he is able to carry us through all the trials and 
difficulties and diverse experiences of this present time. 

"NO LION SHALL BE THERE." 



The prophet Isaiah, pointing down to the grand 
Highway of Holiness which shall be open to the world 
during the Millennial age, the way of righteousness by 
which they may return to full harmony with the Lord 
and to full restitution and eternal life, declares respecting 
that way, "No lion shall be there nor any ravenous 
beast shall go up thereon." Again at the same time it 
was declared, "Nothing shall hurt or destroy in all my 
holy mountain [kingdom]." How glad we are, even 

R3641 : page 299 

while battling with the lions in the way, and while being 

threatened by them, and while overcoming the fear of 

those which would bring a snare upon us— how glad we 

are to know that in the coming age the world will not 

be subject to such oppositions, but rather will be helped 

upward and onward in the way of holiness. And how 

encouraging it is to know that our experiences with these 

lions in the way, these oppositions of the world, the 

flesh and the devil and science falsely so-called, are all 

testing and proving us to the intent that the Lord may 

use us by and by in the great work he purposes, the deliverance 

of the whole world from that great Adversary 

who goeth about as a roaring lion seeking whom he may 

devour, and how then he shall be bound for a thousand 

years that he shall deceive the nations no more. 

THE ANGEL OF THE LORD DELIVERED HIM. 

Evidently the more the king thought respecting 
Daniel and his God the more his faith in that direction 
increased. He spent a sleepless night, and arose early 
in the morning and went to the den of lions and cried 
in a voice full of sympathy and sorrow, "O Daniel, 
servant of the living God, is thy God whom thou servest 
continually able to deliver thee from the lions?" And 
is it not true at the present time that those who are not 
of the consecrated class sometimes have a considerable 
faith in our God and in his protecting power, and in us 
as his children? It is well that we keep this in memory- 
well that we recognize that our worldly friends are 
watching us to see to what extent our God delivers 
us from the difficulties and trials of life's pathway. We 
have known many instances where the strength and 
fortitude granted to the consecrated ones to endure 
trials and difficulties and hardships unmurmuringly has 
told the worldly friends, louder than any professions 
could tell them, of the power of our God and of the peace 
of God which passeth understanding, which rules in our 
hearts. Thus it should always be. The trials and difficulties 
of life shall not overwhelm us if we trust in the 
Lord. Our hearts may be joyful in him notwithstanding 
persecutions and difficulties. Thus the Philippian jailor 
perceived that the God of Paul and Silas was able to 
deliver them from being utterly cast down by their 



experiences when in the stocks suffering from the beatings 
they had recently received. Their songs in the night 
told that their God was able to deliver them. 

Daniel promptly responded, and assured the king 
that God had sent his angel and had shut the lions' 
mouths that they had not harmed him. We are not to 
understand this to signify literally that an angel held 
each lion by the muzzle, but rather that God through 
the exercise of his power had restrained the wild beasts, 
who were hungry, and without such restraint would have 
devoured the helpless prophet. A thought that associates 
with this is the assurance of the Apostle that the angel 
of the Lord encampeth round about them that are his 
and delivereth them, protects them— protects them not 
always from the threatening disaster but from any injurious 
or evil effects therefrom. As, for instance, in our 
Lord's case, and in the cases of many of his followers, 
no protection was assured against those who sought 
to take their lives, but the Lord did overrule so that 
their death under such conditions was a blessing not 
only to themselves but also in its influence upon the remainder 
of the Church. 

It would be well for all of us to learn more and more 
this lesson of the Lord's ever-present power to help. 
But in order to have the blessing from such experiences 
faith must be there— not faith in ourselves, not faith in 
our own righteousness, but faith in God's love, faith in 
the great redemption price which that love has provided, 
and faith in the great promises which are still in reservation, 
waiting for accomplishment. 

But the child of God who would have a perfect faith, 
a perfect trust in God and his promises, must needs remember 
that they are applicable only to a certain class, 
namely, to the sincere, the honest-hearted, who not only 
will to do right but who do the right to the extent of 
their ability and whose faith in Christ is counted for the 
robe of righteousness which covers their imperfections 
and blemishes. This was so in Daniel's case as he testified 
to the king that God preserved him because of his 
innocency, and he was able to appeal to the king also, 
that his course had been one that met the king's approval. 
Let us live in this attitude continually, in a condition 
in which our consciences are void of offense toward God 
and man— in a condition, therefore, in which we can 
hope for the blessings which God has promised to those 
who love him, who reverence him, who seek to do his 
will. 

"THE KING WAS EXCEEDING GLAD." 

The king's heart was rejoiced. He realized that he 
had been entrapped, and that those who had been at the 
foundation of his difficulty were not really worthy men, 
fit for the high positions of trust which they occupied, 
seeing that they were willing to destroy a fellow creature 
because of his adherence to the principles of righteousness 



—because he was better than themselves, because 
he was more faithful to the trusts imposed upon him. 
The king felt that he could not afford to lose one of 
Daniel's stamp of character. And this is true still: there 
are not enough men of the Daniel type, courageous, 
honest, truthful, innocent, capable. Yet if Daniel could 
occupy such a position, certainly all of the Lord's people 
of this Gospel age, still more highly favored, should be 
able to approximate the same standard, especially since 
our blessings are along the spiritual lines. 

When Daniel was taken up from the den of lions 
his word was fully corroborated, no marks of violence 
from the beasts were manifest. The king, having strictly 
followed the law of his country, having been forced to 
this by his subordinate rulers and wise men, realized 
that now he was free from their control; and under the 
despotic form of government then in vogue he called 
for those who had been Daniel's accusers who had entrapped 
the king, and he commanded that they be put 
into the lions' den. He would thus make a test as to 
which were worthy in the sight of the Lord. Daniel's 
protection manifested the exercise of divine power in his 
behalf: let these others, if they would, call upon their 
gods and let them deliver them. There was no divine 
power to stop the mouths of the lions, and, hungered, 
they devoured those who were cast to them. 

Thus the notable miracle pointed out the true God, 
and Daniel as his true servant, and no doubt an important 
lesson was taught to those acquainted with the circumstances. 
It is not for us to think of having our enemies 
devoured when we are delivered, it is not for us to rejoice 
over their fall. On the contrary, the Lord's people 
are to be self-content and to remember that the Lord 
has said, "Vengeance is mine, I will repay." Instead of 
having our enemies devoured we have the Apostle's word, 

R3641 : page 300 

"If thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst give him 
drink." Love and sympathy are to be our attitude 
toward all the world of mankind, including those who 
persecute us and say all manner of evil against us falsely, 
for his sake. 

The punishment which came upon Daniel's adversaries 
was what the Scriptures designate a judgment, 
and we have the Scriptural assurance that when the 
judgments of the Lord are abroad in the earth [when 
they are general] the inhabitants of the world will learn 
righteousness. When the Kingdom shall have been established 
and the reign of righteousness shall have begun 
every transgression shall receive a just recompense 
of reward, every sin will be punished and every endeavor 
for righteousness will be blessed and rewarded. How 
speedily the world will learn righteousness we may readily 
judge. In the present time, although probably the majority 
of people would prefer righteousness to sin and 



injustice, yet under present conditions, under the dominion 

of the prince of this world, the righteous are the ones 

who usually suffer and the evil doers very generally 

escape— hence a doubt prevails respecting God and any 

enforcement of justice. The assumption is that if one 

can escape the technicalities of the law and the clutches 

of the law's officers in the present life he is safe and need 

not fear divine interference. We may readily see then 

that when the Millennial age shall have been fully ushered 

in, and when just penalty will follow each transgression 

and reward follow every good deed, a world-wide reformation 

or conversion to righteousness will follow 

forthwith in every land, in every tongue. In that glorious 

time the righteous shall flourish and the evil 

R3642 : page 300 

doers shall have the stripes, and eventually if they continue 
to be evil doers shall be cut off in the second death. 

There are indeed various illustrations in the world of 
transgressors suffering severely for their wrong doing. 
We are to remember, too, that with the nation of Israel 
God made a special covenant, under which transgressors 
were to be punished and well doing was to be rewarded— 
much after the manner that shall prevail during the 
Millennial age. But we have no such assurances as respects 
this Gospel age and as respects the Lord's consecrated 
people. We are to remember, on the contrary, 
that many of the Lord's people have suffered as transgressors. 
For instance, our Redeemer himself was crucified 
as a blasphemer and injurious person, and against 
one of the apostles the mob cried out, "Away with such 
a fellow from the earth!" The Apostle himself says that 
they were counted as the filth and offscouring of the 
earth, and our Lord said that we must not marvel if 
such be our experiences; that we should on the contrary 
remember that the Master of the house had been called 
Beelzebub, and that his true followers might be spoken 
of similarly in an evil manner. 

We are waiting, therefore, with patience for the 
glorious day of Immanuel's reign, the reign of righteousness, 
when justice shall be laid to the line and righteousness 
to the plummet. In the meantime we are to brave 
the oppositions of the world as did Daniel, as did Christ, 
as did the apostles, faithfully, courageously, persistently 
—even unto death. The principle which we recognize 
has been recognized also amongst worldly people, as 
Shakespeare says:— 

"Be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as snow, 
Thou shalt not escape calumny." 

"That thou art blamed shall not be thy defect; 
For slander's mark was ever yet the fair; 
So thou be good slander doth yet approve 
Thy worth the greater." 



IN THE WILDERNESS. 

Be still, and murmur not, poor heart, 

When God shall lead thee to "a desert place," 

And bid thee dwell apart. 
If ravens in the wilderness 
Did feed the servant of the Lord, will He 

For thee, His child, do less? 

Nor fear, sad heart, its loneliness,— 
Hath He not said, "I never will forsake 

Nor leave thee comfortless ! " 
Have faith, thy Master may design 
To fit thee thus for Kingdom work and bliss, — 

And wilt thou then repine? 

Be patient, let His will be done; 

Be calm, be strong, that He may finish there 

The work He hath begun. 
"A little while," He soon will come, 
And say to thee, "It is enough, my child, 

My faithful one, come home!" G. W. S. 



R3642 : page 300 

RETURNING FROM BABYLON. 

-EZRA l:l-ll.-OCTOBER 15.- 

Golden Text.— "The Lord hath done great things 
for us, whereof we are glad."— Psa. 126:3. 

THE first year of Cyrus mentioned in our lesson is 

by general consent considered the year 536 

B.C. Evidently this does not mean that it was 

his first year of reigning as the king of Persia, but that, having 

conquered Babylon and accomplished other matters 

subsequently, this was the beginning of his reign over 

the united empire of the Medes and Persians as successor 

to Babylon in world empire. 

It will be remembered that in Isaiah's prophecy (44:26-28; 
45:1-4), the Lord had distinctly marked out 
the return of his favor to the Israelites, and had mentioned 
Cyrus by name as the one who should accomplish 
their deliverance, saying: 

"That saith of Cyrus, He is my shepherd, and shall 
perform all my pleasure: even saying to Jerusalem, Thou 
shall be built; and to the temple, Thy foundation shall 
be laid." 

"Thus saith the Lord to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose 
right hand I have holden, to subdue nations before him: 



I will go before thee and make the crooked places straight. 
I will break in pieces the gates of brass and cut asunder 
the bars of iron. ...For Jacob my servant's sake 
and Israel my elect, I have even called thee by thy 
name: I have surnamed thee, although thou hast not 
known me." 
Tradition has it that this prophecy was drawn to 

R3642: page 301 

the attention of King Cyrus, and that it was in harmony 
with the prophecy that he promptly made the proclamation 
mentioned in our lesson, permitting all Israelites 
who might desire to return to their own land to do so. 
The wording of the proclamation, "The Lord God of 
heaven hath given me all the kingdoms of the earth, and 
he hath charged me to build him a house at Jerusalem, 
which is in Judea," might seem to imply that Cyrus was 
a believer in and a servant of the true God, but we have 
no corroborative evidences to this effect: rather the 
records of his time refer to the heathen gods, but 
apparently make no mention of Jehovah. We are to remember 
that the heathen kings were at that time in the 
habit of recognizing the gods of the various countries 
which they governed, and wrote and spoke respectfully 
in reference to all of them, apparently with a view to 
preserving the respect for their realm of every creed 
amongst the worshipers. Thus also to-day Great Britain, 
ruling over millions of Mohammedan subjects through 
her viceroys, shows deference to the Mohammedan faith 
and worship, and not long since built and endowed a 
Mohammedan college. We are to remember that amongst 
worldly people policy continually has an upper hand, 
and that the religious convictions, aside from a clear 
knowledge of the Truth and consecration thereto, are 
more or less vague and indistinct in vision and see good 
and bad in all religions. Positiveness in religion usually 
is only found in those who have the Truth and a clear 
knowledge of the Divine Plan of the Ages, or in fanatics 
blinded by ignorance and superstition. 

The king's proclamation encouraged all the people 
of Babylon, neighbors of the Jews, to help such as desired 
to return to their own land. The king himself provided 
liberally for the expedition, sending a troop of one 
thousand cavalry for the protection of the emigrants 
and their goods from the depredations of the Arabs of 
the desert. He also returned to the Jews the vessels of 
the Temple which Nebuchadnezzar had taken at the 
beginning of the seventy years' desolation of the land— 
the last captivity, when Zedekiah was taken. The total 
number of these vessels, gold and silver, is astounding- 
five thousand four hundred, large and small. 

ONLY 50,000 RETURNED. 

When we remember the length of time the people 



had been in Babylon, that scarcely any of the Jews living 
at the time of this emancipation proclamation had ever 
seen Palestine, that they had merely heard of it through 
their parents, and that only a few very aged men and 
women remembered to have even seen the city as 
children, it will not surprise us that the total number 
volunteering to return to rebuild the city and the Temple 
was only 50,000. But they were a choice 50,000; they 
were, as nearly as could be reasonably expected, Israelites 
indeed. In their hearts burned faith in God and in 
the great Abrahamic promise which had held their 
nation together up to that time. In their captivity they 
had learned lessons respecting why they had been cast 
off from divine favor, and had learned also to look for 
and wait for this very event in which they now participated. 
They knew that the prophets had foretold that 
it would be seventy years of desolation, and they recognized 
that the opening of the door for their return was 
of divine arrangement. 

Of course that fifty thousand were not all men and 
women of faith in the promises, but many of them, 
probably more than half, were children. The great mass 
of the nation, having become settled in business and in 
family relationships in Babylon, were loth to leave- 
just as to-day, if Palestine were opened to the Jews for 
their return, there would be comparatively few to go 
from America, where they are prospering in business, 
socially, etc. The majority would undoubtedly go from 
the lands of persecution, and would probably be chiefly 
the poor. In the present case we know that they were 
not all poor, because a very large sum indeed was collected 
for the rebuilding of the Temple, a sum estimated to be 

R3643 : page 301 

nearly equal to four hundred thousand dollars. 

"YE SHALL GO FORTH WITH SINGING." 

Psalm 126 seems to picture the returning of the 
Jewish exiles from the Babylonish captivity, our Golden 
Text being the key to the joys of the occasion— "The 
Lord hath done great things for us, whereof we are glad." 
A writer describing the scene of their departure from 
Babylon says: 

"Forth from the gates of Babylon they rode, to the 
sound of joyous music— a band of horsemen playing on 
flutes and tabrets, accompanied by their own two hundred 
minstrels and one hundred and twenty-eight singers 
of the Temple (Ezra 2:41-65), responding to 
the prophet's voice as they quitted the shade of the 
gigantic walls and found themselves in the open desert 
beyond: 'Go ye out of Babylon, Flee from the thraldoms, 
with a voice of singing declare ye, tell this, utter 
it even to the end of the earth; say ye, The Eternal hath 
redeemed his servant Jacob,'"— Isaiah 48:20. 



We are interested in the affairs of this narrative 
sympathetically, and also because we realize that the 
Lord's providences control in respect to all the affairs 
of Israel, his people. But we have greater and more profound 
interest in the events here narrated now that our 
eyes have been opened to see that the seventy years of 
desolation of the land of Palestine represent the seventy 
jubilee cycles appointed to them in the time the fulfilment 
of which we are now living. Our interest is still 
further awakened when we remember that in this long 
interim of time God's favor was transferred from the 
Jewish house of servants to the Gospel house of sons, 
and that an antitypical Babylon has carried away 
captive the Lord's people and all the golden vessels of 
Truth. Spiritual Israel in captivity has been waiting 
for the glorious deliverance to be brought about by 
Immanuel, the Deliverer greater than Cyrus. 

The proclamation of liberty for the Lord's people 
to go forth from Babylon has not been generally responded 
to by them. A comparatively small number of 
them have had such love for the Lord, such a reverence 
for his promises, such a desire to be inheritors of those 
promises as to lead them to sever the earthly ties and 
the bonds which hold them satisfied in Babylon. But 
some have heard, some have rejoiced, some have stepped 
out and some are still leaving. Our antitypical 
Cyrus, our present Lord, has permitted us to bring back 
the golden vessels, the golden truths which for so long 
have been misappropriated, misapplied, misunderstood, 
misused in Babylon. 

"COME OUT OF HER, MY PEOPLE." 

The Lord now calls his people forth from mystic 
Babylon ("Babylon the Great, the mother of harlots"). 
His words are, "Come out of her, my people, that ye be 

R3643 : page 302 

not partakers of her sins and receive not of her plagues." 
(Rev. 18:4.) No one should be urged to come out of 
Babylon. If he does not come out joyfully, "with singing," 
making melody in his heart to the Lord, glad of 
the opportunity of coming out, glad of the opportunity 
of getting away from the error and into the place 
of divine favor and inheritance of the divine promises, 
let him stay in Babylon. If he loves the things of this 
present time, the social advantages of Babylon, the 
business advantages and opportunities, the greater 
honor of men, the greater comfort and ease, let him so 
indicate to the Lord and refuse to respond to the Lord's 
message. 

As the company of the Israelites left Babylon with 
great joy and rejoicing, so we who have gotten free from 
mystic Babylon rejoice exceedingly and would not go 
back under any consideration. By and by, when the 



time of trouble is imminent, others may still escape and 
deliver their souls, but it will not be with the same joy: 
some we are assured will be in Babylon up to the time 
of its fall, and will be delivered, but theirs will not be 
the songs of gladness and joy and victory; they will not be 
of the overcoming class. Rather it will be theirs to mourn 
that they were unfaithful to the voice of the Lord, that 
they remained in Babylon contrary to his Word and 
that they receive of her plagues, her chastisements, her 
troubles, which so surely will come thick and fast— the 
"seven last plagues." 

"Then let our songs abound, 

And every tear be dry; 

We're marching through Immanuel's ground, 

To fairer prospects nigh." 



R3643 : page 302 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:- 

More than six years ago I commenced to look to the Lord 
alone for help, asking grace to be made willing to die or live, 
just as His will would be. 

Years of suffering followed and no notable change physically, 
but spiritually the blessings were many and the Lord's 
nearness very sweet. 

Reading the Word of God continually, also many publications 
on the blessings and need of an absolute surrender, 
the Lord not only made me willing to consecrate myself 
fully to him, but same time prepared me to receive the 
present truth. (I must count it a real wonder, a special grace 
of the Lord, that I was able to read most of the time, as the 
nature of my illness, according to man's knowledge, makes 
reading impossible.) About this time a tract came to hand 
warning all Christian people against a publication called "MILLENNIAL 
DAWN,"— denouncing same as a dangerous and anti -Christian 
work, and quoting numerous Scriptures in proof 
of this assertion. Carefully reading same I soon noted that 
most Scriptures quoted were given a different interpretation 
than I was led to understand them so far. This naturally 
awakened the desire to read the very publication mentioned 
and compare notes, but how and where to get these books 
was more than I knew. All I knew was the name, and this 
subsequently proved all sufficient, because only a few days 
after, two books were left in our house to be given to a party 
living near. Sitting in my chair near the table, and noting 
the paper on this package badly torn, I reached out to do 
it up better, and-oh, wonder! -MILLENNIAL DAWN was in 
my hand. Dear Bro. Russell, had it not been for the torn 
wrapper these precious books, which proved to me a source 
of instruction, joy and happiness for years, would have passed 
out of the house and I not any the wiser. Surely this was the 



Lord's doing. I was hungry for the truth, longing for more 
light, and true to his promise he provided. Glory to his name! 

This was three years ago last winter and often almost 
overwhelming blessings received in the study of God's dear 
Word in the additional light presented, frequently makes me 
cry out: "Oh, Lord, I am utterly unworthy of so much grace. 
Grant that I, like clay in the potter's hand, may rest in thy 
Masterhand, to be prepared and molded into a vessel ready 
for thy use and honor only." 

With Christian love and greeting, I remain, 

Yours in Christ Jesus, JOHN F. GRAF,— Oregon. 



page 302 

PASTOR C. T. RUSSELL:- 

The books which, by the grace of God, you have been led 
to write and publish, have been an inestimable blessing to 
me, and some of my dear ones, and I cannot thank my dear 
Redeemer sufficiently for having directed my attention to 
them. 

I read them over and over again; indeed, I may say I 
read nothing else but these and my Bible, and much as I 
loved the Scriptures before, they are doubly dear to me 
now; because, I have the key which opens up to me 
much that was mysterious and therefore not properly understood. 
Now, since through you and the other dear friends 
who labor together with you I have received this "present 
truth," the whole Scripture is illumined— God's plan, in Christ, 
for the glorification of the Church, his body, and the salvation 
of the world, is grasped as never before, and I say, reverently, 
that I rejoice even with a joy unspeakable and full of 
glory. There are of course many things that I would like 
to talk with you about, with the hope that I might see more 
clearly than I do: but it is wonderful how the holy Spirit 
enlightens— as one reads, ponders, prays, and compares the 
statements in the DAWN series with Scripture, endeavoring 
to rightly divide the Word of Truth, how the mists clear 
away, and the light of the truth fills the soul, and one gets a 
faint idea of what it is to be filled with the Spirit. I try, as 
I have opportunity to do, some harvest work, and have frequent 
chances for conversations. One is astonished at the 
various ways in which different people, many of them professed 
Christians, receive the truth. Some turn a deaf ear 
entirely, and change the conversation as quickly as possible; 
others are indifferent— the truth as preached is sufficient for 
them; they do not wish to be any wiser than their parents, 
etc.; still others are startled and state that the signs of the 
times indicate that some great catastrophe is approaching 
they know not what. Others, and these are the ministers and 
learned men I talk with, admit that we have fallen upon evil 
times; but that brighter times are coming, that an age of 
greater faith is approaching, etc. Pity they cannot see just 
how it is to be brought about! But, thank God, there are a 
few who have the listening ear. With those I earnestly talk, 



as aided by the spirit of God, and generally get them to 
promise to read one of the series of books, DAWN. 

I had been sending my copy of the WATCH TOWER to a 
friend. This week my copy was late in coming, and yesterday 
I was delighted to have her ask where that paper was 
I had been sending her. 

You will not be surprised when I tell you that I am about 
to withdraw from the Presbyterian Church here. For some 
time I have been studying the Confession of Faith, and of 
course I am not in accord with it, and for this reason cannot 
loyally remain. There are two other reasons why I must 
withdraw— one is that I deplore the spirit of destructive criticism, 
and the evolutionary theories that not only exist in the 
Church but are tolerated and approved. Again, while in 
the Church I am bound, if loyal to its creed, to be silent about 
present truth; but I must speak, and therefore my course is 
plain. 

Yours in this glorious harvest work, ., Canada. 



R3643 : page 303 

MY BELOVED BROTHER, RUSSELL: 

I always appreciated the work being done through the 
colporteur service, but this appreciation has grown wonderfully 
since entering the pilgrim field, as coming in contact 
with the various little classes I have learned how some colporteur 
—often unknown— sowed the first seed which gave 
the work in that place its start. If each colporteur could 
know how often we hear of such things discouragement would 
be unknown amongst them. 

For instance, about two and a half years ago, I was at 
Savannah, Ga., and during my visit a sister told me how that 
city had been canvassed with apparently no results,— books 
had been sold but no fruit could be seen. Two months ago, 
I went to Chauncey, Ga., for the first time, and in the course 
of my drive into the country I asked the brother how he 
first learned of these things. He said that some years ago 
his sister was working in Savannah, and one day a colporteur 
came to her employer's home. She answered the door bell, 
and found a colporteur there from whom she purchased "The 
Plan of the Ages." That book brought her and her two 
brothers into the light, and now, a hundred miles or so from 
Savannah, a grand little company is laboring and rejoicing 
because of the seed dropped by a colporteur. 

I went to one place in Michigan where a brother and his wife 
were full of joy over the light which had come into their 
hearts and home. The brother told me that when his wife 
ordered the book he thought, "There's another one of those 
fake book agents," and tried to show the colporteur brother 
just how he felt about it. But he said to me, "Oh, Brother 
Barton, I only wish I knew who that brother was. How glad 
I would be if I could only show him how different is my feeling 
now, and could take back what occurred then." 

Do you not think the Lord purposely keeps results from 



being seen by those who do the work in order to give room 
for the exercise of faith? They should believe their "labor is 
not in vain in the Lord," whether they can see its outward 
fruit or not. Our heavenly Father wants us to work for him, 

R3644 : page 303 

not for results,— work from principle, not from a mere desire 
to see our efforts prospering. 

Should we not also esteem the fruit borne in our lives of 
more consequence than the results of labors in the harvest 
field? Does not 2 Tim. 2:6 teach this? 

So even if there was no fruit from the colporteur labors 
except the fruits of patience, humility and fortitude borne in 
our own lives, it would more than pay to be in that work, but 
there is other kind of fruit too, and we pilgrim brethren would 
like to tell of that for their encouragement. 

"God's mercy 'tis which hides results— 
A mercy which our good consults; 
For did he choose he could reveal 
The fruitage of our Christian zeal. 

"He might have shown the seed you thought 
Had surely died and come to naught 
Was living in some unknown place 
Producing words and works of grace." 

May the dear Lord continue to bless those noble brethren 
and sisters who in this way are "laying down their lives for 
the brethren." 

With Christian love in the royal service of the King, 
BENJ. H. BARTON-Pilgrim. 



DEAR BRO. IN CHRIST JESUS: 

I am so thankful to the Lord for having brought my husband 
and myself out of that awful darkness into the light 
of Present Truth, that I want to write you a few lines in 
regard to same. We were spiritualists for five years: In fact 
I was a trance medium, although I could never bring myself to 
take any money for it, as I regarded it altogether too holy 
to use it for earthly gain; yet for the past few years I was 
not satisfied with it and its teaching, and I prayed to the 
Lord to show me whether it was his work, as I had always 
remarked to the spirits if it were God's work I would be very 
thankful for the gift and to be his instrument to further his 
truth; but if it were the Devil's I did not wish for any of 
it. Whereupon they always replied, "There was no Devil," 
and that it was God's work. I gave up friends for their 
sake, and for two years I lived in a haunted house suffering 
untold agony, doing, as they told me, what God had ordained 
me to do, to release an earthbound spirit, the spirit of a man 
that committed suicide by cutting his throat from ear to ear. 

Many times I suffered the horror and agony of having the 



sensation of a razor cut my throat from ear to ear. This they 
told me was to be a proof when that spirit was near me: 
Time upon time I suffered dying agonies to bring tests to 
friends. Prior to my coming into the Truth last fall, I had a 
very severe trial, which I thought I could not bear, and 
when I prayed to die a beautiful little form appeared assuring 
me God would forgive, and I would suffer no punishment 
if I committed suicide, which I had intended. But, 
thank God, my husband watched me until I became more 
calm, and could reason again. That was just one week 
before the booklet "What Say the Scriptures on Spiritualism" 
was placed in my hands. When studying that for two hours, 
and fighting the great battle all night, I knew who I had been 
serving, and so you can probably gain a glimpse of why I 
say awful darkness. In fact I could write many more experiences, 
should you think they would be any benefit to 
God's people. 

I rejoice in the Lord and pray he may keep all. I desire 
to express my heartfelt thanks and appreciation to the Lord 
and to you, for the DAWNS— as Bible Keys. May the Lord 
continue to bless you and use you as that faithful steward, 
is our earnest prayer. 

Yours with Christian love, MRS. G. K.-Ill. 



page 303 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: 

Much love and greetings in the name of our dear Redeemer. 
May our Father continue to bless you richly in all your efforts 
to serve his cause. The Cleveland Church has requested me 
to inform you of the rich blessings derived from the Niagara 
Convention, not only by those who attended, but also by 
those who did not attend. We had a convention echo meeting 
last Sunday, and all who attended the Convention echoed 
the blessings they received to others. We had a delightful 
season of refreshing, so much so that we had to let you know 
about it. It was, indeed, good to be there, among so many 
of the Lord's people. Such a happy people, all so full of 
love and the spirit of unselfishness. If this is a foretaste of 
the heavenly joys, what will it be to have gained the crown 
and be forever with the Lord? It was a means of drawing 
those who attended closer to the Lord and a fresh endeavor 
to run the race set before us more patiently. These conventions, 
dear brother, are a great spiritual uplift and, as you said, 
the money expended was not wasted, and we think could not 
be spent better. The Niagara Convention was, by far, the 
most blessed convention we ever attended. We are so happy 
and thankful that you intend continuing them. May the 
Lord preserve you, to continue to give us such refreshing 
seasons of fellowship. 

Yours with Christian love, FLORENCE SOPER,-0. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:- 

I am still rejoicing in the light, and appreciate the strong 
and helpful words in the WATCH TOWER and DAWN. You 
certainly lift the standard high, higher than any other religious 
teacher I ever knew, but none too high, and I rejoice in 
it. I am greatly enjoying the new Bible Studies, and as I am 
not where I can meet with others, I have pretty long lessons. 
Am not doing as much personal work as I could wish, but 
hope to be able to do more sometime. 
Yours in the blessed cause, 

EMILY A. HAYES,-Maine. 



page 305 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVI. OCTOBER 15, 1905. No. 20 



CONTENTS. 

The Editor's Western Tour 307 

Papal Attempts at Reformation 308 

"By Myself Have I Sworn" (Poem) 309 

"Bear Ye One Another's Burdens" 310 

"Pay Thy Vows Unto the Lord." 312 

Rebuilding the Temple 313 

Hopes Deferred— Trials Many 314 

"Which Temple Ye Are." 315 

"By My Spirit, Saith the Lord." 316 

Prophets to Both Israels 316 

He Shall Not Fail, nor be Discouraged 317 

A Day of Small Things 318 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers 318 

General Convention for the South 320 

page 306 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 



they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



MISSIONARY ENVELOPES 



These are now in stock in large quantity. Every letter you 
send through the mail may be a more or less potent messenger 
of the Truth, even on its outside, by the use of these envelopes. 
They catch the attention not only of those to whom they are 
addressed, but postmen and others have an opportunity, and 
sometimes the curiosity, to read their message of peace— the 
gospel in condensed form. Price, 25c per 100, postpaid. 

VOLUNTEERING BY MAIL. 



Our output of tracts free as Sample Copies is limited. This 
year please follow this plan: Procure wrapping paper of the 
size in which your tracts go to you, write on these the addresses 
of all of your friends and acquaintances of the godly 
sort and mail the bundle to us. Do not this year send us "all 
sorts" of addresses. Do "sharp shooting" rather. You may 
repeat the lists every quarter if you desire, indicating other 
tracts for same, as we would not remember which were previously 
sent. 

ZION'S GLAD SONGS. 



A collection of sixty hymns, with music, for social and 
testimony meetings, and semi-private gatherings. Price, 5c 
each, postpaid. English and German editions. 



R3644 : page 307 

THE EDITOR'S WESTERN TOUR. 



--(CONTINUED FROM LAST ISSUE.)- 

OGDEN, Utah, was our next appointment. By 
this time our company was small, as some came 
no farther than Denver; however, others joined 
us en route for Portland. The Ogden friends met us at 
the depot, and showed abundantly, by words and deeds, 
that they were glad of the one-session Convention. 
They had secured the use of the Mormon Tabernacle 
and had thoroughly advertised our discourse, "To Hell 
and Back. Who are there? Hope for many of them." 
About 600 were present, a very large audience for 
us in a city of Ogden's size. Excellent attention was 
given for nearly two hours, while we endeavored to 
show forth that the real penalty for sin is death, that 
the tomb is the hell of the Bible and that the salvation 
promised as a result of Christ's death and a consequent 
reconciliation with the Father is awakening and resurrection 
—for whomsoever wills. We believe that some 
were helped. 

ON TO PORTLAND, OREGON 

We took train for Portland at 2.30 o'clock in the 
morning— spending nearly two nights and two days on 
the journey. A crowd of dear friends awaited us at the 
depot, though our train was several hours belated. We 
got a good opportunity to wash and rest and visit before 
the opening of the Convention on Friday, 
September 8. 

The Portland gathering had the distinction of being 
the only three-days Convention on this trip, and it 
was a most enjoyable season of refreshment. The local 
friends had made every preparation for the nearly two 
hundred visiting friends who, while chiefly from Oregon, 
Washington and Utah, included representatives from 
British Columbia, Dakota, Minnesota, California, Texas, 
Pennsylvania, and one from Australia. The interspersed 
testimony meetings were rich treats, as always, and 
caused many hearts to "burn" as they recounted their 
experiences and heard of similar mercies of God variously 
manifested toward others. 

We had "Woodmen's Hall" for all the meetings except 
the Baptism service, which was held in the Christian 
Church, and the service specially advertised for the 
public, which was held in the Taylor St. M.E. Church 
on Sunday, Sept. 10th. At the latter our topic was, 
"To Hell and Back," etc., and an audience of about 
900 gave close attention for about two hours and then 
took our free literature with avidity. 

The program was followed throughout. One of 
the Elders opened the Convention with words of greeting 
and welcome, after which Brother A. H. MacMillan 
became the permanent chairman and greeted all present 
in the name of our Society, and then the first testimony 
meeting began. Pilgrim Brother Harrison gave 



an able address in the afternoon, his subject being, 
"The cost to our Lord for the world's redemption." 
The necessity and value of the ransom were shown, as 
well as the Master's great sacrifice in leaving the realms 
of glory and enduring all that our redemption cost. 
"Take heed to the doctrine" of the ransom was the essence 
of his discourse. The evening service, introduced 
by a service of praise, was a Chart Discourse by Pilgrim 
Brother Barton, who made the various features of the 
divine plan very plain and very interesting. 

Saturday morning's opening service was one of 
praise and prayer, after which a question meeting, occupying 
two hours and involving a great variety of topics, 
prepared us all for noon refreshments and rest. 

The entire afternoon was devoted to the consideration 
of Baptism, showing the erroneous views, and, in contrast, 
the true teachings of the Bible on the subject— substantially 
as set forth in MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. VI. Following 
the discourse twenty-nine requested and received 
symbolic immersion in water, as illustrating and confessing 
their true baptism into Christ's death. 

Saturday evening Pilgrim Brother Barton addressed 
the Convention on the lessons of the Ninety-first 
Psalm— showing what it is to be safe under the protecting 
shadow of the Almighty, and how these secured 
ones are protected from the various snares and deceptions 

R3644 : page 308 

of this harvest time. About 300 heard very 
attentively. 

Sunday forenoon brought another blessed testimony, 
praise and prayer meeting, after which we spent over 
an hour discussing the spiritual lessons taught by the 
Exposition, which many of you have read through the 
columns of the Pittsburg Dispatch and other Monday 
publications, which now carry extra messages from the 
editor of this journal to so many of the friends weekly. 

The Sunday afternoon discourse we have already 
mentioned. The Convention closed that evening with 
a Love Feast introduced by a short discourse on the 
Twenty-third Psalm. We parted, hoping to meet at 
the great Convention, "The General Assembly of the 
Church of the Firstborn." We left on the night train 
for Everett, Washington, about twenty friends of those 
parts accompanying us. 

EVERETT'S ONE-DAY CONVENTION 

Warm hearts and hands greeted us and entertained 
us at Everett. An afternoon meeting for the interested 

R3645 : page 308 

was attended by seventy-five. We discoursed to them 
for nearly two hours on the terms on which our calling 



and election may be made sure; and the evidences we 
have of the divine favor with us to assist us in overcoming 
the world, and how all things work together for 
good to the faithful. 

The evening service for the public, on "To Hell and 
Back," was held in Everett's Carnegie Hall, whose capacity 
of about three hundred was fully taxed. We had 
excellent attention and were pleased to learn of several 
who were "greatly helped" by the service. After a good 
night's rest we proceeded to Seattle. 

SEATTLE'S ONE-DAY CONVENTION 

As Seattle friends and others accompanied us to 
Everett, so many from Everett, etc., came with us to 
Seattle. The opening was a praise and testimony service, 
followed at 3 p.m. by a discourse on "Fear not, 
little flock, it is your Father's good pleasure to give you 
the Kingdom," in which we emphasized the favor of 
the present age call and the blessings to result to the 
Church and the world in the Kingdom. About 200 
were present and they mostly the interested from various 
parts, adjacent and distant. Our evening address 
on "To Hell and Back" was heard with great attention 
by an audience of about 650, and we trust that 
good fruitage will appear in God's due time. The afternoon 
services were held in Third Avenue M.E. Church 
edifice, the evening service in the Arcade Hall. The 
midnight train speeded us back to Portland, where, on 
the 13th, we took the Pacific steamer for San Francisco, 
our next appointment. 

FROM PORTLAND HOMEWARD. 

The ocean journey from Portland to San Francisco 
was a delightful and restful one. Our party numbered 
six— three on return journey to Los Angeles, one from 
St. Louis and one from Millvale, Pa., besides the Editor. 
Brother MacMillan preceded us to Los Angeles to open 
the Convention there. 

Every morning we had our usual "Heavenly Manna" 
as well as our physical refreshments and in the 
day time we had Scripture question meetings, in which 
all participated, and by which we trust all were profited. 
Thus our journey passed pleasantly, bringing us to 
San Francisco, Cal. on Saturday morning, Sept. 16th. 
At the landing awaiting our arrival were seven of the 
dear brethren and sisters of that vicinity, who gave us 
most hearty greetings, to which we as fervently 
responded. 

Complete arrangements had been made, and we 
were soon comfortably located in the home of one of 
the dear ones, where a question meeting engaged us all 
pleasantly until dinner, after which came the general 
gathering of the friends of that vicinity, so far as it was 
possible for these to be in attendance on the busiest day 



of the week. There were about forty present, to whom 
we spoke on "God's Election"— our opportunity for 
making our calling and election sure, and the mark of 
the prize, perfect love. The service lasted from 2 to 4 
p.m. 

A goodly number accompanied us to the train 
which speeded us to Los Angeles, a distance of over 
400 miles. Many were the hopes expressed that we 
should meet again in the "General Assembly," if not in 
another Convention on earth. Many prayers went up 
for a share in the heavenly Kingdom, even though led 
by the Master in the narrow way and by the way of the 
cross. 

LOS ANGELES CONVENTION 

As per program, this Convention opened Saturday, 
Sept. 16th, with a rally and testimony meeting. 
An unannounced feature, much enjoyed by the friends 
was a Chart Talk by Brother MacMillan. This Convention 
thus happily opened was already under good 
headway and awaiting us Sunday morning, when we 
had a praise and testimony meeting participated in by 
many, including a Methodist minister and an ex-Methodist 
minister and ourself. 

Our afternoon topic was for the public, "To Hell 
and Back. Who are there? Hope for many of them." 
The attendance was estimated at 700. The closest of 
attention was given and we trust some good seeds of 
Truth were planted in honest hearts, and that others 
partly assured were fully convinced respecting our Father's 
character and plan. 

The evening topic, "The Sin Unto Death," many 
of you have already read as reported in the Pittsburg 
Dispatch, and we need not go into details here. 

By general desire the Convention held over Monday, 
Sept. 18. The morning session was a praise and 
testimony meeting, during which we made a trip to 
Santa Monica at the urgent solicitation of one disabled 
from attending the Los Angeles meetings. There we 
had an opportunity for a talk on the Tabernacle Shadows 
of the Better Sacrifices to a little group which included 
a Presbyterian minister of an apparently thoughtful 
cast of mind. 

At the afternoon session of the Convention we 

R3645 : page 309 

spoke on the true and the symbolic baptisms, following 
which twenty were immersed. 

The evening session, which closed the Convention, 
was a question meeting. A number of questions were 
proffered but the first one occupied our entire time until 
9.15 p.m. and the remainder we brought with us, to 
be answered in the WATCH TOWER columns from time 
to time. The topic which was so engaging was respecting 



"The satisfaction of Justice." Many seemed edified 
and we hope at some time to take up the subject again 
in the WATCH TOWER for the benefit of all. 

Bidding Los Angeles adieu, we started (two only) 
on our journey to San Antonio, Texas, an item of 1,430 
miles, mostly through a sandy desert, growing little but 
sage brush— extremely hot and dusty, especially one 
stretch which dips one hundred feet below sea level. 



"BY MYSELF HAVE I SWORN." 

What means the oath that God hath sworn? 
Have Christians from their Bible torn 
The great Jehovah's seal? 
When Christ shall bring the world's reward, 
Will not each tongue confess him Lord- 
Each knee in homage kneel?— Psa. 82:8. 

Will every kindred, every tribe, 

To Him all majesty ascribe, 

And glorify his name? 

Yet while the nations bow so low, 

Will vengeance hurl the bombs of woe, 

To blast with endless shame?— Psa. 86:9. 

Will God his lowly creatures cheat— 
Or call the nations to his feet, 
To feel a tyrant's rage? 
Then will He scorn their prayerful breath- 
Will nothing but a deathless (?) death 
His stern revenge assuage?— Rev. 15:4. 

What being do you worship then? 

What unrelenting foe of men 

Has chained you to his throne? 

What form of error doth supply, 

Your awful views of God Most High 

To sacred truth unknown?— Mai. 1:11; Isa. 26:9. 

Our God is love, of Gospel mould; 

Who sent the Shepherd of the fold 

To seek his sheep astray, 

With yearning still His heart will burn, 

Until the countless lost return, 

To see the "Living Way."— Jno. 12:32; Rom. 8:21. 

The love that brought salvation nigh, 
Will heed the bruised sinner's sigh, 
And soothe away his pain, 
While "whosoever," great or small, 
Upon Jehovah's name shall call, 

Will never call in vain.— Acts 2:17 and 21; Rev. 22:17. 
-G. M. BILLS. 



R3645 : page 309 

PAPAL ATTEMPTS AT REFORMATION. 

"BACK to the Gospels!" comes the cry from the 
Vatican, sounding the knell of Catholicism. 
After centuries of crafty misrepresentation of 
the Scriptural teachings, the Church of Rome has been 
forced to acknowledge the error of its ways, and at last 
a man has been found honest enough and of sufficient 
boldness of heart to say, "We have sinned; let us return 
to the truth." A Reformer in the Vatican! It is a difficult 
role to play. Will Pius X. be able to carry it 
through effectively? 

Five centuries ago John Huss made the first attempt, 
in Germany, to bring about a reformation in the 
Catholic Church, but the time was not yet, and the 
priests were too strong for him. Despite the fact that 
he carried a safe-conduct, under the seal and hand of 
the German Emperor himself, for his journey to Constance, 
he was seized, condemned as a heretic and 
burned at the stake. A century later saw the rise 
of three mighty champions for Truth— Luther, Calvin 
and Zwingli— who successfully drew from the 
otherwise rotten body of the Almighty Church of the 
Middle Ages the only healthy elements therein, wherewith 

R3646 : page 309 

to build up the real Church of Christ. The rich 

priests and tyrannical nobles however, assisted by the 

cunning and unscrupulous Jesuits, tightened their hold 

upon the ignorant masses and wrapped the cloak of ignorance 

more closely around them. These brought a 

rich income to their worthy masters, who repaid them 

with adulterations of Christ's teachings suited to their 

vile purposes. The truths of the Gospels became hidden 

or utterly unrecognizable under the accumulated 

dogmas of centuries of Popery. The Council of Trent 

but added to the venerable collection of fraudulent 

misrepresentations, and even as late as the third quarter 

of last century the dogma of the infallibility of the 

Pope was promulgated afresh by the Council of the 

Vatican. 

Even nature must suit herself to the Catholic dogmas. 
When Galileo discovered the rotation of the earth 
he naturally upset the Popedom, and was informed that 

he was wrong and must admit his mistake or ! Galileo 

was not of the stuff of which martyrs are made, or 
it may be he was wise in his generation. He knew he 
was right, but he preferred a natural death, and he felt 
confident that the time would come when this scientific 
truth would be acknowledged in spite of the Pope and 
all his minions, so he acquiesced in the Papal fallacy. 



Nature, however, eventually triumphed, as Truth is now 
doing, and the Lion of Rome continues to retire beaten 
and cowed before a power too great even for its mighty 
strength. 

From the many official booklets which have been 
published of late, and which have been directly inspired 
by the present Pope, it is easy to see that he, along 
with many of his high-placed followers, has come to the 
conclusion that some measure of reformation has become 
an urgent necessity within the Roman Catholic Church, 
otherwise the mighty edifice may totter to a fall. The 

R3646 : page 310 

direct reforms at which Pius X. aims may be summed 
up as follows:— 

(1) To transform the religious cult into keeping 
with the sense of the true religion of Christ, insisting 
more upon the worship of the Redeemer and less upon 
that of the Virgin Mary, the saints, holy relics, etc. 

(2) Complete reform, i.e., restriction and simplification, 
of the Papal Court. 

(3) Restriction of the numbers of Orders, which 

now runs into hundreds, to about five or six; and purification 
of monastic and convent life, which at present 
teems with abuses. 

(4) Modernization of the teaching of divinity in the 
Roman Catholic Colleges. 

(5) Greater liberty to the Catholic scientist, and the 
prevention of rash condemnation, such as that experienced 
by the Abbe Loisy and others. 

(6) Reform in the Papal diplomacy, and the foundation 
of a sound school of diplomatists. 

(7) Reduction of the 264 Italian dioceses, with an 
equal number of bishops, to a reasonable number. 

(8) Reform of the Congregations, which have not 
been altered since the time of Pope Sextus V. 

(9) Thorough reform of the entire Roman Catholic 
religion, morally and intellectually! 

(10) Formal renouncement of all claim to temporal 
power in Italy; and finally, in fact, a return of Catholicism 
to the Gospels ! 

Reform literature has been particularly in evidence 
throughout Italy of late, and the publication of pamphlets 
goes on continually. Bishop Bonnemelli of Cremona, 
for instance, has published a pastoral letter in 
book form, and with the full permission of the Pope, 
which may be taken as a typical example. Referring 
to the worship of the Virgin Mary, he says: "It shocks 
Christian feeling and common sense to see the Virgin 
Mary and many saints placed upon the same level as 
our Lord Jesus Christ." The Bishop then goes on to 
criticize the superstitious worship of Saint Antonius of 
Padua and the financial exploitation connected therewith. 
"Not only are there people who believe in him," 
he says, "but there are those who turn him to good business 



account, and also others who afford permission for the 
conduct of such transactions." Monsignor Bonomelli 
frankly admits that it is quite comprehensible to him 
that in Italy the educated classes— be they patricians, 
merchants or workers— do not desire any connection 
with the Roman Catholic Church. What an admission 
from a Catholic Bishop! And why is this? Simply because 
that religion represents a pot pourri of absurd 
ceremonies, customs, devotions, etc., which may have 
the effect of subduing the ignorant masses to due reverence 
and respect for their spiritual (?) guides, but 
offends the good sense of the educated and enlightened. 

Since the above article was written, a Rome correspondent 
informs us that Pius X. has appointed a committee 
consisting of several Cardinals and Doctors of 
Catholic Divinity, to consider and decide upon the measures 
of reform to be adopted. The Intransigeants and 
Jesuits, continues the correspondent, are highly indignant 
at the lines of the policy taken up by the Pope, as 
they can see only too well that should the meditated 
reforms be carried out the knell of the priesthood's 
power is sounded, and their hitherto uncurbed license at 
an end. These latter views find strong confirmation in 
the fact that outside of Italy the Catholic priests are 
careful not to breathe a word of the movements, pregnant 
with meaning, which are going on in Papal circles, 
since they fear, and with good cause, that as soon as the 
Vatican announces that the dogmas hitherto propagated 
by them as Gospel truths are entirely wrong and merely 
the results of former abuses on the part of the clergy, 
people will immediately come to the conclusion that 
where so much is false it is useless to look for aught that 
savors of the truth, and will, in their disgust at the manner 
in which they have been misled, turn their thoughts 
towards the true faith and so swell the ranks of the 
Protestant believers.— The Bulwark. 



But, alas! how few they will find of true Protestants 
—holding the Bible as God's inspired Word and 
protesting against the errors of the "dark ages." By 
that time "higher criticism" will have infidelity intrenched 
in pulpit and pew. But, God be praised, some 
are already seeing Present Truth. 



R3646 : page 310 

"BEAR YE ONE ANOTHER'S BURDENS." 

-GALATIANS 6:2.- 

THOSE WHO LOOK upon the Bible as a collection 
of moral precepts designed for the regulation 



of the world in general, are very far from 
the proper estimate of its object and scope; for the Bible 
is not addressed to the world at all. The whole book, 
from beginning to end, is the inheritance of the saints— 
"the sanctified in Christ Jesus." To them, all the 
apostolic epistles are addressed. 

The book of Revelation is also similarly addressed. 
And the Apostle Peter, in referring to the prophecies 
of the Old Testament, says even of the prophets that 
"not unto themselves, but unto us they did minister." 
(1 Pet. 1:12. See also Dan. 12:4,8,9.) And the Apostle 
Paul says that "whatsoever things were written aforetime 
were written for our learning, that we [the sanctified 
in Christ Jesus] through patience and comfort of the 
Scriptures might have hope." (Rom. 15:4.) Consequently, 
all that was written aforetime by Moses and the 
prophets— whether of history or law or prophecy or 
type or precept— was designed specially for us who are in 
Christ, for the instruction and comfort of the children of 
God. And not one iota of it belongs to the unregenerate 

R3646 : page 311 

world. It is a "light which shineth in a dark place" 
to Christians: it is "a lamp to our feet, and a light to 
our path." And whatever light the worldly get from it, 
reaches them indirectly— as reflected from the children 
of God, who "shine as lights in the world." "Ye," 
said our Lord, "are the light of the world."— Phil. 2:15; 
Matt. 5:14. 

The plan of God, once discerned, indirectly inculcates 
every principle of morality and virtue by showing just 
what God designs to have us do; by showing, first, 
how he created us perfect and glorious in his own image 
and designed us for everlasting life in the enjoyment 
of his favors; next, that everything in us which is short 
of that original perfection is due to sin and renders us 
unworthy of life. Then there is the recognition of sin; 
and thus the glorious plan for both our legal and our 
actual deliverance from sin and death is opened up, and 
the final restitution of all things is assured to the loyal 
and obedient sons of God; and all the necessary provisions 
thereto are made manifest. 

As the plan is now clearly outlined we see how 
history and prophecy and type and law all minister to 
the one grand design of the Book of books, in which the 
reverent and careful student finds the highest incentive 
to purity and holiness, and the most perfect delineation 
of that praiseworthy character which he should seek to 
build up, and in contrast with which the deformity of 
every evil is manifest. 

Among the instructions to the children of God is 
the one above cited— "Bear ye one another's burdens, 
and so fulfil the law of Christ." The law of Christ we 
have seen to be the law of love: and Love says, "Bear ye 
one another's burdens." There are times in the experience 



of almost every one when the surges of trouble 

roll high, and the timid, shrinking soul is almost overwhelmed 

by them. And then how soothing is the sympathy 

and counsel of a fellow-member of the body of 

Christ! Worldly-minded friends may sympathize, but 

their counsel is almost sure to be wrong. Hence the 

R3647 : page 311 

necessity of fellowship in the body of Christ, and of disfellowship 
with the world. 

It is not always necessary to tell one's sorrows and 
perplexities to another, and to have their sympathy and 
aid: in most cases they are better untold, except to the 
Lord. But Love's quick discernment is always watchful 
and ready with the word in season, the cordial friendliness 
and the helpful hand if need be, to help bear the 
burden. 

There are various kinds of burdens to be borne: 
there are burdens of bereavement, of financial embarrassment, 
of business and family cares, of physical and 
mental suffering, of sudden disasters and great perplexities 
and anxieties; and there are burdens also of 
conscious sins. In all these, if we are diligently seeking 
to fulfil the law of Christ, we may be able to cheer and 
strengthen fellow-members of the body of Christ with 
sympathy and counsel, and such aid as may be most 
needful and timely. 

But the Apostle calls particular attention to this 
last kind of burdens— burdens of sins— and counsels the 
exercise of this disposition specially in cases of acknowledged 
sin. We are all to remember our own liability to 
sin, and therefore to be patient and considerate with 
others when they are overtaken in a fault. Such patient, 
forbearing love is one of the most beautiful adornments 
of the Christian character. 

In the body of Christ the various members have 
their various inherited weaknesses, against which they 
must wage a lifelong warfare; and these weaknesses are 
sometimes of such a nature as to interfere to some 
extent with the rights and comforts of others as well as 
of themselves. And just here the Apostle offers a word 
of counsel, saying, "We, then, that are strong ought to 
bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please ourselves." 
(Rom. 15:1,2.) This does not imply that we 
should not expostulate with such a one and endeavor 
to help him get rid of his infirmity. This we should do, 
in the spirit of meekness and kindness, while we patiently 
endure the trial of our patience, not seeking to please 
ourselves, but rather to help a weaker brother or sister. 
"Let every one of us," as the Apostle counsels, "please 
his neighbor [brother] for his good, to edification"— i.e., 
not by simply ignoring his fault as though you considered 
it all right, but, while kindly urging him to strive 
against it, still humbly and patiently submitting to the 
discomfort it brings to you. 



If this spirit prevails, the Apostle further shows 
(1 Cor. 12:24-26), there need be no schism in the body; 
because the members all have a mutual care and a mutual 
love one for another— a care which seeks to encourage 
and strengthen all that is good and to discourage all that 
is unbecoming, and a love which throws its mantle over 
the deformity and endeavors to conceal a fault, rather 
than to expose the weaker brother to the reproach of 
others. Thus in the true body of Christ, which is knit 
together in love, if one member suffer, all the members 
suffer with him, in proportion as they are more or less 
directly associated with him; or, if one member be 
honored, all the members rejoice with him, and to some 
degree share the honor; just as when in an earthly family 
one member rises to honorable distinction all the members 
partake of the honor and the joy. 

For such self-sacrificing love how necessary is the 
spirit of humility and gentleness and patience and faith! 
How forceful are the Master's words, "Except ye be 
converted [from the spirit of the world to the spirit of 
Christ] and become as little children [in meekness and 
teachableness], ye shall not enter into the kingdom of 
heaven. "-Matt. 18:1-6. 

And again says the Master, "Whoso shall receive 
one such little child [one such humble, teachable child of 
God] in my name receiveth me." Let us, therefore, 
be in haste to receive and to heartily fellowship every 
such one. 

And here he adds a caution which all would do well 
to heed, saying, "But whosoever shall ensnare one of the 
least of these who believe in me, it would be better for 
him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and 
that he were sunk in the depth of the sea." With what 
carefulness, then, should we regard one another. 

Dearly beloved, bear ye one another's burdens, 
and so fulfil the law of Christ— the law of love; and so 
bind up the body of Christ that there be no schism in the 
body, but that it be more and more knit together in 
love. Let this blessed law of Christ rule more fully in 
all who have taken, by consecration, the name of Christ: 
and let its hallowed influence shine out upon the world, 
showing them how it brings peace and harmony and 

R3647 : page 312 

happiness— how it makes more tender and devoted 
wives, more noble and good and kind husbands, more 
loyal and loving children, more kind and good neighbors; 
and how it puts oil upon all the troubled waters of present 
experience and prepares the heart for the enjoyment of 
all the fruits of righteousness. 



R3647 : page 312 



"PAY THY VOWS UNTO THE MOST HIGH." 

THE FIFTIETH PSALM furnishes food for most 
profitable meditation to the consecrated. It 
starts with a precious reminder of the glory 
that is shortly to be revealed in and through the faithful. 
Taking the standpoint of the Church's future completeness 
and glory, it says (verse 1): "The mighty God, 
even Jehovah, speaketh [through the glorified Church, 
the Christ, Head and body], and calleth the earth from 
the rising of the Sun ["the Sun of Righteousness, with 
healing in his wings"— Mai. 4:2] unto the going down 
thereof" [i.e., from the beginning to the close of the 
Millennial day, Jehovah, through his Anointed, will be 
calling the earth to repentance and to righteousness and 
eternal life.] 

Verse 2. "Out of Zion, the perfection of beauty 
[out of the Church exalted and glorified], God shineth 
forth [his glorious character and plan are made known]." 

But verse 3 reminds us that that time is yet future, 
and begins to describe the coming of the Lord, while the 
following verses discourse as to the first work of his 
presence. 

Verse 3. "Our God shall come, and shall not keep 
silence: a fire ["the fire of his jealousy"] shall devour 
before him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about 
him." It will be the tempest of the great time of trouble 
so often and so variously and vividly described 
elsewhere. 

Verse 4. "He shall call to the heavens above, and 
to the earth, to judge his people." In this time of the 
Lord's presence and the harvest of the Gospel age, all 
who claim to be his people— i.e., all "Christendom," 
Christ's kingdom, falsely so-called, or "Babylon," as 
named in the Scriptures (Rev. 16:19)— are brought into 
judgment before the assembled hosts of heaven and 
earth— angels and men. Already this judgment of 
"Christendom," "Babylon," is in progress: hence the 
late overhauling and revision of the hitherto accepted 
and unquestioned creeds of its various sects. And hence, 
too, the unsparing criticism of nominal Christianity 
by the world at large, in the secular press, etc., calling 
attention to its traditional errors, and to its untenable 
positions. It is now recognized as a self-contradictory 
mouthpiece of God. 

Verse 5 is the command of the now present Lord of 
the harvest to the reapers, to separate the true wheat 
from the great bundles of tares in Babylon— "Gather 
my saints together unto me: those that have made a 
covenant with me [not merely by the lips, but] by 
[actual] sacrifice"— those who have faithfully carried out 
the solemn covenant of entire devotedness to the Lord. 

Verse 6. "And the heavens shall declare his righteousness; 
for God himself is judge." In that judgment 
which heaven and earth are called upon to witness, and 
which shall closely discriminate between the wheat 



and the tares, and effectually separate them, "the 
heavens [the Kingdom of God which will be established 
as the outcome of this judgment] shall declare his 
[God's] righteousness; for God himself [who cannot err] 
is [the] Judge." 

The following verses of the chapter sum up charges 
brought against God's nominal people, while verses 14,15,22 and 23 
interpose a word of wise counsel for 
those who will receive it. 

Verses 7 and 8. "Hear, O my people [ye who claim 
to be my people by a solemn covenant], and I will 
speak: O Israel [nominal spiritual Israel], and I will 
testify against thee: I am God, even thy God. Not 
because of thy sacrifices will I reprove thee; and thy 
burnt offerings [free-will offerings, such as benevolent 
works, etc.] are continually before me." But such works 
cannot commend them to God in that day of judgment; 
for, said Jesus, "Many will say to me in that day, Lord, 
Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? and in thy 
name cast out devils? and in thy name done many 
wonderful works? and then will I say unto them, I never 
knew [approved] you: depart from me, ye that work 
iniquity." (Matt. 7:22,23.) These have been "false 
prophets" (Matt. 7:15), "teaching for doctrines the commandments 
of men." (Matt. 15:9.) For their own 
erroneous theories they have claimed divine authority; 
and though in going about to establish their own righteousness 
they have done "many wonderful works," 
those works are not acceptable to God, because they 
have not submitted themselves to his plans and methods. 

Verses 9-13 declare God's independence of their 
works, and intimate his perfect ability to accomplish 
the blessing of the world according to his own plan without 
their assistance. "I will take no bullock out of thy 
house, nor he goats out of thy folds; for every beast of 
the forest is mine, and the cattle upon a thousand hills. 
I know all the fowls of the mountains: and the wild 
beasts of the field are mine. If I were hungry I would 
not tell thee; for the world is mine and the fulness thereof. 

R3648 : page 312 

Will I eat flesh of bulls or drink the blood of goats?"— 
Am I in need of your wisdom or works, or in any way 
dependent upon your gifts? No— "Offer unto God 
thanksgiving; and pay thy vows unto the Most High." 
(Verse 14.) What have any of us to offer unto the Lord 
that we did not first receive from him, and that should 
not, therefore, be thankfully received and used according 
to the directions of his plan? And this is what all 
who have consecrated themselves to God have covenanted 
to do. It is, therefore, obligatory upon all such that 
they pay their vows, fulfil their covenant unto the Most 
High. ' 

True, in the faithful fulfilling of a covenant of entire 
consecration to God there is much to endure in the way 



of reproach and persecution from the world (2 Tim. 3:12); 
but to such the Lord through the Prophet (verse 15) 
says, "Call upon me in the day of trouble: I will 
deliver thee, and thou [by thy testimony and faithfulness] 
shalt glorify me." 

Verses 16,17. "But unto the wicked God saith" 
[The wicked here referred to are not people of the world; 
for, according to verse 7, this testimony is borne against 
those who claim to be the Lord's people, and members 
of the spiritual house of Israel. These "wicked" are the 
covenant-breakers among those who still claim to be 

R3648 : page 313 

faithful people of God.]— unto these God saith, "What 

hast thou to do to declare my statutes [decrees, doctrines] 

or that thou shouldest take my covenant into 

thy mouth? seeing thou hatest instruction and castest 

my words behind thee." The Lord will not hold them 

guiltless who, professing entire consecration to him, 

nevertheless despise instruction and cast his words 

behind them while they cling to their own traditions and 

theories; "For," says the Apostle, "the wrath of God 

is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness 

of men who hold down [Greek katecho— 

hold down or suppress] the truth in unrighteousness." 

(Rom. 1:18.) This is what the various ecclesiastical 

systems of Great Babylon have been guilty of for centuries 

past: they have taught their own false doctrines and 

have claimed for them the divine authority of the Word 

of God. In doing so they have unjustly suppressed the 

truth: they have hated instruction and have cast the 

words of the Lord behind them whenever the latter 

were brought forward to testify against them or their 

plans. 

What right, the Prophet inquires, have such covenant-breakers 
to declare the plan of God? None whatever. 
Such unfaithful and "wicked and slothful" servants 
are hindered by their errors from seeing truths now 
due. Having been unfaithful to the measure of truth 
received, they are not permitted to know, and hence 
cannot declare, the deeper things of God— the breadth 
and scope of his wonderful plan. "Light is sown for 
the righteous" who faithfully and thankfully receive 
and disseminate it, "and gladness [the gladness which 
comes from a realization of the truth] for the upright 
in heart."— Psa. 97:11. 

But the testimony against this class proceeds- 
verse 18— "When thou sawest a thief [one desirous of 
robbing God's children of the truth], then thou consentedst 
with him." All who do not guard the truth and 
the flock of God against the encroachment of error, who 
bid false teachers God-speed, or who commend wolves 
in sheep's clothing to the Lord's little ones, are, according 
to the Prophet's language, wickedly consenting with 
thieves and robbers. And not only so, but he continues— 



"and hast been partaker with adulterers." Such a 
compromise with the spirit of the world is, in the language 
of the Scriptures, defined as adultery. For this 
reason Babylon the Great (Papacy) is termed a harlot, 
and the mother of harlots (of the various similar systems 
that sprang from her); and the principle holds good in 
every case where unfaithful covenant-breakers consent 
to any degree with the thieves and robbers who plot and 
scheme against the truth. 

Verse 19. "Thou givest thy mouth to evil, and thy 
tongue frameth deceit." Such is the course of all who in 
unrighteousness suppress the truth and go about to 
establish their own righteousness and their own plans. 

Verse 20. "Thou sittest and speakest against thy 
brother; thou slanderest thine own mother's son." The 
unfaithful always take the attitude of persecutors, to 
some degree, of the faithful. Such is the attitude of the 
whole nominal church against those faithful servants 
who receive and advocate the truth. 

Verse 21. "These things hast thou done ["Babylon," 
"Christendom," the great nominal church], and I kept 
silence: [up to the present time, the harvest; and because 
I kept silence and permitted this evil to run and prosper] 
thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as 
thyself [that I was consenting with thee to thy evil 
ways]; but [not so; for a purpose I permitted you to run 
your course and to make your real character manifest; 
but now, in this harvest and judgment time] I will reprove 
thee, and set them in order before thine eyes." 
Hence the present investigations and exposures of creeds, 
and the growing unrest in the various sects of 
"Christendom." 

Verses 22,23. "Now consider this [reproof], ye 
that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces [destroy you], 
and there be none to deliver. 

"Whoso offereth thanksgiving [thankfully receives 
the reproof and applies his heart unto instruction] 
glorifieth me [or honors me, as a faithful and consistent 
believer and representative of the truth]; and to him that 
ordereth his course aright [that conforms his life and 
teaching to the light received] will I show the salvation 
of God." 

How solemn and weighty the admonition, and how 
worthy of the most thoughtful and prayerful consideration 
of all who name the name of Christ! The day of 
reckoning is upon the Church— upon all who profess to be 
members of it: "The hour of his judgment is come." 
Who is worthy to stand? Only those who gratefully 
receive the message of divine truth, and who faithfully 
pay their vows to the Most High. 



R3648 : page 313 

REBUILDING THE TEMPLE. 



--EZRA 3:10-4:5.-OCTOBER 22.- 

Golden Text:— "The Temple of God is holy, 
which Temple ye are."— 1 Cor. 3:17. 

LOYALTY to the Lord, and faith in his promises, 

are costly. The Lord has so arranged the matter, 

to the intent that only those who are willing to 

pay the price may enjoy these blessings. Only the faithful 

and the obedient are willing to pay the price. Thus 

the Lord proves his people, separating the merely 

nominal believers from the true, selecting to himself his 

"jewels," his "peculiar people." 

This principle applied to the Jews who returned 
to Jerusalem from Babylon captivity, in response to the 
Lord's provision through the proclamation of King 
Cyrus. Out of the great hosts of that nation carried 
captive— first the ten tribes, and later the two tribes- 
there were only Forty-two Thousand Three Hundred 
Sixty (42,360) of the proper faith in God and the Abrahamic 
promise, and of the proper zeal and courage, etc., 
ready to respond. The remainder of the nation had become 
so comfortably settled in Babylon, socially and 
financially, that their interests in these things outweighed 
their faith in the Abrahamic promise. Thus 
God sifted the nation, and in this motley group from all 
the tribes he had the jewel class— the very best and 
most loyal part of all the seed of Abraham. As the 
Apostle explains in respect to the elect Church in this 
gospel age, so we might say of these Jews returning from 
Babylonian exile, that there were not many of them 

R3648 : page 314 

great, or wise, or learned, or noble, according to the 
course and wisdom of this world. 

HOPES DEFERRED. TRIALS MANY. 

Nor had their trials ceased with the surrender of 
brighter prospects in Babylonia. They left their friends 
in Babylon, full of zeal, and to some extent admired 
by their more worldly-wise compatriots, who preferred 
to remain in the foreign land. The escort granted them 
by the king, the presents of money, and the costly vessels 
of the temple service, were with them, and their 
hopes ran high as they began their journey of nearly 
800 miles, about the distance from Philadelphia to Chicago. 
According to tradition, they must have been about 
four months travelling, whereas an express train in our 
day would make the distance in seventeen hours. 

The toilsome journey ended, they finally rested at 
Jerusalem, only to find still greater discouragements. 
But a very few of them had ever seen the place before, 
and those few had seen through the eyes of childhood, 



for the city had lain desolate, according to the Word of 
the Lord, for seventy years. (2 Chron. 36:21.) The wall 
and the temple had been demolished by Nebuchadnezzar's 
orders, and many of the private residences were 
also left in ruins, and now for seventy years of such 
desolations, "without inhabitant," the place was a 
wilderness. Trees were growing in what formerly were 
streets. Everything was disorder. Any other class than 
those full of faith and zeal, as these were, would have 
been utterly discouraged. We are to remember that the 
Lord thus tries our courage, and faith and zeal, not to 
destroy these qualities, but to deepen and fix them— 
to establish us, to develop us in character. As with the 
typical Israelites there, so it is now with the spiritual 
Israelites— all such trying experiences, under divine 
providence, will work out to our advantage if we will but 
persevere in our faith, and love, and zeal. 

R3649 : page 314 

It required more than a year to put themselves in 
reasonable condition for living, and then their attention 
turned to the rebuilding of the temple. That they should 
have begun so soon to think of the house of the Lord 
speaks well of their spiritual condition. It is at this 
point that our lesson properly begins, describing the 
laying of the foundation of the temple, and the priests 
and the Levites, appropriately robed, making a joyful 
noise before the Lord, as representing the faith and confidence 
of the people in the precious promises associated 
with that temple and with that city. Alas, poor Jews! 
we sympathize with them greatly as we remember that 
as a nation they clung to those Abrahamic promises for 
over 1,600 years, and yet finally rejected the Prince of 
life, and in consequence were left desolate, as a house, or 
nation. The Apostle remarks, concerning their faith in 
the Abrahamic promise, "unto which promise our 
twelve tribes instantly serving God hope to come." 

How glad we are for the poor Jews that although 
Israel hath not obtained the chiefest favor, but only the 
"elect" have obtained it, while the rest were blinded, 
nevertheless God's mercy and favor still have them in 
mind, and assure us that they shall obtain mercy through 
our mercy, shortly— that the blindness that has been on 
Israel, during the selection of Spiritual Israel, will surely 
pass away, furnishing them the chief opportunity for 
reconciliation to God, under the New Covenant provisions 
of the Millennial age.-Heb. 8:10-12. 

A NEW SONG IN MY MOUTH. 

As with the mind's eye we see those poor but faithful 
Israelites, out of all the tribes, praising God as they 
laid the foundation of the Temple, it suggests to us how 
much more the spiritual Israelites who have returned 
from mystic Babylon should shout and sing the praises 



of our King from our higher standpoint of knowledge 
and appreciation of his grace and truth. Speaking of us, 
the spiritual Israelites, the Prophet declares, "Thou hast 
put a new song into my mouth, even the loving-kindness 
of our God." All spiritual Israelites, who are in the 
right attitude of heart toward the Lord, are full of songs 
of gratitude and praise— not always audibly, however, 
for many can best sing and make melody in their hearts 
unto the Lord; and indeed the Psalm of Life, which each 
of the Lord's followers declares in actions and words to 
those about him, is the best testimony, the best praise 
we can raise, more to the glory of our King than any 
others. 

If the Israelites who remained in Babylon, whose 
faith and courage were insufficient, could have witnessed 
the scene at a distance, they doubtless would have 
shouted for joy, that they had not undertaken such a 
pilgrimage and such a work of restoration; but as Paul 
and Silas could sing in the prison, with their backs 
bleeding from the cruel lash, while others enjoying every 
luxury of life in the same city were miserable, so it was 
with those returned Israelites. Full of faith and hope, 
they were also filled with joy as they looked forward in 
prospect for still further favors from the Lord, in harmony 
with his glorious promises. And so it is with the 
Lord's people to-day: our rejoicing is not because of 
temporal favors and advantages and privileges, but on 
account of those joys which are ours through faith and 
hope, inspired by the divine promises— the culmination 
of the same promises for which the natural Israelites 
were aspiring, and which are secured to us through the 
great Jew of the seed of Abraham, our Redeemer, our 
Bridegroom. 

The shouts were discordant— some of joy, some of 
weeping. Those who looked forward in hope shouted for 
joy. Those who looked backward, and pictured before 
their minds Solomon's grand Temple, wept as they 
thought of the insignificance of the present one in comparison. 
And so to-day among spiritual Israelites, there 
are some who weep for the past, when they should be 
rejoicing for the future. The Apostle exhorts us to 
"forget the things which are behind, and to press forward 
to the things which are before." The lessons we 
learn from past experiences, even from adverse experiences, 
while they should be kept in memory, need 
not be mourned over by spiritual Israelites, for they can 
call to mind that the merit of Christ's sacrifice covers all 
of their unwilling blemishes and mistakes. Carrying 
with them their experiences they should press forward 
to fresh victories and fresh joys in the Lord. 

"FIRST PURE, THEN PEACEABLE." 

We are to remember that these 42,000 people, about 
35,000 of whom are supposed to have belonged to the 
tribes of Judah and Benjamin and Levi, and about 1 1,000 



from the other nine tribes, occupied only a small district 
in Palestine, about twenty-five miles square, Jerusalem 
being the center. The remainder of the territory of 
Palestine was more or less settled by immigrants. The 
king of Babylon followed the practice of moving the 

R3649 : page 315 

captives from one nation into the territory of another, 
so that their old associations being broken up they would 
be more dependent upon the Babylonian government and 
lose their own natural traits. These people of various 
nationalities that had settled in Palestine had acquired 
some of the traditions of the land and its religious 
customs, and in our Lord's day, 566 years later, they 
were known as the Samaritans. Of them our Lord said, 
"Ye believe ye know not what; we know what we believe, 
for salvation is of the Jews." Respecting the same 
people, we remember our Lord's commandments as he 
sent forth the twelve apostles and later also the seventy 
disciples to proclaim him, he said, "Go not into the way 
of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans 
enter ye not; but go rather to the lost sheep of the house 
of Israel. "--Matt. 10:5,6. 

These mixed peoples, whom we will for convenience 
call Samaritans, paid little attention to the Jews returned 
from Babylon until they heard of their project of rebuilding 
the Temple on its own site, the consecrated 
site, for it is supposed that Abraham's typical offering 
of Isaac was made upon this very "dome of the rock" 
upon which the Temple was built, a rock that to this 
day is held sacred by Musselmans, Jews and Christians. 
The Samaritans had been unneighborly up to this time, 
but now seemed to catch an inspiration from this Temple 
building as they remembered the ancient glories of the 
nation of this land, whose great king Solomon had built 
the first Temple. Ceasing to act as enemies, the Samaritans 
proffered their assistance in the building of the 
Temple. We cannot doubt that they were sincere in 
this proposition, and that really their religious fervor 
impelled them to make it. 

Many commentators think the Israelites made a 
great mistake in rejecting their aid and declining to 
affiliate with them. But such commentators are evidently 
in error, since our Lord Jesus by his conduct and 
words fully substantiated the thought that the Samaritans 
had nothing whatever to do with the true Temple 
and its building. God had been sifting the true seed of 
Abraham to select from it the faithful few, and now to 
have invited the Samaritans to come in and join them 
in the Temple building and Temple services would have 
been to bring in a semi-heathen mixture, which the 
Lord did not desire. Why the Lord did not desire it can 
be seen only from the one standpoint— not that it was his 
wish to send those Samaritans to eternal torment, nor 
that he wished to destroy them in the Second Death, but 



that he has for future development a great plan of salvation 
which will affect every nation, people, kindred and 
tongue, including these Samaritans. In the interim he 
wished to develop the typical seed of Abraham, and 
subsequently the spiritual seed of Abraham, to be his 
agents and representatives in conferring his blessings 
upon all nations. 

"WHICH TEMPLE YE ARE." 

We find the same thought abroad to-day, troubling 
those who have come out of Babylon, and who are wishing 
to build the true Temple of God referred to in our 
golden text— the holy temple, the antitypical temple, 
"which temple ye are." The foundations of our temple 
were laid at Pentecost, under apparently very unfavorable 
conditions from the world's standpoint— a dead 
leader, and a handful of a few hundred disciples scattered 
and considerably discouraged. Nevertheless, those who 
recognize the Lord's hand in the matter see things 
differently: with the eye of faith they discern in Jesus 
the great rock of our Salvation typified by the "rock of 
the dome," the top of Mt. Zion, on which the altar of 
sacrifice stood. The same eye of faith now discerns that 
the twelve apostles are the foundation stones of divine 
appointment, built upon the rock Christ Jesus; and that 
upon the ministries of those appointed representatives 
of Christ, a glorious church, a glorious temple of the Lord 
is being erected. Those who then had the eye of faith 
shouted for joy, and all who since possess the same 
spiritual vision rejoice in the greater work which the 
Lord is accomplishing, as they see the preparation now 
of the "living stones," which, by and by, in the first 
resurrection, shall be brought together complete as the 
glorious temple of God, in and through which all the 
families of the earth may have intercourse with God to 
their blessing. 

There are numerous "Samaritans" to-day who have 
neither part nor lot in this great temple and its construction. 
These Samaritans are found in churches of nearly 
all denominations, men and women of good character 
and of religious inclinations. Some of them are "good 
Samaritans," ready to relieve the sick, the indigent. 
Worldly wisdom says that these should all be recognized 
as "Israelites indeed," even though they be not fully 
consecrated to the Lord to do his will. Many are inclined 
to upbraid us now, as they upbraided the natural 
Israelites, for refusing the fellowship and cooperation of 
the Samaritans of their day. 

ONLY ONE NARROW WAY. 

There is but one course for the Lord's people to 
follow: they should appreciate whatever is good in these 
their neighbors and friends, they should deal justly and 
kindly with them, but they should remember that as 



R3650 : page 315 

oil and water will not mix, so likewise there cannot be 
any real union between the consecrated and the unconsecrated 
in respect to their religious views and their 
endeavors to cooperate in the divine service. Their 
standpoints are opposite, affiliations are injurious to 
both parties. If the spiritually begotten ones, the 
Israelites indeed, attempt to meet the ideas of the 
Samaritan class, they will be compromising their own 
covenant with the Lord. Likewise, if the Samaritan 
class or the churchianity class of our day be encouraged 
to affiliate with the consecrated, it will injure them in 
that it will deceive them into thinking that they have 
become joint-heirs in the divine promises; whereas none 
can inherit under those promises except through faith 
in the Redeemer, circumcision in the heart, and a full 
consecration unto the death. Such only become regularly 
and legitimately Israelites indeed, probationary members 
of the "very elect" Church. 

When their cooperation in temple building, etc., 
was declined, the Samaritans became the bitter opponents 
of the Jews, whom they, no doubt, described as 
bigoted. Consistently with their views of the subject 
they did all in their power, politically and otherwise, 
to hinder the temple building, and thus the trials and 
difficulties of the servants of God were greatly increased 
and multiplied. 

So it is to-day. Those who are faithful to the Lord, 
"the people who do know their God," are esteemed to 
be religious bigots and fanatics by some of the respectable 

R3650 : page 316 

of churchianity, who, in harmony with their erroneous 
conceptions of the situation, are doing all in 
their power to hinder us in the great work of this Gospel 
age, the preparation of the living stones of this Temple. 
We need to understand the situation properly, otherwise 
we would soon be discouraged, and think of God as being 
against us because he permits such opposition. But with 
the right view of things before our minds we may realize 
that all the oppositions of churchianity are really beneficial 
to us, helpful in that they serve to do the chiseling 
and polishing of our characters, necessary to fit and 
prepare us for honorable stations in the temple of glory 
soon to be completed. One thought not to be lost sight 
of is, that in the Lord's arrangement we are the stones, 
he the master workman— and all the trials and difficulties 
and oppositions and perplexities and disappointments of 
our experience are the chisels and the wheels and the 
emery-sand for our preparation. From this standpoint 
only are we able to follow the Apostle's advice to rejoice 
in tribulations also. 



R3650 : page 316 

"BY MY SPIRIT, SAITH THE LORD." 

--ZECHARIAH 4:1-10.-OCTOBER 29.- 

Golden Text:— "Not by might nor by 
power, but by my Spirit, saith the Lord." 

ZECHARIAH prophesied during the period of the 
rebuilding of the Temple. In our last lesson we 
noted the beginning of the work in the laying of 
the foundations, and that this corresponds with the 
establishment of the Gospel Church at Pentecost. The 
joy and zeal associated with the founding of the Temple 
was followed by a period of slackness, the result of the 
opposition of the Samaritan neighbors, who employed 
their every art to discourage the builders and to cause an 
interruption of the work. As a result several years 
elapsed before the structure was finally completed. 

Just so, after the founding of the Church by our 
Lord and the apostles, and the great season of refreshing 
associated therewith, there came a period of fierce 
opposition and persecution from Satan and his blinded 
servants. As a consequence of this opposition very 
little was done for centuries upon the building up of the 
Church— the preparation of the living stones; yet 
finally, with the Lord's assistances and encouragements 
through the Reformation movement, etc., the work of 
collecting the living stones has progressed, and now we 
are in the time when the Temple of the Lord is nearly 
complete— the spiritual Temple which, when completed, 
will receive its top-stones in the sense of being brought 
directly in contact with and under the guidance of the 
glorified Lord, who is the capstone of the spiritual 
pyramid— his Church. 

Haggai's prophecies were delivered to Israel about 
the time of their return from the captivity, and therefore 
at the time of the founding of the Temple, the 
prophet at this time being advanced in years. Zechariah, 
a younger prophet, was raised up by the Lord at this 
time, and other messages were sent to the discouraged 
Israelites to show them that they must not expect great 
national prosperity at the time, but that nevertheless 
the Lord was with them, and that going on faithfully in 
an apparently small, insignificant matter, they would be 
accomplishing his purposes. This corresponds in some 
degree with the messages which have come to the Lord's 
people since the time of Wycliffe, and which have led 
to the Reformation movement in its various aspects, and 
incidentally to the development and preparation of the 
various living stones of the glorious Temple. 

PROPHETS TO BOTH ISRAELS. 



Our lesson treats of these visions given to Zechariah 
and related by him to the people, which served to encourage 
them to proceed with the work. They were not 
spiritual Israelites, neither was the Temple they were 
constructing the true, glorious Temple of the Lord. 
Those were only the types— the better things, the antitypes, 
are ours. Nevertheless they got a blessing in 
connection with the types as we get still greater blessings 
in connection with the antitypes, and the same 
messages which mean so much for us meant a great deal 
to them, though they did not understand them so clearly. 

For instance, this prophecy respecting the Golden 
Candlestick, etc., to natural Israel at that time was 
properly understood to mean that they were to be 
God's light-bearers amongst all the nations of the world, 
and that God himself would see to the supply of light 
which they would shed forth. And all that was true of 
natural Israel for centuries; they were God's light-bearing 
nation, and undoubtedly their influence in the 
world hindered a greater degradation than might otherwise 
have occurred. The nations furthest away from 
them and the light which God placed in them and which 
shone out from them were the nations which became the 
most degraded, while the nations nearest them and their 
light were the nations which went downward least 
rapidly. Assuredly, however, it was not intended that 
they should understand the full meaning of this prophecy, 
and the prophet himself did not understand its full 
meaning. 

The Apostle Peter explains the situation to us when 
he says, "Holy men of old spoke as moved by the holy 
Spirit." And yet he proceeds to say, The things which 
they uttered were not for themselves but for us upon 
whom the ends of the ages have come. (1 Cor. 10:11; 
1 Pet. 1:10-12; 2 Pet. 1:21.) The prophets spoke and 
wrote mechanically, as they were moved by the holy 
Spirit. They saw some meaning, some significance of 
the things they wrote and spoke, but not the true, the 
deep significations, which were not then due to be 
understood. Only since the true Temple began to be 
built at Pentecost, only since the anointing of the holy 
Spirit came upon the spiritual household, the body of 
Christ, has it been possible for any to enter into the real 
spirit, thought, intention of the divine purpose as expressed 
in this and in other prophecies. 

THE GOLDEN LAMPSTAND. 

The Golden Candlestick, or, more properly, lampstand, 
was an important feature in connection with the 
Tabernacle services and subsequently with the Temple 
services. It was the light in the Holy as the Shekinah 
glory was the light in the Most Holy. We may gain an 
accurate conception of the appearance of this golden 



R3650 : page 317 

lampstand from the arch of Titus at Rome. Titus was 
the Roman general whose army destroyed Jerusalem 
A.D. 69. Amongst the spoils of the city which he carried 
away with him was the golden lampstand from the 
Temple. The arch in Rome was built as a memorial to 
that victory. It still stands, though somewhat dilapidated, 
and chiseled in it are representations of Hebrew 
captives bearing the trophies of war. Amongst these 
trophies the golden candlestick is represented. The cut 
herewith produced well represents it. 

The golden candlestick shown to Zechariah in this 
vision differed from the one in the Temple and in the 
Tabernacle in that it had a special bowl as an oil reservoir 
and pipes leading from the bowl to two olive trees, one 
on each side of it, the oil being thus represented as flowing 
from the tree to the lamp and thus perpetually supplying 
a light. We remember that similarly, in his last 
great message to the Church, our Lord pictures seven 
golden candlesticks or lampstands separated from one 
another, and explains that these represented the seven 
stages or epochs of the Church symbolized by the seven 
congregations of Asia. The seven lampstands united in 
one represented, therefore, the Church as a whole from 
first to last, its every member complete, the number 
seven representing completeness. 

We are not to think of this lampstand as representing 
the Church in the future state of glory, giving light 
to the world. No! Thank God! The future glory is 
represented otherwise as the Sun of Righteousness, with 
healing in its beams, and we are particularly told that 
the Church will constitute with her Lord that Sun of 
Righteousness, which shall bless the world and heal its 
sin-sickness.— Matt. 13:43. 

R3651 : page 317 

"LET YOUR LIGHT SHINE." 

In applying this lesson, then, we should recognize 
that it relates to the Church as a whole during this 
Gospel age, during the time when the preparation of the 
living stones for the Temple is in progress. The lesson to 
us is that God is supplying to us the light amidst the 
surrounding darkness of the world— the light of truth, 
the light of the holy Spirit. Nevertheless, God is pleased 
to supply this light through peaceable agencies represented 
by the two olive trees, which we understand to 
symbolize the Old and the New Testaments. From these 
two sources of instruction the Lord's Church is to be 
filled with his spirit and to shine as lights in the world in 
the midst of darkness, in the midst of crooked and 
perverse peoples. From this standpoint they are not to 
expect that their success in the building of the Temple 
will be in the nature of worldly success. They are rather 



to expect that the Lord will furnish them with this supply 
of oil and light because they are his people and because 
they are doing the work, and they are thus to be 
assured of its ultimate accomplishment no matter how 
or what agencies are in opposition. "Greater is he that 
is for us than all they that be against us." 

Zerubbabel was one of the princes amongst the 
people of the line of David, and therefore represented 
the kingdom hopes of the people. His name implies 
alienation from Babylon. He also represented our Lord 
Jesus, the prince of the house of David, whose Kingdom 
is ultimately to be established in the whole earth for the 
blessing and enlightenment of all, but who for a time was 
to be unrecognized by the world. The message given to 
Zerubbabel, therefore, in a general way applies to Jesus 
the Head of the Church and to all the members of his 
body, and particularly to all who are his representatives 
in the Church in the capacity of teachers, elders, etc. 

HE SHALL NOT FAIL NOR BE DISCOURAGED. 

We are reminded here of another statement applicable 
to our Lord, "He shall not fail nor be discouraged 
until he have set judgment in the earth." 
(Isa. 42:4.) The message here to the Zerubbabel class 
is to encourage the work, that the Temple must be built, 
that it shall be built, and that ultimately great blessings 
shall flow to all people through it. The message 
reads: "Not by might, nor by power, but by my spirit, 
saith the Lord of hosts." The implication is that the 
Lord's Church is not to be established through Crusades, 
nor through mighty organizations combining with worldly 
systems and powers, nor by unions of wealthy sects. 
These all build along different lines. The Temple which 
the Lord is building is to have a beauty, an honor, a 
dignity, not in its construction, nor in the value of its 
stones, but by reason of its completion and of its then 
being filled with the glory of the Lord— in the first 
resurrection. 

The oppositions of the surrounding neighbors and 
the difficulties which they put in the way of the building 
of the Temple must have seemed to the people of that 
time like an impassable mountain before them blocking 
their way. And so throughout the Gospel age the various 
agencies of evil, the civil power and subsequently 
the ecclesiastical and civil powers in combination, have 
seemed to have thoroughly blocked the way for the 
development of the living stones for the Kingdom. 
From the human standpoint, discerning the class which 
the Lord is selecting, all the outward circumstances have 
been unfavorable. The prosperity of Churchianity has 
meant the hindrance of the truth, the hiding of it under 
forms and ceremonies and creeds, until those who fear 
the Lord and who speak often together have wondered 
why the Lord has permitted such great obstacles in the 
way of finding the very elect and building them up in 



the most holy faith. And when the power and strength 
of present institutions are considered we may well ask, 
Where will the Lord's little flock be found? how will they 
ever be glorified? and how can they eventually take 
possession of the Kingdom under the whole heavens? 

ENCOURAGEMENT FOR THE ZERUBBABEL CLASS. 

The message here through the prophet is intended 
to encourage the Zerubbabel class, representative of all 
those who are co-laborers with the Lord in the building 
of his Temple, in the preparation of the stones. The 
assurance is that however great and formidable the 
opposition, the apparent mountains of difficulty shall 
disappear. What we need is faith in the Lord that he is 
carrying out his work and that ultimately all his good 
purposes shall be accomplished. Instead of mountains 
before us shall be a plain, and ultimately God will bring 
forth the headstone, the capstone, to the great complete 
Church, and Head and body together shall be glorified, 
and then will be the shoutings of Grace, grace unto it! 
God's favor upon it! Then the Shekinah glory shall fill 
the Temple, every member, every stone, shall be glorified, 
made partaker of the divine nature, and be fully qualified 
to carry out all the gracious purposes of our God. 

R3651 : page 318 

The message adds that as Zerubbabel laid the foundations 
of the house, he also would complete it, and the 
message to us is that as our Lord Jesus was the Father's 
representative and founded the house of sons at Pentecost, 
so in due time he will complete the work and it 
will be completed along present lines, not by power of 
men nor by the might of men, nor by the riches of the 
world, but by the Lord's spirit, seeking those who are his 
and operating in them through the Word to the chiseling 
and polishing, the shaping and preparing, of them for 
the glorious positions they are to occupy. He who began 
the good work in us is able and willing to complete it 
unto the day of Jesus Christ— Phil. 1:6. 

A DAY OF SMALL THINGS. 

To the Jews returned from Babylon the effort to 
build the house of the Lord and the materials with which 
they worked all seemed insignificant and poor and unlikely 
to result in anything great or glorious or lasting. 
And so with us who now are free from Babylon and who 
are seeking to be built upon the foundation of the apostles 
and prophets, the present time seems a day of small 
things; not many great, not many wise, not many learned 
are to be found amongst the living stones, but the Lord 
knoweth them that are his, and our confidence is to be 
in him. If we despise not these small things we shall 
ultimately rejoice. We are to recognize the plummet in 



the hands of the Lord, squaring, straightening, proving, 
testing, not only our faith but also our characters. We 
are to recognize that only those who will stand the testing 
of the Lord shall ultimately constitute the living 
stones in this glorious Temple. We are to recognize also 
that the eyes of the Lord are upon all his people and upon 
all their interests, to note their tears and their joys, their 
trials and difficulties and their prosperity, to care for all 
their interests. 

In this symbolical picture the eye of the Lord is 
represented as seven or complete all-seeing, everywhere, 
all-knowing. This is our confidence, this is our 
rejoicing. Let us then in our double capacity not only 
be conformed to the plummet line, to all the elements 
of justice and truth and righteousness and love, but let 
us also, as associated with our Lord in the work of upbuilding 
the Church, build one another up in the most 
holy faith. Let us use the plummet with love, with 
kindness, and let us encourage one another with the assurance 
that ultimately the glorious plan of the Lord 
shall be accomplished through the small things, the mean 
things, the insignificant things of the world, the little 
flock whom he is choosing to be his agents and representatives 
in the great and glorious work which is to follow. 
Let us accordingly seek to be more and more filled with 
the spirit. Let us remember that we are the golden 
candlestick of the Lord, to shed the light abroad in the 
present time, whether men will heed or whether they 
will forbear. 

Indeed we have the Lord's assurance that the darkness 
hateth the light, and that therefore the world will 
not love or appreciate the efforts, even though they may 
recognize them as being in many respects good and proper. 
It is ours not to please the world but to please the 
Lord, and in order to please him we must let our lights 
shine out. "Let your light so shine before men that they 
may see your good works and glorify your Father who 
is in heaven." But we cannot as the Lord's Church in 
the world let our lights shine out unless we have the oil, 
unless we have his spirit, and we cannot have the oil, the 
spirit of the Lord, except as we receive it from his appointed 
channels or agencies; and we are to recognize 
that not the wisdom or learning of men is our supply, 
and not our own wisdom, not the wisdom of this world, 
but the wisdom from above, which is supplied to us 
through the two olive trees— the Old Testament, with 
its glorious prophecies and symbols and instructions and 
types— the New Testament, with its explanations and 
assistances and encouragements and exhortations and 
promises. 

"A voice once still and small 

Rose sweetly on the ear; 
With love so clear and full, that all 

In heaven and earth might hear. 



"It spoke of peace, it spoke of love, 
It spoke as angels speak above; 

And God himself was heard. 

For oh, it was the Father's voice 

That bade his trembling world rejoice. 



page 318 
ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Every day, and day by day, we have increasing 
reason for rejoicing that by God's abounding grace we— even 
we— are in the Light. In reading over "Encouraging Words 
From Faithful Workers," I am forcibly struck with what 
seems to be a common source of wonder, to wit: That this 
astonishing favor is bestowed upon me— "even me!" It 
is well that we realize our personal unworthiness, but how 
often, oh, how often, do I have to hold up before the Adversary, 
when he would overwhelm me with this thought 
with respect to myself, the assurance of our great Apostle 
in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, 1st chapter, 26-29 
verses. 

It would require many pages on which to jot down the 
particular items of advantage which those who are in the 
light of Present Truth possess in reading God's Word. Let 
me refer to one— the understanding of terms, or perhaps 
'twere better to say expressions used by the inspired writers. 
How often we find the expression "That Day;" "In that 
Day;" and in former times we remember how vague and 
undefined was our understanding of the "Day" referred to. 
But now we know its full meaning and we know that we have 
at last really entered that heretofore mystic period; we are 
now living— actually living in "That Day," the "great and 
notable day of the Lord." A day of rejoicing to the Church; 
of sorrow and anguish to the careless and indifferent world. 
How more and more we realize the blessedness of those who 
hunger for Truth. It was the eagle eye and appetite (See 
Vol. VI., p.6 10) that led us to the feast, and it is that that 
enables us to instantly detect the "tid bits" which are here 
and there dropped for our sustenance along the "solitary 
way."-Psa. 107:4. 

For the edification of all who have been firmly placed 
upon the rock of God's eternal Truth, through the MILLENNIAL 
DAWNS, by a clear understanding of His Wonderful 
Plan of the Ages, I refer to one morsel at which I almost 
held my breath when I noted it, because I could almost 
fancy I could hear the voice of our Lord quickly whispering 
the message to me. Without doubt it is slipped in parenthetically, 
like some verses in Daniel's prophecy, meant not 
for the careless or indifferent reader, who really would not 
understand it, but for the eye which God knew would detect 



page 319 



it, appreciate it and pass it around. I refer to Proverbs 22:17-21. 
All the chapter up to the 17th verse is proverbs 
pure and simple, and from the 21st to close of chapter 
the same; but in these verses there is not the sign of a 
proverb. 
In joy, love and consecration, I am, 

Your brother, EMORY A. SADDLER,-0. 



DEAR SIRS: 

Kindly mail to above address a sample copy of ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER, and a list of the MILLENNIAL DAWN publications. 
I have one copy, "The Divine Plan of the Ages," 
which came to my hand accidentally, to all appearances, 
but I shall always look upon it as being sent to me from God. 
I was wandering in a sea of doubt— feeling that I MUST have 
something more to satisfy me than I heard in the sermons 
from Sabbath to Sabbath. The book was in my home for 
some time before I paid any attention to it beyond merely 
glancing in it and deciding it was not interesting. My 

brother, the Rev. W ., B.A., B.D. (at present in Yale University 

—recent winner of a scholarship and elected Fellow of Yale 
College for the year), picked up the book, and after glancing 
at it asked where I got it. I said my husband bought it from 
a traveling agent. "Well," he remarked, "I wouldn't advise 
you to read it." This aroused my curiosity and I decided to 
read it at once— which I did. I have since read it many, 
many times finding new beauties, and fresh comfort in every 
reading. My brother is an advanced theologian, and would 
no doubt think I was a mild lunatic if he knew how thoroughly 
I agree with the views taken by Mr. Russell. 

Yours sincerely, , Canada. 



MY DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:- 

I have no doubt but that a report of the following 
experience will interest you. I have come to this city to 
attend the N.O.A. meeting, and came in advance to 
build up a clinic. In order to accomplish this I sent a 
letter to all the ministers of the city, inviting them to send 
any member of their congregation who might wish to have 
the advantages of this treatment, as no charges were made 
for it. 

I received an invitation to attend the meeting of the 
ministers' alliance. There were present seven ministers. 
Three of them were amongst the best-known and most prominent 
of the city. We were invited into the study, where a 
large center table had been placed in the middle of the 
room, and the ministers all were invited to sit around the 
table. I took a seat back in one corner. 

In addition to the ministers three women were present. 
They were invited in, and one of them seated at the head 
of the table. When all were seated the rector of the church 



made a speech, the gist of which was that the Christian 
Scientists were proselyting from the various churches all over 
this country, especially in Denver, and in order to combat 
this influence the time had come when the ministry were 
compelled to do something in self-defense. And the most 
rational thing for them to do, in his opinion, was to investigate 
these things and accept that which could be supported by 
demonstrated facts. Personally, he thought the healing appealed 
to the people, and every minister of the Gospel should 
be able to do this. He wound up by saying that the 
woman at the head of the table was a graduate from Mrs. 
Eddy's school and was there prepared to give them facts. 
The "facts" (?) were a few extracts from Mrs. Eddy's teachings 
showing upon what her methods or "science" (?) were 
based. These were interspersed with something from Hudson, 
on mental suggestion. Afterward the ministers present were 
called upon to give an expression of their views and their 
opinion as to the advisability of starting a class under this 
woman as instructor. They were all in favor of it. There 
was one stranger present besides myself, with a MS. of a 
book written to show that all these occult methods of healing 
belong properly within the churches. During his 
remarks he made the statement that all these various methods 
of healing were opposed to Christ and denied the 
atonement. 

Before closing they asked me as a physician to make some 
remarks. I told them I realized that there was considerable 
efficacy in mental suggestion, but had always avoided such 
things because they were used of the Adversary and invariably 
led men into spiritualism and away from Christ. That 
as ministers of the Gospel, I could not see how they could 
justify their action in becoming interested in bringing into 
the Church anything which one of the members had stated, 
and all felt, denied the atonement sacrifice of our Lord; and 
that as a follower of our Lord I wanted nothing to do with it. 

As soon as I sat down one of the most prominent ministers 
of the gathering arose and said he was heartily in favor 
of what I had said; that it was true that these things were 
opposed to Christ. Consequently the only safe thing to do 
was to keep the two separate, or not to confound their religion 
with their method of healing, as they were separate 
and distinct anyway, but by all means they must do something 
to save their flocks! So the class was started. 

Thus the Devil is using Christian Science to whip the 
ministry into line, to a finish. 

Praying the Lord's blessing to continue with you, I am, 
Your loving brother in Christ, 

, Colo. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL: 

These Monday issues of the Dispatch are certainly accomplishing 
a good work. I know of at least two who were 

formerly very much opposed to the Truth and the TOWER publications, 
to whom I have regularly sent the Dispatch, and who 



are now reading the fourth Vol. of DAWN, having read I., II. 
and III. already and are now inquiring along the line of Truth, 
and are no longer bitter toward it, and acknowledge the 
reasonableness of many of the presentations and the scripturalness 
of many others. If persons continue to read them, we 
have a ground for hope, and I have noticed that occasionally 
such ones, all unconsciously to themselves, come to accept 
portions of the Truth; therefore we will, with the dear Lord's 
assistance, continue to send out the "glad tidings," hoping and 
praying that it may find all those who have "ears to hear." 

I desire to do all I can to assist in this work, because I believe 
it is all being accomplished under the direction of the great 
Chief Reaper, and the time in which we may do this harvesting 
work will very soon be past— the summer will be ended. 

It is a great privilege— co-operating with those already 
beyond the vail, in the harvest work. May the dear Lord bless 
his own work, and all those earnest loyal ones, everywhere, 
who are trying thus to assist, is my prayer. Sincerely, 
Your Brother in his Service, 

R. H. BARBER.-N.Y. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Am led to write you to say that last winter some one 
left a tract at our door entitled, "Christ's Death Secured One 
Probation, or Trial for Life Everlasting to Every Man." After 
reading it, we decided that it was the Word of God. We 
then sent to the WATCH TOWER for more and they sent us a 
good supply, which was a great feast of truth to us. Then 
we subscribed for the WATCH TOWER and a little later on for 
the Plan of the Ages. 

We have been separated from all Creeds and Sects for a 
good many years, and being willing sacrifices unto God until 
death, we are striving daily to become more and more conformed 
to the Image of our Living Head, and whereunto we 
have attained we stand fast. Looking for that blessed hope 
and the glorious appearing of the Great God, and our Savior 
Jesus Christ, 

Your brother in Christ, 

CHARLES W. MANDEVILLE,-Pa. 



page 321 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVI. NOVEMBER 1, 1905. No. 21 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 323 

Watch Tower Views of Socialism 323 

A Great Conference for Religious Co-operation. 323 

The Pope on the Bible 323 

High Churchmen Favor "Higher Criticism" 324 

Anent the "Withdrawal Letters" 324 

The Editor's Western Tour 325 

The Kingston, Jamaica, Convention 326 

Bible Study for November 327 

The Remedy Co-Extensive with the Curse 327 

His Veiled Angels Guard Thee (Poem) 328 

From Glory to Glory 328 

Jews Providentially Delivered 330 

Gathering and Winnowing 333 

page 322 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



MISSIONARY ENVELOPES 



These are now in stock in large quantity. Every letter you 
send through the mail may be a more or less potent messenger 
of the Truth, even on its outside, by the use of these envelopes. 
They catch the attention not only of those to whom they are 
addressed, but postmen and others have an opportunity, and 
sometimes the curiosity, to read their message of peace— the 
gospel in condensed form. Price, 25c per 100, postpaid. 

VOLUNTEERING BY MAIL. 



Our output of tracts free as Sample Copies is limited. This 
year please follow this plan: Procure wrapping paper of the 
size in which your tracts go to you, write on these the addresses 
of all of your friends and acquaintances of the godly 
sort and mail the bundle to us. Do not this year send us "all 
sorts" of addresses. Do "sharp shooting" rather. You may 
repeat the lists every quarter if you desire, indicating other 
tracts for same, as we would not remember which were previously 
sent. 

ZION'S GLAD SONGS. 



A collection of sixty hymns, with music, for social and 
testimony meetings, and semi-private gatherings. Price, 5c 
each, postpaid. English and German editions. 



R3652 : page 323 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
WATCH TOWER VIEWS OF SOCIALISM. 



SOME of the dear friends have quite mistaken our 

recent publication of items on the progress of 

Socialism. In the volumes of the MILLENNIAL 

DAWN series (especially in VOL. IV) we have endeavored 

to show that we have great sympathy with every movement 

designed to benefit mankind— including Socialism— but 

that from the Bible view-point the hope of the world lies in 

none of these human devices, but only in the second coming 

of Christ and in the Kingdom of the heavens then to 

be established. We do point out, however, that God purposes 



to allow mankind to try various projects for its own 

relief, only to learn their futility, and that the end of all 

these failures will be discouragement and anarchy; but 

that the Lord's people, better informed than others 

through the Scriptures, will not only not be led to discouragement 

and anarchy, but can by faith rejoice in the 

troubles, knowing of the glorious outcome of peace and 

blessing these will usher in— the Millennium. 

THE FRENCH DISESTABLISHMENT. 



The Church and its supreme Pontiff are blamed by 
Emile Combes, ex-Premier of France, for the disruption of 
the Concordat. As Mr. Combes was the leading spirit in 
the severance of this bond between Church and State, his 
utterance, which appears in the Deutsche Revue (Stuttgart), 
is probably the most authoritative that has been given out 
on the Government's side of the dispute. He says in a 
recent article:— 

"It is time that in France an administrative organization 
of clergy be suppressed, which transforms the pulpit 
into a political tribune, where with unrestrained liberty 
all the political and social reforms, all the measures taken 
in the interests of liberty and progress are controverted 
and pointed out to the faithful as so many crimes against 
religion. Separated from the State the Church can utter 
what opinions it likes about statesmen and their acts, but 
this can not be permitted in a Church allied to the State 
by a treaty which accords to ecclesiastics a legally recognized 
authority and all the privileges of State 
functionaries." 

A GREAT CONFERENCE FOR RELIGIOUS CO-OPERATION. 



The Literary Digest says:— 

More than seventeen million church members, belonging 
to twenty-six different communions, we are told, 
will be represented at the great gathering in New York 
city, beginning November 15, to discuss and plan for 
church federation. Cooperation in service is said to be 
the goal the conference will have in view, and no organic 
union of denominations will be attempted. The idea of 
federation, represented by this conference, believes the 
Chicago Tribune is practicable "because it makes possible 
union without fusion" and the Rochester Democrat and 
Chronicle surmises that its resulting organization "may become 
one of the great moral social and religious factors of 
the coming age." The coming conference has been planned 
and promoted by the National Federation of Churches 
and Christian Organizations, which came into being in 
1900. 

Dr. F. M. North, writing of the approaching Inter-church 



Conference on Federation, says:— 

"Should the present promise of its import be realized, 
there should be an influence in its utterance and its action 
so powerful as to create a new epoch in the progress of 
Christ's Kingdom. ...It is, however, in the Evangelical 
Alliance of the United States of America that the historian 
will find the organized influence which has most 
strongly emphasized the principles underlying federation." 
-See MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. III., chap. 6. 

THE POPE ON THE BIBLE. 



It betokens a marked change in the attitude of the 
Church of Rome toward the Bible for the laity, when 
the Pope gives his blessing to an association engaged in 
sending it forth in the language of the people. The 
St. Jerome Association is engaged in this for Italy, and 
when requested to bestow his blessing on the new work 
and the spread of the Gospel, the Pope answered:— 

"Gladly do I give my blessing, and that with both 
hands and with full heart, for I do not doubt that this 

R3652 : page 324 

work will produce the richest fruit and is already blessed 
by God. The more we read the Gospel the stronger 
our faith becomes. The Gospels are writings that are 
valuable for everybody and under all circumstances. 
I have lived among the common people and know what 
they want and what pleases them. Tell them the simplest 
Bible stories and you will have attentive listeners 
and effect blessed results. 

"Your purpose is to spread the Gospels. You are 
doing a noble work. Some people think that the peasants, 
with their plain, everyday way of thinking, would 
not profit by the reading of the Scriptures. This is 
incorrect. The average peasant is a shrewder thinker 
than we may suspect, and knows how to draw the correct 
lessons from the Scriptures, often even better than 
many of the preachers. But it is not only the common 
people and the lower classes who will profit by the reading 
of the Scriptures. 

"No matter how many prayer books and books of 
devotion there may be for the priests, none is better 
than the Gospels. This is an unsurpassed book of devotion, 
the true bread of life. I grant an especial apostolic 
blessing on all those who preach the Gospel, who 
hear and read it, whether on a Sunday or a week day. 
I bestow my blessing on all members of the St. Jerome 
Society and all who cooperate in the sacred work of 
spreading the Gospel."— Christian Intelligencer. 

HIGH ENGLISH CHURCHMEN FAVOR HIGHER CRITICISM. 



London.— A committee of 101 clergymen sent out 
a request some time ago for petitions on the subject of 
Biblical criticism, or the so-called "higher criticism." 
Over 1700 clergymen of the Church of England having 
signed the declaration, the widespread and far-reaching 
character of the petition has aroused comment and 
caused criticism. That 1700 clergymen should have 
signed a document of that kind is regarded as an amazing 
thing. The document itself calls attention to the 
momentous intellectual character of "higher criticism" 
or Biblical criticism.— Globe-Democrat. 

FIFTEEN PER CENT. OF NEBRASKA CHURCHES ARE 
PASTORLESS. 



Lincoln, Neb.— Fifteen per cent, of the Protestant 
churches of Nebraska are without pastors, and it is impossible 
to secure ministers to fill the vacant pulpits. 
According to reports received at the headquarters of the 
Congregational, Methodist and Lutheran churches here 
scarcely a week passes but some minister breaks away 
from the calling to engage in another line of work. The 
prosperity of the farming industry has called away the 
greater number, but many have also gone into business 
and other professions. 

DISPROOFS OF THE EVOLUTION THEORY. 



"To the student of architecture it may be surprising 
to learn that the arch, until recently supposed to 
have been unknown to the ancients, was frequently employed 
by the pre-Babylonians. Such an arch, in a poor 
state of preservation, was, a few years ago, discovered 
in the lowest stratum, beneath the Babylonian city of 
Nippur. More recently an arched drain was found beneath 
the old city of Fara, which the Germans have 
excavated in Central Babylonia. The city, although 
one of the earliest known, was built upon an earlier 
ruin, and provided with an arched drain constructed of 
small plano-convex bricks. It measures about one meter 
in height and has an equal width. 

"While delving among the ruined cities of the 
world, we are thus finding that at the time when we 
supposed that man was primitive and savage, he provided 
his home and city with 'improvements' which we 
are inclined to call modern, but which we are only reinventing. 
—Prof. E. J. Banks. 

UNTIL HE COME! 



When we celebrate the Lord's Memorial supper we 
show forth his death, until he come— until at his coming 
he changes, glorifies us, setting us up as his Kingdom. 
-1 Cor. 11:26. 

We are using our talents, until he come. 
-Luke 19:13. 

We are fighting the good fight of faith, until he 
come.— 1 Tim. 6:12-14. 

We are enduring tribulation, until he come.— 
2 Thess. 1:7. 

We are to be patient until he come.— James 5:8. 

We wait for the crown of righteousness, until he 
come.— 2 Tim. 4:8. 

We wait for the crown of glory, until he come.— 
1 Pet. 5:4. 

We wait for re-union with departed friends, until 
he come.— 1 Thess. 4:13-18. 

We wait for Satan to be bound until he come. 
-Rev. 20:3. 



Until he come, then, does not point to a special 
moment, hour or day, but to the period of his presence 
(parousia), during which his "harvest" work will gather 
and glorify his saints and establish his promised 
Kingdom. 



R3653 : page 324 

ANENT THE WITHDRAWAL LETTERS. 

WE urge none to withdraw from "Babylon." We 

point out to the truth-hungry the "meat in due 

season," and encourage them to eat thereof freely, 

heartily, and to grow spiritually strong in the Lord. As 

each develops in knowledge and in grace it must be by 

confessing with his mouth as well as by his conduct his 

relationship to the Head and to all whom He recognizes as 

his "members." He cannot suppress the Truth and continue 

his spiritual progress; and to confess it will bring 

opposition from the Adversary and from all in darkness 

under his blinding influences— social, financial and Babylonish. 

It is only a question of time when such will realize 

that loyalty to God, to His Truth and to the brethren 

will call him out of Babylon and into fuller fellowship with 

the Lord and all the brethren and all the Truth.— 

Rev. 18:4. 

When such are ready to act they need assistance, advice. 
They are liable to one of two extremes, according 

R3653 : page 325 



to their natural temperament: either (1) with too much 
combativeness they are liable to act and speak too harshly 
of those who are still asleep, as they once were, or (2) 
with too little positiveness they are likely to miss a glorious 
opportunity for declaring meekly but firmly for the 
Lord and his Word. Thereby they not only lose a blessed 
reward at the time, but they unwittingly place in the hands 
of the Adversary a lash for their future chastisement, a 
cord for the restraint of their influence. 

Alas! how often we witness this last experience. 
Some dear brother or sister purposes a quiet withdrawal 
from one of the sects, and sends his letter of withdrawal to 
the pastor or other prominent official. The matter is kept 
quiet, his name remains on the rolls, and his associates consider 
his absence an evidence of unfaithfulness to his covenants. 
Gradually they come to regard him as a backslider 
and his influence is forever damaged. Worse than 
this: sometimes the pastor or official, seeking to serve his 
sect, will falsely and maliciously and slanderously circulate 
rumors that he has become an infidel, or that he is mentally 
unbalanced. This is done in order to offset the influence 
of the Truth upon other members of the sect, which 
they feel must be upheld at any cost. 

THE PROPER COURSE FOR ALL. 

To meet these conditions we have prepared a "Withdrawal 
Letter" suitable to all cases, which we advise should 
be sent to every member of the congregation withdrawn 
from. You did not join the minister, but the congregation, 
and you should address to the latter your withdrawal. 
We print these "Withdrawal Letters" in large quantities 
and supply them with tracts and envelopes free. You 
merely need to sign and date them, and put on postage and 
mail them. 

These letters are carefully and moderately worded so 
as to prevent your friends in "Babylon" from misunderstanding 
the step you are taking, and extends to them your 
Christian greetings and a helping hand out of a darkness, 
which to some extent they realize, into God's marvelous 
light, which, if true disciples, they are longing and seeking 
for. It is a most kind and effective way of giving 
your witness for the Truth. And the sooner done the better, 
though better late than never. 

Order a sample of these letters, and if you decide to 
use it order the quantity necessary for the congregation 
and get out your testimony, your witness for the Truth, as 
speedily as possible. We now have a fresh supply. 



R3653 : page 325 

THE EDITOR'S WESTERN TOUR. 



--(CONCLUDED FROM LAST ISSUE.)- 

AT SAN ANTONIO, TEXAS. 

ALTHOUGH our train was considerably late, about 

a dozen of the friends of the Truth awaited 

us at the depot with greetings in the Lord. 

After a bountiful supper and a good night's rest we enjoyed 

a day of glorious fellowship in spiritual things. 

In the morning a service of praise and testimony was 

followed by a discourse from the Chart of the Ages by 

Brother MacMillan. In the afternoon about 160 were 

present— interested ones from the city and surroundings, 

with their friends. The discourse was, we trust, 

encouraging and helpful for those already acquainted 

with Present Truth. Following it seven were baptized 

in symbol of their consecration unto death with Christ. 

The evening service for the public was attended by 
about 600, who gave closest attention to our discourse 
on "The Oath-bound Covenant." We considered it an 
excellent hearing, considering that it was a Saturday 
night— the busiest of the week. The dear friends of 
the cause brimmed over with the joy of the Lord and 
shook our hand time and again, some telling that they 
had come over ten, others over twenty, others fifty, and 
others over a hundred miles to enjoy the blessed associations 
of those few hours. Many, with tears, told how 
they longed for the "General Assembly of the Church of 
the First-born." We encouraged them to wait patiently 
for the Lord's time, meantime remembering that all 
the trials of faith and patient endurance and brotherly 
kindness and, in general, of our love for the Lord and 
for all— even our enemies— are necessary for us, that we 
may be approved and make our calling and election sure. 

AT HOUSTON, TEXAS. 

Here the experiences were almost an exact duplication 
of those at San Antonio, except that the interested 
numbered 250 to 300 at the morning and evening sessions, 
while the service for the public brought out 750. 
The difference in numbers was due in part, no doubt, 
to the fact that these sessions were on Sunday. The 
afternoon topic was "To Hell and Back. Who are 
there? Hope for many of them." The close attention 
given and the subsequent greetings from strangers as 
well as friends, encourage us to hope that a work was 
accomplished in some hearts at least, and that some 
heads were assisted to clearer views of the divine character 
and plan. 

GALVESTON'S ONE DAY. 

We had but one session here. We arrived too late 
for a morning meeting and left too early for an evening 
one. About seventy-five of the interested (fifty whites 



and twenty-five blacks) assembled for an afternoon session 
which lasted two hours. We received the closest 
attention while we discussed "The Very Elect," and 
how we must make our calling and election sure by 
faithfulness to our covenant. We recalled the Lord's 
words, "Gather my saints together unto me, they that 
have made a covenant with me by sacrifice." "They 
shall be mine in that day when I make up my jewels." 
The colored friends gave every evidence of being as 
deeply interested and as fully consecrated as their white 
brethren and sisters— which is saying a great deal for 
them. 

R3653 : page 326 

DALLAS, TEXAS, OUR NEXT STOP. 

The Dallas friends had arranged for excursion rates 
on the railroad, and nearly a hundred came from nearby 
points. The morning rally numbered 150. The afternoon 
session for the interested showed about 250. 
The evening session for the public was attended by 550. 
Six symbolized their consecration by water baptism. 
The attendance and interest were excellent for a week-day. 
Indeed all of our experiences in Texas, as well 
as along the entire route, tended to show that the religiously 
inclined public is becoming more and more 
awake along the lines of Present Truth. And this is just 
what we should expect at this the zenith of the "harvest" 
time. 

The Dallas meetings were very enjoyable to us and 
we trust also to all in attendance. Our afternoon topic 
was "Consecration unto death" and the glorious rewards 
—present and future. The topic for the public 
was, "To Hell and Back." 

AT SHERMAN, TEXAS. 

Our last appointment of the trip was at Sherman, 
where we had time for a morning session only. About 100 
were present, of whom forty were previously interested. 
During an hour and a half we discoursed to them of 
the great "Oath-bound Covenant," showing its import 
to the Church and also to the world. Our words received 
the closest of attention from thoughtful-looking 
people, five of whom, we were advised, were preachers 
of various denominations. A three hours' ride brought 
us back to Dallas for supper and for our night train 
homeward. 

HOME AGAIN AT ALLEGHENY. 

A ride of two days and two nights brought us to 
Allegheny and the Bible House, as pleased to be back 
to the labors of the office as we were pleased just a 
month before to depart to visit and address the far 



distant brethren. Our journey covered 8,650 miles 
and included thirty-three addresses of an average of 
an hour and a half each, besides numerous semi-private 
talks. We thanked God for the privileges enjoyed, 
and felt refreshed in spirit, though weary in flesh by 
reason of the rapid going necessary in the interest of 
the work demanding our speedy return. 

We were met by a reception committee at the depot 
and on arrival at the Bible House found the office 
force (30) gathered to greet us and welcome us back 
with outstretched hands and kindly words and with a 
hymn and prayer of thanksgiving for our home-coming. 
In the evening (Saturday) about two hundred of the 

R3654 : page 326 

Allegheny congregation met us in the Chapel and extended 

their welcome similarly through a chairman and 

by praise and prayer. We thanked these dear ones, as 

well as the morning gathering, for their many manifestations 

of love, and assured them that, although we had 

met many dear ones residing afar off, and although we 

love all and enjoyed the fellowship of all, yet none could 

be more precious to our heart than the tried and true 

of the home congregation. 

Then we detailed some of the incidents of our tour 
and assured the friends that we brought love and best 
wishes and heart greetings to them from all along the 
route. We concluded with a little dissertation on Christian 
love— its breadth and depth— chiefly toward God 
and the brethren who have his heart-likeness, but also 
sympathetically toward all men, yea, even toward our 
enemies who despitefully misrepresent us and our endeavors, 
even as they have long misrepresented the 
Father and his plan. 



R3654 : page 326 

THE KINGSTON, JAMAICA, CONVENTION. 

THE second annual "Convention of Believers in the 
Atonement through the death of the Man Christ 
Jesus, a ransom for all, and in his Millennial 
Kingdom," will long be remembered by the Jamaica 
brethren who assembled in Kingston from various parts 
of the Island to receive that blessed refreshment which 
accompanies the communion of saints. 

Theatre Royal was the scene of such a "holy convocation" 
as it had never before witnessed, while the 
joys of the brethren were two-fold increased as we remembered 
daily that our loved ones in Portland were 
enjoying a similar blessing at the same time; and some 
one even suggested that perhaps our brethren in the 
Most Holy were holding a sympathetic convention during 



those very hours. Thrilling thought! 

A rich program awaited the longing appetites of 
those who came, and none were turned away empty. 
Two subjects were calculated to draw the public, and 
they did not fail. About 400 were present on Friday 
night, Sept. 8th, to hear "Which is the True Church?" 
and more than 600 on Sunday night to listen to a discourse 
on "The Day of Judgment." 

The closing session was a question meeting which 
became extremely interesting because of the presence of 
a reverend opposer of the Truth, whose violent speeches 
and scurrilous writings were well known throughout the 
Island. Because of his previous threat we were at first 
fearful that the assistance of the police authorities would 
have been needed, but the Sword of the Lord and of 
Gideon was sufficient, and the gentleman who wrote 
"Millennial Dawnism Condemned" has been trying ever 
since to re-gild his tinsel by nightly harangues at the 
public square in the presence of the unintelligent populace. 
We are glad to believe that his questions were 
providentially permitted for the enlightenment of our 
visitors, many of whom, as a result, have become friends 
to the cause of Truth. 

Reported by the Society's representative, 
BROTHER BROWNE. 



R3654 : page 327 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDY FOR NOVEMBER. 

-FOR EXPLANATION SEE PREFACE OF WATCH TOWER 
BIBLES AND WATCH TOWER, MARCH 1, 1905.- 

BROTHERLY KINDNESS (BROTHERLY LOVE) 

31. How does brotherly kindness apply "the Golden 
Rule"? F.376, par. 1,2; F.406, par. 1, to 409; Z/00-218 
(2nd col. par. 1 to 4) and 219 (2nd col. par. 

1,2). 

32. How should brotherly love exercise itself toward 
the special servants of the Church? Z. '00-80 

(2nd col. last par.); Z/05-173 (1st col. par. 2,3,4); 
Z.'96-305,306. 

33. How should we exercise brotherly love toward our 
brethren still "in Babylon"? Z/05-116 (2nd 

col. par. 3,4,5); Z/05-164 (2nd col. par. 4 to 7); F.150, 
par. 4 to 7); F.150, par. 2. 

34. How should brotherly kindness consider "social obligations"? 
F.588 to 590. 

35. What course will brotherly love dictate in the matter 
of "borrowing and lending"? Rom. 13:8; F.564, 

par. 1,2; F.569, par. 1,2; Luke 6:35; F.567, 
par. 2; F.568, par. 1,2. 

36. How should brotherly love regard visiting, "borrowing 



a neighbor's time"? F.570, par. 1, to 572. 

37. What is the relation between brotherly love and 
communism? D.474 to 481. 

38. Do those who have reached "the mark" still have 
trials along the line of brotherly love? F.190, 

par. 1,2. 

39. Why is brotherly love "one of the final and most 
searching tests" of the brethren and how may we 
prepare to meet it? 1 Pet. 3:8; Z/99-88 (1st 

col. par. 3,4; 2nd col. par. 1,2); Z/98-201 (1st 
col. par. 1). 

40. What should be "the main-spring back of brotherly 
kindness"? 1 Jno. 4:7,8; F.137, par. 1. 



R3654 : page 327 

THE REMEDY CO-EXTENSIVE WITH THE CURSE. 

-ROM. 5:12-21.- 

IN READING this scripture, some who are unable 
to follow the Apostle's argument have become 
somewhat confused and therefore request 
assistance. 

The difficulty with such probably arises from the 
fact that they have failed to notice that verses 13-17 
are parenthetic, and that the main line of the Apostle's 
argument passes from verse 12 to verse 18, irrespective 
of the parenthesis, which is merely incidental, being introduced 
to offset a misapprehension on the part of the 
Jews to the effect that their Law Covenant conflicted 
with the New Covenant in Christ, of which Paul was a 
minister. It was difficult for the Jews to accept the fact 
that under the New Covenant there was no difference 
made between Jew and Gentile, but that "the same 
Lord over all is rich unto all that call upon him."— 
Rom. 10:12. 

In verses 12,18-21, the Apostle is showing that by 
one man sin entered into the world, and death as the 
penalty for sin; and that this sentence of death passed 
upon all men because all had sinned— not all individually, 
but as represented in Adam, in whose loins we all 
were. "Therefore," he adds, verse 18, "as by the offense 
of one [Adam] sentence came upon all men to condemnation; 
even so [by the same law of heredity] by the 
righteousness of one [of the one who gave his life a ransom] 
the free gift came upon all men unto justification 
of life: for as by one man's disobedience many were made 
sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many [all of the 
race who will accept it] be made righteous." In other 
words, Adam, the head or progenitor of the entire human 
race, could only bequeath to his posterity the remainder 
of the ever-declining inheritance which he himself 
possessed, viz., a spark of life under condemnation 



to death; but our Lord Jesus, by the payment of the 
penalty upon Adam, thereby gained the legal right to 
restore him to life, and in so doing gained the right also 
to restore all his posterity. And when the "appointed 
time" for thus restoring life to all the race has come, he 
instead of Adam, will be the father, life-giver, or head 
of the new race, as it is written, "He shall be called... 
the everlasting Father." (Isa. 9:6.) And the birthright 
of the race under this head, Christ, unlike that under 
the first head, Adam, will be life instead of death. And 
that birthright can never be taken away unless forfeited 
by individual wilful transgression against the known 
righteous law of God, with full ability to keep it. 

Thus we see that the gist of the Apostle's argument 
is to prove that by the law of legal heredity the race 
which, by the working of this law, inherited death from 
its first head, Adam, will, by the same law inherit life 
from its second head or re-generator, Christ, and that the 
remedy is co-extensive with the curse. This being the 
substance of his argument, it is, of course, presumable 
that his parenthetic remarks are not in opposition to, 
but in harmony with it. Thus we read- 
Verse 13— "For until [previous to] the law [of 
Moses and the Law Covenant with Israel] sin was in the 
world; but sin is not imputed when there is no law." 
Consequently there must have been a law, and a covenant 
based upon that law, previous to the law of 
Moses. What law was that? It was the Law of God 
originally inscribed, not upon tables of stone, but upon 
the heart of the first perfect man, and which was gradually 
more or less effaced in his posterity, because they 
did not like to retain a knowledge of it. (Rom. 1:28.) 
That law, whether ignored or recognized, has always 
been in the world, and sin against that law has always 
been imputed to men. 

Verse 14. "Nevertheless [although the Mosaic law 
had not yet come, to revive in the Jews the knowledge 
of God], death reigned from Adam to Moses [just the 
same], even over them that had not sinned after the 
similitude of Adam's transgression [i.e., wilfully; for it 
reigned over infants as well as over those capable of 
personal sin], who is the figure [type] of him that was to 
come [of Christ, the second head of the race]." Thus 
it is manifest that all mankind were born under the 
original law, the authority of which was never annulled, 
and under which all were condemned representatively 
in Adam, the first head of the race, but who, 
thank God, in this office of headship was a type of a 

R3655 : page 328 

second head, through which our deliverance should come. 

Verse 15. "But not as the offense, so also is the 
free gift. [The results of the offense and the free gift are 
entirely different.] For if through the offense of one 
[Adam, the] many be dead [under the condemnation to 



death], much more the grace [favor] of God, and the 
gift [of life] by grace [by the divine favor], hath abounded 
unto many." From the one head we inherit death: from 
the other, the re-generator, we shall inherit life. 

Verse 16. "And not as it was by one that sinned, 
so is the gift: for the sentence was by one [offense] to 
condemnation, but the free gift is [the forgiveness] of 
many offenses unto justification." Note the contrast of 
the one and the many here, the object of which is to increase 
our estimation of the value of the free gift. 

Verse 17. "For if by one man's offense death 
reigned by [that] one [Adam], much more they which 
receive abundance of grace [of divine favor] and of the 
gift of [imputed] righteousness [the righteousness of 
Christ imputed to us by faith] shall reign in life by one, 
Jesus Christ [who has not only purchased us and covered 
us with the robe of his own imputed righteousness, but 
who will also completely eliminate sin from our nature 
so that men shall have an actual righteousness of their 
own, entitling them to reign in life as kings of the earthly 
dominion which God at first gave to Adam]." 

Thus by these parenthetic remarks, which are seen 
to be in perfect harmony with the main argument, the 
Jews were shown that their Law Covenant did not in 
the least interfere with the original sentence to death 
of the entire race (all in Adam), nor with the consequent 
gracious provision of life for all mankind, through Christ, 
and not for the Jews alone. 

Verse 20. After clearly announcing that the 
remedy for sin was co-extensive with the penalty (verses 18,19), 
the Apostle— reading the inquiry in the Jewish 
mind as to the object of the Mosaic law, if it were not 
intended to give life— further adds, "Moreover the law 
[the Mosaic law] entered that the offense might abound. 
[It brought with it a clearer knowledge of the will of 
God, and therefore an increased sense of sin, and an increased 
responsibility which made transgressions even 
more blameworthy. But what of it? Did God mean 
only to afflict Israel more heavily than the rest of the 
world? By no means.] But where sin abounded [where 
the clearer knowledge of the Law of God was given, 
which enabled them also the more fully to see their 
short-comings and brought upon them the greater responsibility], 
grace did much more abound [Israel had 
many special favors, as well as chastisements, from 
God]: that as sin hath reigned unto death [both in Israel 
and in the world], even so [both in Israel and in the 
world] might grace reign through righteousness unto 
eternal life, by Jesus Christ our Lord." 



HIS VEILED ANGELS GUARD THEE. 

"The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear 
him, and delivereth them."— Psa. 34:7. "He shall give his 



angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways."— 
Psa. 91:11. "Are they not all ministering spirits sent 

forth to minister unto them that shall 

be heirs of salvation?"— Heb. 1:14. 

Often when thou'rt faint and weary in the struggle and the 

strife, 
And thy heart nigh sinks within thee, 'neath the strain and 

stress of life: 
When thou'rt tempted, tried and fearful, and thou can'st 

not see the way, 
And each night looms black with shadows from thy sorrows 

in the day; 
I would ask thee still to trust Him, He who sees all in the 

light, 
For he guards thee by his angels, though they're veiled 

from thy sight, 
Yea, he guards thee by his angels though they're veiled 

from thy sight. 

Oh, be watchful, oh, be sober, for the Adversary tries, 
To allure us to destruction by his subtly fashioned lies. 
He would sift us, he would tempt us, he would claim us for 

his prey, 
And his legions ever watch us as we tread the Narrow Way: 
But we know of his devices, and we trust Jehovah's Might, 
For he guards us by his angels, though they're veiled from 

our sight, 
Yea, he guards us by his angels though they're veiled from 

our sight. 

There is One who knows thy weakness, and thy failings, 

and thy tears, 
Thy burdens and thy sorrows, and thy tremblings and thy 

fears, 
And thy heart-cries always reach him, and are answered 

in his way, 
Though thou can'st not see his workings as they shape thy 

path each day. 
Sad disaster had o'erwhelmed thee had he not put forth 

his might, 
Through his angels that surround thee, but are veiled from 

thy sight, 
Guardian angels that surround thee, but are veiled from thy 

sight. 

Ah, believe me, when the Day breaks, and we know as we 

are known, 
In the sunlight of the glory that surrounds our Father's 

Throne, 
He will tell us how he led us: we shall see the pathway clear, 
The way we trod that led to God through failing, fault and 

fear. 
And we'll see those guardian angels who were veiled from 

our sight, 
We shall understand the workings of the Power put forth 



in might: 
Yea, and with those guardian angels who were veiled from 

our sight, 
We shall see our Saviour, and our God, in Heaven's Eternal 

Light. —Sidney Smith. 



R3655 : page 328 

FROM GLORY TO GLORY. 

"But we all, with open face beholding as in a glass the 
glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image 

from glory to glory, even as by the 

spirit of the Lord."— 2 Cor. 3:18. 

A FULL transformation into a likeness of character 
to our heavenly Father should be the 
constant effort of every true child of God. It 
is not enough that we gain a knowledge of his plan and 
a pleasurable realization of his mercy and grace toward 
our unworthy race, and that we joyfully tell the good 
news to others; and it is not enough that we exert ourselves 
with uncommon zeal to bless others with those 

R3655 : page 329 

good tidings of great joy for all people; for we may do 
all of these things and more, and yet, if we do not let 
our Heavenly Father's goodness and grace have its 
due effect upon our own hearts, our knowledge, and even 
our good works, will profit us but little. 

Our main object, therefore, in studying God's Word 
and his character as therein revealed, should always be 
to bring our own hearts and minds into closer sympathy 
and likeness and co-operation with his. As the Apostle 
says (1 Thes. 4:3), "This is the will of God, even your 
sanctification"— our full setting apart, or consecration 
of mind and heart entirely to the Lord, that he may 
complete the good work of transforming us into his own 
glorious likeness, by the operations of his Spirit through 
his Word, and thus fit us for the enjoyment of his abounding 
grace in the ages to come. 

In the above words of the Apostle we notice particularly 
that the statement is made of all the Church— 
we all are being changed from glory to glory. And the 
inference is consequently a strong one, that those who 
are not being so changed are not of the class addressed. 
This is a solemn thought, and one that claims the most 
careful consideration of all the consecrated. The question 

R3656 : page 329 

with us is not, Have we made a full consecration 

of ourselves to the Lord? but, having made such consecration, 



are we, in accordance with that consecration, 
fully submitting ourselves to the transforming influences 
of the Spirit of God to be changed daily more and more 
fully to the glorious likeness of our God? 

Like the Apostle, then, addressing all the consecrated 
and faithful, we also of today may say, We all 
are being changed from glory to glory under the molding, 
fashioning influences of the Spirit of God. We can see it 
in each other, thank God! and we glory in it. Yesterday 
the mallet of divine providence struck a blow upon 
that member of the body of Christ, and an unsightly 
excrescence of pride fell off, and he looks so much more 
beautiful today, because he did not resist the blow, but 
gracefully submitted to it. The day before, we saw 
another under the wearing, painful, polishing process, 
to which he patiently submitted, and oh, how he shines 
today! And from day to day we see each other studiously 
contemplating the divine pattern and striving to copy 
it; and how we can note the softening, refining and 
beautifying effect upon all such! So the Spirit of God 
is at work upon all who fully submit themselves to his 
will. 

But while the mallet and chisel and the polishing 
sand of divine providence do a very necessary part of 
the transforming work, by way of relieving us of many 
of the old and stubborn infirmities of the flesh, which 
cannot be so promptly and so fully eradicated by the 
gentler influences of the Spirit, the Apostle points us to 
the specially appointed means for our transformation 
in the careful and constant contemplation of the glory 
of God as revealed in his Word, and also in his blessed 
Ambassador, Jesus Christ, saying, "We all, with open 
face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are 
changed into the same image from glory to glory." 

"With open face" would signify without any intervening 
vail of prejudice or fear or superstition, but 
with simplicity of heart and mind. So we behold the 
glory (the glorious character) of the Lord— not with 
actual vision, but as in a glass, as reflected in the mirror 
of his Word and as exemplified also in his living Word, 
Jesus Christ. And to aid us in this study we are promised 
the blessed influences of the Spirit of the Lord, who 
will guide us into all truth and show us things to come. 

As we look into the mirror what a glorious vision 
we have of the divine justice, which we promptly recognize 
as the very foundation of God's throne (Psa. 97:2), 
as well as the foundation of all our present and future 
security. If we could not recognize the justice of God 
we could have no assurance that his gracious promises 
would ever be fulfilled; for we would say, Perhaps he 
will change his mind. But, on the contrary, we can say, 
He changeth not, and whatsoever he saith shall surely 
come to pass. See with what inflexible justice the 
sentence upon our sinful race has been executed! Generation 
after generation, for over sixty centuries, has 
witnessed it; and no power in heaven or earth could 



revoke that sentence until the claims of justice had 
been fully met by the sacrifice of Jesus Christ. Justice, 
says the Word of God, must be maintained inviolate at 
any cost. And herein we read not only our rightful 
condemnation as a race of sinners, but also our final, 
complete and glorious deliverance, because "God is 
just to forgive us our sins" (1 John 1:9), since the precious 
blood of Christ redeemed us from the curse of death. 

And while we thus read justice in the character of 
God, and mark with what scrupulous care he regards 
and respects this principle in all his dealings with his 
creatures, we see how he would have us respect the same 
principle in all our dealings. Thus we are led to consider 
what is the exact line of justice in this and that and 
the other transaction; and to remember also that this 
must be the underlying principle in all our conduct: 
or, in other words, that we must be just before we can 
be generous. This principle should, therefore, be very 
marked in the character of every Christian. 

Next we mark the love and mercy of God. The 
death sentence upon our fallen race was a most merciful 
sentence. It was equivalent to saying: See, I have of 
my own free favor granted you life and all its blessings 
to be enjoyed forever on condition of its proper use; 
but now, since you have abused my favor, I take it 
away and you shall return to the dust from whence you 
came. 

True, in the process of dying and of bringing forth 
a dying race to share the penalty, the mercy of God is 
not so manifest to the unthinking; but those who see 
the plan of God, discover in all this, not the decree of a 
merciless tyrant, but a merciful wisdom, but faintly 
disclosed in the promise that the seed of the woman 
shall in due time crush evil effectually— bruise the serpent's 
head— and deliver the entire race once generated 
in sin, by afterward regenerating all who will to life and 
all its blessed privileges. And in this mercy, in all its 
multiplied forms, we see the verification of the statement 
that "God is love." Thus we learn to be loving 
and merciful and kind both to the thankful and also to 
the unthankful. 

We mark also our Heavenly Father's bountiful 
providence and his tender care for all his creatures; for 
even the sparrows are clothed and fed, and the unconscious 
lilies are arrayed in glory. Here we learn precious 
lessons of divine benevolence and grace. And thus, 
through all the catalogue of the moral and intellectual 
graces which go to make up a glorious character, we 
see in the mirror of the divine Word the model for our 

R3656 : page 330 

imitation; and in contemplation of all that is lovely, as 
embodied in him, and of all that is pure and holy and 
beautiful, we are changed little by little in the course 
of years to the same blessed likeness— from glory to glory. 



So be it: let the good work go on until every grace adorns 
the spotless robe of our imputed righteousness, received 
by faith in the blessed Son of God, whose earthly life 
was a perfect illustration of the Father's character, so 
that he could say— "He that hath seen me hath seen 
the Father." Let us, therefore, mark well the love of 
Christ, the gentleness, the patience, the faithfulness, 
the zeal, the personal integrity and the self-sacrificing 
spirit. Mark well, then imitate his example and shine 
in his likeness. 

The Apostle adds (2 Cor. 4:7) that the fact that we 
thus hold this treasure of a transformed mind in these 
defective earthen vessels proves the excellency of the 
power of God, and not of us. And so, by constant yielding 
to the influences of the Spirit of God, we may show 
forth the praises of him who hath called us out of darkness 
into his marvelous light. (1 Pet. 2:9.) Oh, let our 
efforts and prayers continually be that these poor earthen 
vessels may more and more show forth the praises of our 
God! Let them be clean in body and mind; let no evil 
communications proceed out of the mouth; and let no 
actions unworthy of the sons of God dishonor these 
living temples of the holy Spirit. True, on account of our 
deformities we may very imperfectly perform good 
works; but, by the grace of God, let us at least refrain 
from known evil. 



R3656 : page 330 

JEWS PROVIDENTIALLY DELIVERED. 

-ESTHER 4:10-5:3.-NOVEMBER 5.- 

Golden Text:— "The Lord preserveth all 
them that love him."— Psalm 145:20. 

WHILE the more faithful of the Jews had gone 
back to Palestine to repair its wastes and, as 
seen in our last lesson, were rebuilding the 
Temple, the Lord was not negligent of the remainder of 
the people who had not been sufficiently zealous to 
return to "the land of promise" under the decree of 
Cyrus granting them the privilege. Hundreds of thousands 
of Jews resided in all parts of the Persian empire, 
which then included Babylonia and Persia and nearly 
all Asia, including India. While special lessons and 
peculiar trials were given to those rebuilding the Temple, 
the Lord's favor was upon the remainder of the chosen 
people to the extent that he permitted to come upon them 
a great trial, severe testing, which undoubtedly taught 
them a valuable lesson in their far-off homes. 

A record of this great testing is furnished us in the 
Book of Esther. The king of Persia at this time, about 
forty years after the completion of the Temple, was 



Ahasuerus, otherwise known as Xerxes, who chose for 
his queen the beautiful and accomplished Esther, a 
Jewess— apparently without particular thought or knowledge 
respecting her nationality, and without knowing 
that Mordecai, one of his faithful attendants, a keeper 
of the palace gate, was her uncle. The story of Esther is 
a most remarkable one, and confirms the proverb that 
"Truth is stranger than fiction." 

Haman, one of the nobles of the land and a favorite 
with the king, became incensed against Mordecai because 
the latter would not show him as much respect as others 
of the people. His pride excited his animosity to such 
an extent that he secured the king's decree against all 
Jews everywhere throughout the civilized world under the 
control of the Persian government. The edict was 
sweepingly broad, and directed the people in every 
quarter of the Persian empire to destroy, to kill, to cause 
to perish, all Jews both young and old, both little children 

R3657 : page 330 

and women, in one day, even upon the thirteenth 
day of the twelfth month. This commandment of the 
king was written out in various languages of the various 
peoples of the realm, signed with the king's seal and sent 
out by special messengers, a year being allowed to give 
ample time for the information to reach even the most 
distant quarters of the realm; and as an incitement to 
the doing of the work thoroughly, those who killed the 
Jews were given the privilege of taking all their possessions. 
Haman felt that he now had accomplished a 
great revenge against the Jew who stood at the gate. 
Mordecai and all the Jews, on learning of the edict, were 
of course greatly troubled. They had but a year to 
live. We may safely assume that such an experience as 
this would do more to draw the hearts of the Jews to 
the Lord in reverence and supplication than anything 
else that could have occurred to them. They fasted and 
prayed, in sackcloth and ashes. 

Our lesson touches upon the matter at this point. 
The proclamation and edict had been in force for more 
than a month. Queen Esther had heard of her uncle's 
mourning in sackcloth, and its cause, and felt a special 
interest in him, as she had been an orphan and had been 
his special protege. Mordecai assured her that it was 
not only for him she should mourn, but that this edict 
included herself as well as all Jews, and that she should 
bestir herself to bring the matter before the king, and if 
possible, to have another edict issued which would 
counteract this in some measure. But there lay the 
difficulty: the laws of the Medes and Persians altered 
not, could not be changed, must stand as though they 
were unalterable. Nevertheless, something must be 
done, and the queen was the only one in position to 
make any approach to the king. For others to have 
done so would have cost their own lives. 



NOTING OPPORTUNITIES AS DIVINE PROVIDENCE 

Mordecai, evidently trusting in the Lord that the 
decree could never be accomplished, called the queen's 
attention to the fact that quite possibly she had come 
into her present position of honor and privilege for the 
very purpose of staying this evil against her people. 
His suggestion was that quite likely God's providence 
had brought her to that place to be the divine agency for 
preserving the Jews from the evil malignity of their 
enemies in power. But he added that if she failed to 
respond to these opportunities, to manifest loyalty to 
the Lord's people, failed to risk something on their 
behalf, it would mean her own loss anyway shortly; 
and that he believed that God would provide some means 
for the deliverance of the people in general. It was her 
opportunity, it was her duty to act, and the responsibility 
he cast upon her. 

R3657 : page 331 

There is a beautiful lesson of faith here that should 
appeal to all of the Spiritual Israelites. Whatever we 
have, whatever positions we occupy of influence or 
power or wealth or confidence in the esteem of others, 
is so much of a stewardship granted to us by the Lord 
and respecting which we should expect to give an 
account; and if the account would be rendered with 
joy, we must be faithful even to the risking of our lives 
in the interests of the Lord's people, the Lord's cause. 
Let us lay this feature of Esther's experience to heart, 
that we may draw valuable lessons therefrom, helpful 
to us in the spiritual way. The suggestion that she had 
not come to a place of honor and privilege by accident, 
but that the Lord had overruled in the matter, is one 
that should appeal to all Israelites indeed. Whatever 
we have is of the Lord's providence; let us use it faithfully 
and as wisely as possible for him and his; thus 
our own blessings and joys will be increased as well as 
our favor with the Lord. 

The queen's answer was that Mordecai, as well as 
all the people, knew that if she or anyone else should 
attempt to go into the king's presence uninvited it 
would mean their death, unless the king chanced to feel 
favorable to them and extended his golden sceptre. 
She remarked, also, that evidently the king was not 
feeling very gracious toward her, because he had not 
called her into his presence for more than a month. 
That her fears were not groundless is evident to those 
acquainted with the history of those times. For instance, 
it is recorded of this very king that when en route for a 
war he rested at Olaenae of Phrygia, where he was the 
guest of Pythias, who entertained him magnificently; 
but when the latter begged as a favor that of his five 
sons in the king's army the eldest might be left with him 



in his old age, the brutal Xerxes in a rage caused that son 
to be slain in the presence of his father, the body divided 
into two parts, the one part placed on one side the road 
and the other on the other side, and the whole army 
marched between them. Of another Persian king it is 
related that to show his skill in archery he shot an arrow 
into the heart of his young cup-bearer, the son of his 
greatest favorite, Prexaspes. It is related of this same 
Xerxes that he allowed one of his previous queens to 
mutilate one of her rivals most horribly. "Her breasts, 
nose, lips, ears, were cut off and thrown to the dogs, her 
tongue was torn out by the roots, and thus disfigured she 
was sent back to her home." 

SEEKING DIVINE GUIDANCE 

Persuaded that no other course was open than to 
risk her life in approaching the king, Esther sent word to 
her uncle and through him to all the Jews of the palace 
city that they should fast with her for three days, and 
this, of course, implied prayer. We cannot suppose that 
they abstained absolutely from food and drink for three 
days, but that they went on short allowance, avoiding 
anything that would be specially pleasurable and all 
luxuries. This prayer and fasting convinces us that not 
all the Jews who had faith in the Lord had returned to 
Palestine, that some of this kind were still scattered 
throughout all Asia. No doubt the exceptional trial of 
this time thus proved a great blessing and strengthening 
to the faith of Esther and her uncle and all the Jews. 

At the close of the three days the queen, attired in 
her best royal robes to appear as attractive as possible, 
approached the king. Thus she used wisdom and sought 
to cooperate with her prayers for divine guidance and 
blessing. The king was very gracious to her and extended 
the golden sceptre, which she touched, and then perceiving 
that only some urgent matter of request had thus 
brought her into his presence he inquired what he could 
do for her, assuring her that it should be done even to 
the extent of half of his kingdom— the latter expression, 
however, being doubtless a mere formality indicating 
great interest. 

The queen's plans were evidently all well thought 
out, although at this time she was only about fifteen years 
of age. Doubtless the Lord granted the wisdom necessary 
for the occasion. She did not communicate her request, 
but rather led on the king's expectancy by inviting him 
first to come to a banquet which she had arranged 
in his honor, and to which also his most trusted officer, 
Haman, was invited. The appointment was kept, and 
at that banquet the queen again parried the inquiry 
as to her real desires by asking that the same two should 
honor her by attending a banquet on the day following 
also, and this was agreed to. Some of the Lord's dear 
people of the spiritual Israel are a little inclined to go 
to extremes and, trusting in the Lord, do nothing to 



forward the cause they wish to serve. We believe that 
Esther's course is a good example of propriety. We 
should both watch and pray, labor and wait, be wise as 
serpents and harmless as doves. We should do all in 
our power while trusting to the Lord for the results, 
assured that he is able to make up all of our deficiencies, 
but at the same time leaving as little deficiency as 
possible. 

Meantime the Lord worked upon the king from 
another standpoint, we know not how— divine providence 
has a thousand ways for its operation. The king passed 
a sleepless night, and seems to have inferred in some 
manner that he had been derelict to some obligation— 
that some one who had done him a favor had not been 
suitably rewarded. He called for the reading of the 
court records as to various incidents, and amongst these 
noted an occasion on which two of his trusted palace 
servants had conspired to take his life and had been 
frustrated by the exposure of their plot by Mordecai. 
No doubt the king was guided to this matter in some 
way by the Lord's providence. He inquired what 
recompense had been made to Mordecai, what had been 
done for him, how had he been rewarded for this faithfulness 
to the king? Finding that no special reward had 
been given he called for Haman to offer suggestions. 

The latter had been grieving over what he considered 
Mordecai's insult to him in not bowing to him, and 
feeling very confident of his influence with the king he 
had already erected a gallows in the court of his own 
house, purposing to have Mordecai hanged thereon by 
the king's decree before another day. He had come to 
the palace for the very purpose of requesting Mordecai's 
life when he was inquired for by the king, and asked to 
suggest what would be suitable honor to be done to a 
man whom the king desired to honor. Thinking that he 
was the person to be honored he suggested the king's 
horse, the king's robe, the king's crown, and one of the 
king's chief men to lead the horse throughout the city 
proclaiming in a loud voice that the king was thus 
honoring the one who rode. To his surprise the king 
directed him to carry out this program with Mordecai 
as the honored man, and himself the king's representative 
leading the horse and proclaiming the king's favor. 

R3658 : page 332 

The king's word could not be disputed or even questioned, 
and the matter was carried out in every detail, 
but Haman, covered with shame and mortification, 
returned to his own house for consolation from his 
friends for his wounded pride. 

In the afternoon the messenger arrived to escort 
him to the banquet with the king and the queen. Thither 
the unhappy man went, little surmising what more 
there was in store for him. In the midst of the banquet 
the king again pressed the queen to know the important 



thing she had to request. Her time had come, and she 
besought the king for her own life and the life of her 
people, telling him that their enemies had inveighed 
against them for their utter destruction. The king, 
evidently failing to comprehend, asked who was the 
wicked person who had thus plotted to kill his queen and 
all her family connections, and she replied, This wicked 
Haman, who is with us at the banquet board. The king 
was perturbed in mind and walked from the banquet 
room into the garden to meditate what course he should 
pursue. 

THE WICKED CAUGHT IN THEIR OWN TRAP 

Meantime Haman perceived that everything was 
going wrong with him, that his life was in jeopardy, 
and that only the queen's word could spare his life; and 
so when the king left the apartment Haman made every 
appeal to the queen for her forgiveness and intercession 
on his behalf. In his frenzy of fear he forgot the circumstances 
and surroundings, and was partly 
stretched upon the couch upon which the queen 
was reclining at the banquet, when the king 
re-entered, and noting the situation his wrath 
knew no bounds. Ascertaining about the gallows, 
he commanded that Haman should be hanged at once 
upon the gallows he had prepared for Mordecai. Haman's 
estates were conferred upon the queen by the 
royal decree, and then the queen, explaining that Mordecai, 
who had once saved the king's life, was her uncle, 
requested the royal interposition to counteract the effects 
of the previous edict for the extermination of the Jews. 

It was well understood that no decree or edict of 
the Medes and Persians could be altered, amended, withdrawn 
—once issued it must stand; but the king gave 
permission to Mordecai to arrange the matter with the 
wise men of the palace, so that another decree should 
be issued which would be equally binding, and which 
would, in some measure if not fully, offset the first 
decree. This was done by formulating a decree permitting 
the Jews throughout the entire realm to defend 
themselves, and to do to all their enemies all that their 
enemies were permitted by the first decree to do to them. 
This last decree was similarly sent by messengers, under 
the king's seal, to all parts of the empire, and as a result, 
when the fateful day came which was to have meant the 
extermination of all the Jews, the Jews privileged by the 
second decree to defend themselves were prepared, 
armed, and had favor with the magistrates of all the 
lands, because the second decree was understood to be 
a measurable offset to the first, and it was known that 
Mordecai, a Jew, was now the king's chief counsellor, 
or, as we would say to-day, Secretary of State. The 
result was the slaying of thousands throughout the 
realm, not chiefly the Jews but their opponents, their 
enemies, some eight hundred of the Jews in the palace 



city being destroyed. 

"DO GOOD TO THEM THAT HATE YOU" 

We are not to look back to this record of the slaying 
of enemies as an illustration of what Spiritual 
Israelites are to do. We as Israelites indeed, begotten 
of the holy Spirit, are to love our enemies and to do good 
to those who hate us and despitefully use us and persecute 
us. We are to bless and injure not. We are to 
remember that at this time the Lord had not even revealed 
his own love. He had revealed his justice and 
his power but not his love, for the Scriptures declare, 
"Herein was manifested the love of God, in that he 
gave his only begotten Son," etc. (1 Jno. 4:9)— it was 
never manifested before. It is this great love which God 
has manifested, and which he has inculcated upon 
those who appreciate his love and who have been benefited 
by it, that appeals to us. We love him because 
he first loved us, and we love others because, having 
learned first to love the Lord, we have experienced an 
enlargement of heart and a broadening of sympathies. 
And this breadth of sympathy and love, which is a 
continual growth in the Christian in its relationship to 
the others, is proportionate to its exercise toward God. 
He that loveth God loveth also his brother and his 
neighbor. 

The heart of this lesson is respecting divine providence, 
divine care over the Lord's people. True, God's 
providence has not been manifested in favor of the Jews 
for more than 1,800 years, because they have been cast 
off for a time, rejected from the Lord's favor, their house 
left desolate because of their rejection of Messiah. We 
are glad, however, that the Lord through the apostle 
has made clear to us that this blindness on their part and 
rejection of them are not to last forever— that in due 
time their blindness is to be turned away and the good 
promises of the Lord are still theirs and shall be fulfilled 
to them. The Apostle assures us that their casting off 
is merely until the fulness of the Gentiles shall have been 
brought in to divine favor, until the full number of the 
elect Church to be selected from the Gentiles shall have 
been gathered. With the completion of the elect spiritual 
Israel, the Apostle assures us that divine favor will 
again return to natural Israel, who are still beloved for 
the fathers' sake— these now shall obtain mercy through 
your [the Church's] mercy— through the mercy of the 
glorified Christ. -Rom. 11:25-32. 

When we note the divine providential care over 
God's typical people it increases our faith and trust as 
his spiritual children, for with the Apostle we reason 
that if God so loved us while we were yet sinners as to 
give his Son for us, much more does he love us now that 
we are no more sinners, aliens, strangers, foreigners, but 
consecrated to him and seeking to walk in the footsteps 
of our Redeemer. Likewise we reason that if God 



exercised his providential care in the interests of the 
typical people he is both able and willing to do as much 
and more for his spiritual Israel— Israelites indeed, in 
whom there is no guile— those who have entered into 
covenant relationship with him and are seeking to walk 
not after the flesh but after the spirit. 

Our Golden Text is in accord with this thought, 
"The Lord preserveth all them that love him." True, 
he has a sympathetic love for the world which has led 
him to provide a redemption for all in due time— all the 
redeemed ones will have a manifestation of divine love 
and care over their interests— but now, during the Gospel 

R3658 : page 333 

age, divine blessings are conferred upon those who 
will constitute the Church, the body of Christ, who love 
him more than they love houses or lands, parents or 
children or self. All who can thus affirm to their own 
hearts their loyalty to the Lord, their faith and trust in 
him, may be assured that all things are supervised for 
their good and working out for their welfare, in matters 
temporal and eternal. 



R3658 : page 333 

GATHERING AND WINNOWING. 

-EZRA 8:21-32.-NOVEMBER 12.- 

Golden Text:— "The hand of our God is 
upon all those for good that seek him." 

A PREVIOUS lesson showed us how the rebuilding 
of the Temple had been delayed for about twenty 
years, with various discouragements, by the 
returning exiles from Babylon, but was finally finished, 
the people being spurred on in their zeal through the 
prophesying of Haggai and Zechariah. With the completion 
of the Temple came a lull in the zeal of the people 
and a corresponding deadness in religious matters for 
about fifty years. We must sympathize with the struggles 
of those poor people against the unfavorable conditions 
surrounding them. Their city wall was still unbuilt, 
they were exposed to the malevolence of their 
neighbors, who hated the Jews, largely because of their 
refusal to mingle with the Samaritans, a thing which 
the former were not permitted to do according to the 
law of Moses. 

Added to this unfriendly relationship to their 
nearest neighbor was the fact that they were continually 
subject to trouble, loss of life and loss of property from 
marauding bands. They did not connect these losses 
and disadvantages properly in their minds, nor see that, 



rightly received, all these matters would have been 
working together for good to them, and that anything 
which would not have been for their welfare the Lord 
would have hindered. Instead they grew careless and 
indifferent to religious matters, losing considerably the 
zeal which first brought them from Babylon. Indeed 
many of them concluded that they would affiliate more 
with the Gentiles round about them, thus setting at 
naught the divine counsel— would seek worldly alliances 
for themselves and their children. As a result, with 
many of them religion reached a very low plane— their 
law was disesteemed and disobeyed. 

God, however, still had his eye upon the nation 
which he had chosen, and which, according to divine 
purpose, must be sifted yet kept together until the coming 
of Messiah and the establishment through him of 
Spiritual Israel. In harmony with this we find that at 
this time the Lord stirred up the love and zeal of others 
residing in Babylon, chiefly the children of some who 

R3659 : page 333 

had declined to participate in the first return under 
Zerubbabel or were too young to go or to exercise their 
own volitions at that time. It was nearly seventy-five 
years after the return of the first company of about 
50,000 under the decree of Cyrus that Ezra, a young 
man filled with religious zeal, became the leader of a 
company of the Jews still residing in Babylon, and went 
up with them to inspire and revive those who had first 
returned and their children and grandchildren meantime 
born in Palestine. Our lesson relates to the return 
of this second company. 

THE KING'S ASSISTANCE 

Xerxes, the Persian king who took Esther to be his 
queen, and who exalted Mordecai, her uncle, to be chief 
minister of state in the Persian empire, had been murdered 
by a palace conspiracy, and his son Artaxerxes 
was the reigning monarch at the time Ezra undertook 
the expedition in question. Three things were necessary 
for the success of the project: First, the king's promise or 
decree; secondly, money not only for the expenses of 
the expedition but also to properly forward the work at 
Jerusalem and encourage those who had become discouraged 
there; thirdly, the interest of the Jews required 
to be aroused so that a sufficient number of volunteers 
might be found. The king furnished the money and 
gave the necessary authority. This might seem remarkable 
did we not remember that in the Lord's 
providence his acquaintance at his father's court as a 
boy would more or less associate him with Mordecai and 
other Jews prominent in the empire and inspire him also 
with a respect for the God of the Jews. 

Ezra belonged to the priestly family and evidently 



was very sincere, not only inspiring the king with confidence 
in the project but also enlisting the sympathy 
and cooperation of many of his fellow countrymen to 
the number of about 1,700— probably including the 
families of some of them. These were volunteers— no 
one had a right to insist upon their going. Some may 
have gone with more or less of a spirit of adventure, but 
doubtless having knowledge of conditions at Jerusalem 
the majority were thoroughly enthused with a religious 
ardor for God and for his law. Knowing what we do 
through the records of Ezra's thorough-going character, 
teaching, practices, we may be sure that no other class 
would be attracted to the standard raised by him in this 
expedition. An illustration of his spirit is furnished in 
the first verse of our lesson. 

A certain point for the assembling of those who 
would return with him had been established at the river 
Ahava. The first condition enjoined on the assembly 
was a day of fasting, and we may be sure also a day of 
prayer to the Lord for his blessing upon the expedition— 
"That we might humble ourselves before our God and 
seek of him a straight way for us and for our little ones 
and for all our substance." It was a great undertaking 
in those days to set out upon a journey of over eight 
hundred miles and requiring slow travel, made necessary 
by the presence of women and children in the company 
and the absence of vehicles. The journey required about 
four months' time. True, there was a shorter road 
through the desert, but that would have been much more 
unfavorable in every way, and extra hazardous on account 
of the Bedouin tribes of the desert, who would 
have sought to take from them the treasures of gold and 
silver which they took along and which are estimated at 
between two and three million dollars in our money, 
but really equivalent to much more than this when 
measured by the standard of the value of labor now as 
compared with then. 

R3659 : page 334 

SPIRITUAL ISRAEL'S TESTINGS 

Seeking to apply this lesson to spiritual Israel, we 
see during this Gospel age somewhat similar sittings 
and tests of the Lord's people. We find to-day that some 
of the children of the most devout reformers have lapsed 
into measurable indifference respecting the holy things 
of the Lord and his law, and are disposed, like the Israelites 
of the first return, to not only fellowship the world 
but to amalgamate with it in customs, in habits, in 
social functions. The spirit of separateness and consecration 
which enthused their forefathers is dying out, 
leading to a mixed or Churchianity condition not at all 
pleasing to the Lord and calling for reformation. On 
the other hand we see spiritual Israelites coming forward 
from Babylon with great zeal for the Lord and his 



cause, and if perhaps we wonder, we find a solution of 
the matter to be that some of these inherited a blessing 
from their parents, and we remember the word of the 
Lord that he would show mercy and favor to many 
generations of them that love and reverence him. 

Ezra seems to have been led to the announcement 
of the fast by a realization of his own weakness and of 
the dangers which would beset the Israelites on the 
journey. Relying upon the Lord's promises given to 
natural Israel, that they would be blessed in temporal 
things while obedient to the divine precepts, he had 
almost boasted of this matter to the king Artaxerxes, 
saying, "The hand of our God is upon all them that seek 
him for good, but his power and his wrath are against all 
them that forsake him." It had been on the strength 
of this faith and this testimony that the royal decree had 
gone forth and the moneys had been subscribed, and 
Ezra felt that now to ask the king for a troop of soldiers 
for the protection of himself and his associates would have 
implied at least their doubt of the favor of God toward 
them or of his ability to protect them. 

Realizing the perils of the situation and the danger 
from enemies, and that he was responsible in great 
measure for the lives of those who would be under his 
direction, and that under the circumstances he could not 
ask for soldiers, Ezra felt all the more the necessity for 
going before the Lord in prayer and with fasting, and 
hence the fast was enjoined upon all the people. We 
cannot doubt this did them good, tending to direct 
their hearts to the Lord as the great Captain of their 
Salvation, awakening in them the thought that the whole 
expedition was based upon faith in the Lord and in his 
promises as respects the future and the present life. 

FASTINGS OF SPIRITUAL ISRAELITES 

That there is an advantage in fasting and prayer to 
the spiritual Israelite is beyond question. Our case is 
not exactly that of the Israelites under Ezra, and yet 
there is some similarity. We are not guaranteed earthly 
blessings or earthly protection against earthly adversaries. 
As spiritual Israelites, however, we have a still 
higher guarantee, for in our estimation our spiritual 
interests as new creatures are higher and grander than 
all of our earthly interests, beyond comparison. We 
have the guarantee that, whatever shall befall us, the 
Lord is able and willing to overrule it for good if we trust 
in him. It is in proportion as this gracious promise of 
the Lord fails to be appreciated by us that we look to 
the world for protection. The very experience of realizing 
danger and feeling timidity may prove indeed a 
superior blessing to us if it will but lead us nearer to 
the Lord— through fasting and prayer. 

Fasting, as we have seen heretofore, signifies self-denial. 
The thought is not the weakening of the 
body by absolute abstention from food, but rather 



a disciplining of the body by abstaining from delicacies, 
relishes, etc. No doubt such fastings 
are profitable to us in other ways than one. 
They not only relieve the physical system of over 
pressure, but with many tend to clarify the mind and 
make it more acute, more spiritually inclined. We all 
recognize this as a fact whether we can explain the 
philosophy of it or not. To all believers, especially to 
all starting upon a course of consecration, of self-devotion 
to the Lord and to his cause, we commend fasting 
in reasonable and proper ways, the denying to one's 
self the gratification of natural passions, and in general 
the living moderately, abstemiously, using this world 
and its comforts and blessings as not abusing them— 
the using of them in so far and in such a manner as will 
be to the highest advantage as new creatures in Christ. 
With the consecrated Christian this is not only the 
incident of a day but the course of a life. His every day 
is a fast day, a day of self-denial as respects any and 
everything sinful, and as respects any and everything 
that would not inure to the spiritual advantage of himself 
or others. 

CONTINUOUS BAPTISM AND FASTING 

Our fasting is like our baptism— it has a definite 
point of beginning and a definite point of ending. It 
begins with our baptism even unto death and it ends 
in death. These self-deniers, these fasters, are the self-sacrificers, 
the overcomers of the world, to whom the 
Lord has promised his special blessing of spiritual favors, 
peace, joy and all the fruits and graces of the Spirit in 
the present time, and by and by the everlasting blessedness 
of fellowship with himself in all the joys and perfections 
and completeness of the Kingdom condition- 
glory, honor and immortality. 

Ezra says, "So we fasted and besought our God for 
this: and he was entreated of us." This verse could be 
applied in full measure to the spiritual Israelites who, 
under the lead of the great High Priest of our profession, 
are travelling to the New Jerusalem. Their fasting 
and prayers to the Lord for protection and help along 
the narrow way and for success to the journey's end are 
heard, and the Lord assures us in advance that all such 
petitions are granted. It is our Father's good pleasure 
to give the holy Spirit to those who ask, and to make all 
things work together for their good, and to bring them 
under the leading of the great Chief Shepherd and ultimately 
to the Kingdom. In other words, "He is faithful 
who has called us, who also will do it." (1 Thess. 5:24) 
—he will do all he has promised to do, exceedingly 
more abundantly than we could have asked of him or 
expected. The whole matter is with us: if our consecration 
is based upon faith in the redemptive work of our 
Lord, if it is a full and complete consecration, and if we 
live it out day by day, the results will be all and more 



than we ever expected. 

"LET EVERYTHING BE DONE DECENTLY AND IN ORDER. 

Our lesson shows that Ezra divided the wealth 
contributed by the Jews throughout Babylonia and 
Persia and by the king amongst twelve prominent men 
of the Levitical tribe, strict count being kept of what 

R3660 : page 335 

each received and he being held responsible for the 
delivery of that amount to the properly constituted 
representatives of the Jews at Jerusalem. Thus our Lord, 
who is the Captain of our journey and who is bringing 
us to the heavenly Kingdom, gives to every one of his 
followers pounds and talents for which they must 
ultimately give account. 

In verse 28 Ezra said to these twelve men, "Ye are 
holy unto the Lord and the vessels are holy, and the gold 
and silver are a freewill offering unto God, the God of 
your fathers. Watch ye and keep them, until ye weigh 
them before the chief of the priests and the Levites and 
the princes of the fathers' houses of Israel at Jerusalem 
in the chambers of the house of the Lord." The chambers 
of the Temple were the little rooms of the court, separate 
from the Temple yet connected therewith. In these 
the officiating priests lived, and in them were stored the 
treasures belonging to the Temple and its service; 
they were, therefore, the safety deposit vaults of that 
time for the Lord's treasury. 

We can see the responsibility that rested upon those 
men, yet still greater responsibility rests upon us who 
have received of the Lord's spiritual gifts and treasures, 
his great Truth. If it was required of those men handling 
earthly treasures that they should be faithful and watchful, 
diligent, much more may this be reasonably required 
of us— "A charge to keep I have, a God to glorify." 
All of these lessons should come to us as fresh reminders 
of our responsibility, not for our discouragement, but 
reversely to make us more watchful, more careful, more 
zealous, more appreciative of the riches of God's grace 
committed to us. Those of old time were to hide their 
treasure, but we are commanded to show ours on every 
occasion— "Let your light so shine before men, that 
they seeing your good works may glorify your Father 
who is in heaven." The more we let our light shine, the 
brighter it will shine; the more we use and display the 
riches of God's grace entrusted to us, the more valuable 
will be our treasure and the more safe we will be, for it is 
a treasure which our enemies will not really covet, and 
our faithfulness in acknowledging the Lord in all our 
ways will assure us of his protection and care. 

AT THE JOURNEY'S END 



Ezra and his company, after a four months' journey, 
arrived safe at Jerusalem, the Lord having indeed kept 
them and delivered them from the marauding bands of 
enemies on the journey. Then it was that Ezra's real 
work began. He found matters at Jerusalem and 
throughout Judea in a much worse condition than he 
had anticipated, and was used of the Lord in instituting 
a very radical national reformation which proved a 
great blessing to the people, though it sifted out some of 
their number. 

Ezra magnified the Law, showing the people how 
the calamities that had befallen them as a nation were 
all foretold in the Law and were all the result of a failure 
to keep that Law, and the proper course now was not 
only to rebuild the Temple, as they had done, but to 
go back to the Law and seek to keep it inviolate to the 
best of their ability. He pointed to the fact that they 
had made unlawful unions with the tribes and nationalities 
surrounding them, and that the only course remaining 
was to separate themselves from all heathen people. 
This involved special trouble and trial in cases where 
Jews had married heathen wives, and Ezra's course would 
be roundly denounced by the entire civilized world to-day; 
but evidently he did the proper thing at the proper 
time in God's estimation, and was the divine instrument 
in sharply separating between the Jews and other 
peoples. This spirit has persisted amongst the Jews 
ever since, and the effect has been what the Lord desired, 
the keeping of that nation and people comparatively 
separate and distinct from all others. True, it 
wrought great hardship upon the wives who were put 
away and the children who were thus alienated, though 
much the same course is to-day prescribed by law against 
the Mormons, and the wives of plural marriages and 
bigamists. 

A lesson for spiritual Israelites may be found 
herein, though not according to the exact letter of Ezra's 
teaching. The spiritual Israelite is directed by the Captain 
of our Salvation, through the Apostle Paul as his 
mouthpiece, to be not unequally yoked together with 
unbelievers in marriage, and to have as little as possible 
to do with the world in general. Nevertheless the 
spiritual Israelite is enjoined that if the unbelieving 
husband or wife remain and it be possible to live together 
in unity even under trying circumstances, they 
should do it; but if the unbelieving one depart, let him 
depart, consider it to be of the Lord's providence that 
the Israelite should be free from a vexatious alliance, 
though he would not be free to remarry. 

"HOW LOVE I THY LAW!" 

The call of Ezra's teaching, enforced by the word 
of the Lord through the Law upon the Israelites who had 
gotten into worldly conditions and alliances, must have 
been very similar to the proclamation of Present Truth 



to-day amongst Protestants. After having come out of 
Babylon to the extent of leaving Roman Catholicism, 
they have become involved with the world in a system 
which may very properly be termed Babylonish— 
Churchianity. The Lord's people have entered worldly 
alliances through worldly sects and parties, contrary to 
the divine injunction and the spirit of the divine law, 
which commands us to be subject in religious matters 
to the Lord and to him alone. These misalliances with 
the daughters of Rome are so general in our day that only 
the Israelites indeed will have the spiritual ears to hear 
the message or the spiritual courage to break off the 
improper union, to stand out separate from all earthly 
alliances as the people of God, recognizing one Head of 
the one Church whose names are written in heaven- 
recognizing as brethren all who are united to that one 
Head, and repudiating all false bodies of Christ (churches) 
as well as the false heads to which they are united. 
This is the particular trial apparently of our day. 
The voice of the Lord is being sounded forth in every 
quarter of Christendom, saying, "Babylon is fallen, is 
fallen, Come out of her, my people, that ye partake not 
of her sins and receive not of her plagues." The churchianity 
of Protestantism is but a transplanting of the 
spirit of Babylon to new ground, and brings into bondage 
all those who will associate with these sects and 
parties; and all who would be in full accord with the 
Lord and have his fullest blessing must be faithful to 
his message and stand firm and loyal to him at any cost. 
To such and such alone the message of the Lord is now 
going forth, proving a glorious blessing and uplift, bringing 
them nearer to the Lord and into closer fellowship 
with those who are truly his and most completely under 
the blessings and provisions which he has made for his 
faithful. 



page 337 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVI. NOVEMBER 15, 1905. No. 22 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 339 

A Bishop's Gloomy Survey 339 

Socialists in Germany Very Bold 340 

The Glasgow Convention 341 

In the Garden of the Lord (Poem) 342 

Effectual Fervent Prayer 342 

Answers Long Delayed 343 

"Beloved for the Fathers' Sake" 344 

Praying to the Point 345 



Abstinence for the Good of Others 346 

The Law Governing Saints 347 

Parallel Questions Today 348 

Paul's Personal Example 349 

Concerning One-Day Conventions 350 

Interesting Questions Answered 350 

page 338 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



"Blessed are ye when they shall say all manner of evil 
against you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice and be exceeding 

glad, for great is your reward in heaven." 

"See that ye render not evil for evil, nor cursing for cursing, 
but, contrariwise, do good to them that hate you and pray 
for those who despitefully use and persecute you." 

TOWER READERS-DAWN READERS 



Frequently we read of DAWN readers, and believers, too, 
who do not subscribe for the WATCH TOWER— especially when 
we urge them to let us have their names on our list— either for 
the price or on credit, or free if they cannot afford to pay. Experience 



shows that the regular visits of the TOWER would 

prove a blessing to them; and we urge all who regard the matter 

thus to come to the supper which the Lord thus provides. 

But we are still more astonished to learn occasionally that 
some on the WATCH TOWER lists have never read the six volumes 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN. They can never rightly appreciate 
a single article in the TOWER until they have studied the 
orderly presentation of the Divine plan set forth in the DAWNS. 
Any who desire to read the DAWNS, but feel that they cannot 
afford to purchase them even at the cost price, are welcome to 
have them free, one copy at a time, upon promise to read them. 
The entire set of six volumes costs little more than is ordinarily 
charged for one volume of any religious work— even 
the most unscriptural and nonsensical, such as "Science and 
Health." 

Do not starve your souls while good food is so easily and 
cheaply obtainable— for a one-cent postal card. 

HEAVENLY MANNA FOR GIFTS. 



One Colporteur has made the experiment of going over 
territory already worked for DAWNS with the Heavenly Manna. 
He was quite successful. One customer bought a leather-bound 
copy ($1.00) for personal use, and three in cloth binding (35c 
each) for birthday gifts. The suggestion is an excellent one. 
The very best Christian people desire something of the kind— 
a Scripture and a comment for every day in the year for consideration 
at the breakfast-table and for comfort and help for 
every day. Do you know of a better or a more useful Christmas 
token for anyone? Wholesale rates to TOWER subscribers, 
cloth, 20c; leather, 60c— postpaid. 

MISSIONARY ENVELOPES 



These are now in stock in large quantity. Every letter you 
send through the mail may be a more or less potent messenger 
of the Truth, even on its outside, by the use of these envelopes. 
They catch the attention not only of those to whom they are 
addressed, but postmen and others have an opportunity, and 
sometimes the curiosity, to read their message of peace— the 
gospel in condensed form. Price, 25c per 100, postpaid. 

FREE SAMPLES OF TOWERS, TRACTS, ETC. 



We are always pleased to send to those who promise to 
carefully circulate them, not only TOWERS and tracts in the 
English, but also in the German, French, Swedish, Danish and 
Italian languages. In ordering please specify your opportunities 
for using these and the quantities you desire. 



HYMN BOOKS DELAYED. 



As we have in preparation an edition of our Hymn Book 
with the music score, we have allowed the old edition to run 
out. We will not reprint it unless a demand should be found. 
All orders for the "P. & H. of D." are being held over to be 
filled out of the new edition, which we hope to have early in 
the new year. 

OLD THEOLOGY QUART'LY 
-FOR THE- 
PROMOTION OF CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE. 
PUBLISHED BY THE 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCY 

SAMPLE TRACTS FREE! SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, SIX CENTS (3D.) PER YEAR-48 PAGES 



NO. 15. REPLY TO INGERSOLL. 

NO. 37. HOW READEST THOU? 

NO. 38. HOPE OF IMMORTALITY. 

NO. 40. WHAT IS THE SOUL? 

NO. 41. MUST WE ABANDON HOPE OF A GOLDEN AGE? 

NO. 44. GATHERING THE LORD'S JEWELS. 

NO. 49. WHICH IS THE TRUE GOSPEL? 

NO. 52. OUR LORD'S RETURN. 

NO. 53. THE WAGES OF SIN. 

NO. 54. A DARK CLOUD AND ITS SILVER LINING. 

NO. 57. CALAMITIES -WHY GOD PERMITS THEM. 

NO. 58. PURGATORY. 

NO. 59. THE WORLD'S HOPE. 

NO. 60. BRINGING BACK THE KING. 

NO. 61. PROTESTANTS, AWAKE! 

NO. 62. WHY EVIL WAS PERMITTED. 

NO. 63. CHRIST'S DEATH: ONE OPPORTUNITY FOR EVERY MAN. 

NO. 64. CRITICISMS OF MILLENNIAL HOPES AND PROSPECTS EXAMINED. 

NO. 66. DO YOU KNOW? 

NO. 68. INCREASING INFLUENCE OF SPIRITISM. 

NO. 69. STUDY TO BE APPROVED. CHRISTENDOM IN GRAVE DANGER. REFRAIN 

FROM WEEPING. HOPE FOR THE NON-ELECT. 

NO. 70. CHEERFUL CHRISTIANS. DIVINE PREDESTINATION. 

Nos. 40, 53, 60 and 66 can be had in Swedish. 

Nos. 53, 54 and 66 can be had in Dano-Norwegian. 

Nos. 38, 40, 49, 53, 59, 60, 61, 62 and 66 can be had in German. 

Nos. 59 and 66 can be had in French. 

No. 66 can be had in Hollandish and Greek. 

BOOKLETS 

THE WONDERFUL STORY, "THE OLD, OLD STORY." Illustrated.-60 pp. 
WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES ABOUT HELL?-88 pages. Also in German and 
Swedish. 



WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES ABOUT SPIRITISM7--128 pages. Also in German. 

TABERNACLE SHADOWS OF BETTER SACRIFICES. 111.— 130 pp. Also in German 

and Swedish. 

Extra Copies of the above booklets are supplied to subscribers at 10c (5d.) 

each, or 50c (2/6) per dozen. 

THY WORD IS TRUTH. A REPLY TO INGERSOLL. 48 pp. 

THE BIBLE VS. THE EVOLUTION THEORY. 48 pp. Also in German. 

THE PAROUSIA OF OUR LORD. 78 pp. Also in Swedish. 

EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS. Illustrated. -64 pp. In Yiddish, only. 

Extra copies of the above booklets are supplied at 5c (2-l/2d.) each, 25c 

(1/3) per dozen. 



R3660 : page 339 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
A BISHOP'S GLOOMY SURVEY. 



"THE growth of divorces and suicides, the trying controversy 

with regard to the education question, 

and many other things, had made many people 

anxious as to the future of the country, not to speak of 

the Church." 

This pessimistic utterance was made at a conference 
of clergy and church workers at Blandford by the Bishop 
of Salisbury, who added that there had been revealed to 
them the terrible fact that a great many were giving up 
public worship, and that a large proportion of the people 
of England paid little attention to religion at all. 



The press states that when at the last convention of 
the "Young People's Society of Christian Endeavor" at 
Baltimore, the reports were read, showing the great growth 
of the Society in recent years, a delegate caused consternation 
by inquiring, Why every form of evil seems to be 
growing proportionately more rapidly. The same question 
would apply to nearly all the reports of Babylon's 
expansion and federations. 

The trouble seems to be that it is not the right kind 
of religion that is being promulgated and "compassing sea 
and land." The fear of a hell of torment has for so long 
been the basis of all religious effort that now, when sensible 
people can no longer swallow it, and when it is no 
longer preached in intelligent communities, there is little 
left as a basis for Christian life. 

The public in general are ignorant of the faith and 
hopes set forth by the Bible; they are but "babes," and 
the majority not even regenerated at all. When they discard 



R3661 : page 339 



hell torments it often means a repudiation of everything 
taught in the Bible which they have been misled 
into believing is the authority for hell, purgatory and all 
such errors. 

The thing necessary, and at once, is to show that the 
eternal-torment theory, as well as purgatory, the Mass, 
etc., are perversions of the Bible's teachings, invented 
during the dark ages, by the very people who invented 
all the atrocious and diabolical tortures and persecutions 
of that time. 

And next the people need to know what is meant by 
the Kingdom of Heaven everywhere referred to in the 
Scriptures. They need to know of the present selection 
of the kings and priests for that Kingdom; and that it is 
to be set up in power and great glory at Christ's second 
advent; and that its mission will be the conversion of the 
world under the guide of its super-human rulers and instructors; 
—that thus in God's "due time" a knowledge of 
divine goodness and mercy in Christ may reach "every 
creature" and be made available to all. 

Note in this connection the following evidence of 
dense ignorance on the latter point clipped from the 
Pittsburgh Dispatch: 

"JOHN THE BAPTIST'S TEACHINGS OBSOLETE TODAY" 

"Over 700 people assembled at the East Liberty 
Presbyterian Church yesterday morning listening to an interesting 
sermon delivered by Rev. Dr. Ford C. Ottman of 
Stamford, Conn. He took for his text Matt. 24: 14, 'And 
this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the 
world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the 
end come.' He spoke in part as follows: 

"It has been 1900 years since Jesus spoke these 
words still millions of people are living in heathenism 
and are liable to stay there if the present rate of progress 
is taken into account. If the gospel now proclaimed by 
Evangelical preachers is the same as the gospel of the kingdom 
to which Jesus refers, then it will be impossible to say 
anything definite about the coming of the end. It can be 
shown, however, that the text has a precise application 
that differentiates it altogether from the message committed 
to the Apostle Paul. 

'"Christ is the Messiah, according to the official 
title. Isaiah said: "Unto us a child is born," and he did 
not mean any Gentile outside, but he meant a Jew. The 

R3661 : page 340 

promise given in Isaiah, that Jesus will occupy the throne 

of David, will never be kept, and the gospel of John the 

Baptist, "Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at 

hand," is out of date. All I can preach to you is the salvation 

of Christ and not the Old Testament teachings. 

The gospel of the Kingdom is not the salvation that ought 



to be taught today. 



Poor man! He hesitates to rail at the Savior directly, 
and therefore, after quoting Jesus' words, he denounced 
them as misleading teachings of John the Baptist, and 
apparently his 700 auditors assented and considered this 
an "interesting" gospel sermon. How blind and deaf to 
the true gospel of the Kingdom! 

The speaker evidently saw that the gospel of the 
Kingdom was what had for centuries been the "hope of 
Israel." He infers that it failed with fleshly Israel and 
has since failed with spiritual Israel. He lacks the "key" 
of the divine plan, viz., that God is now selecting or 
electing the Kingdom class— the "overcomers" who shall 
inherit all things and sit in the throne of their Lord. 
And that as soon as the elect shall be all complete— having 
made their calling and election sure through obedience in 
sacrifice— then "changed," glorified with Christ, they 
with him shall live and reign the thousand years foretold; 
—binding Satan, subduing all things contrary to God and 
his law, and blessing and uplifting the willingly obedient 
of mankind— unto life everlasting as men. 

But how was the Kingdom "at hand" eighteen centuries 
ago, yet not established even now? 

We reply: According to the divine program the 
Kingdom was first offered to the natural seed of Abraham, 
so that had there been enough of that people "Israelites 
indeed"— enough to have filled the foreordained number 
—the invitation to joint-heirship would never have come 
to us Gentiles. Then there would have been no Gospel 
age— the Millennial Kingdom would have been established 
directly, as it is about to be established now because the 
full number of the elect is almost completed. 

SOCIALISTS IN GERMANY VERY BOLD 



When Germany granted universal suffrage to her people 
she sought to safeguard her established laws and usages 
by granting extra votes to officials, property holders, etc. 
Yet with all this precaution against Socialism the latter has 
been steadily growing. The government sees this, and 
anticipating that at the elections of next year the Socialists 
may be able to control their Congress, the "Reichstag," 
proposes some restriction of the present voting privileges 
of the masses (or their total abolition) to prevent a 
Socialist control. 

The tone of the German Socialists for the past three 
years has been growing more and more mild as, under the 
guidance of Herr Bebel and others, they have hoped to 
gain their ends by peaceable means— through the ballot. 
Now, however, the bare suggestion of a loss of the ballot 
power arouses them to anger as they perceive that it would 



mean the extinguishment of their hopes. They are now 
planning for a universal strike, to be called in the event of 
any attempt being made to deprive them of their share in 
the government. This is the key to the telegram which 
we reprint below from the columns of the Detroit News. 

It is not difficult to see that this means serious trouble. 
The Emperor and nobility of Germany, imbued from 
infancy with the thought that they are God's elect favorites, 
and that even criticism of their doings is rebellion 
against God, will not turn over Germany to Socialism 
without a bitter struggle which must in the end spell 
Anarchy. 

This illustrates what we mean when we say that Socialism 
is impossible in this land. We do not claim that 
it has no good and just proposals (as well as some bad and 
unjust ones). What we do emphasize is that Socialists 
totally delude themselves in thinking that their full program 
could ever be carried into general effect. They seem 
to think that the wealthy would permit them to vote Socialism 
into effect, and that all they need do is to get the 
public to vote their way and then legislate the rich out of 
their "vested rights." Not so. Watch Germany, and 
note that the wealthy and influential would resist to the 
point of anarchy. 

The thought we continually seek to enforce is that the 
great Millennial Kingdom is nigh, at our door, and that 
it is the world's only hope; that the Bible points out 
that the world in its selfishness is about to wreck present 
institutions in anarchy within the next ten years. And 
that God's people should hold aloof from both sides of the 
struggle, and seek peace and righteousness, and love and 
pursue these while looking with the undimmed eye of 
faith to the glorious blessings of Christ's Kingdom, which 
will be established without their swords or guns by our 
Immanuel. 

The article referred to follows:— 

"HERR BEBEL URGES STRIKE." 

"JENA, Duchy of Saxe-Weimar.— Herr Bebel, leader 
of the Socialist party in the reichstag, had one of his great 
days in the convention of the national social democratic 
party today, and again showed his mastery over the members 
of the party. The day was devoted to a hot debate 
over the lengthy resolutions proposed by Herr Bebel in 
favor of a general strike of the working classes for political 
effect under given circumstances. 

"Herr Bebel said he saw impending danger in the 
abolition of universal suffrage in the case of the election of 
members of the reichstag, and the aim of his resolutions 
was to meet such a situation with a strike en masse. He 
spoke during the entire forenoon, beginning at nine 
o'clock and holding the delegates and a great attendance 
of spectators spellbound until a recess was taken for lunch, 
receiving an enthusiastic demonstration at the close of his 
address. The sentiment in the address that called for the 



greatest enthusiasm was: 'We would deserve to be devoured 
of dogs if we were unwilling to endure hunger for 
several weeks in behalf of human rights.' 

R3661 : page 341 

"The discussion at the afternoon session brought out 
sharp opposition to Herr Bebel's resolutions from leaders of 
the labor unions and from several important socialist members 
of the reichstag, who regretted what they called 'a relapse 
into revolutionism,' as it was calculated to strengthen 
that element in German politics which advocated ruthless 
methods in dealing with the laboring classes. 

"Herr Rosa of Luxemburg, who is famous in the 
party for his vitriolic eloquence, made the speech of the 
afternoon. He said it would be a shame if the social 
democracy should have any anxiety about 'disenthralling 
the proletarian masses in the glorious year of the Russian 
revolution.' 

"Herr Bebel, in summing up the debate, said he had 
attended every socialist convention that had been held, 
but never had he heard such a threatening tone as that 
used during the present convention. The speeches, he 
said, were ghastly with talk of blood and revolution. 

"Only 14 votes were cast against Herr Bebel's resolutions 
to strike." 



R3662: page 341 

THE GLASGOW CONVENTION. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

There seemed to be a general expectation that this 
Convention would, in one respect, at least, be like all its 
predecessors. So far each Convention has been better 
than those before it, and the one just past has conformed 
to the rule. Former occasions have been sweet and precious 
as we have met to talk over the good things the Lord 
is providing, but as we approach the end of the journey, 
with a wider experience of the love of God, and a clearer 
understanding of the great call with which we are favored, 
the joy deepens and the fellowship becomes more and 
more a foretaste of the good to come. It is only a few 
short years since the first of this series of meetings was held 
in Glasgow: then there was a small company in a small 
room. The Truth was hardly known in the city, but the 
few upon whom it had laid hold, whose hearts were touched, 
worked hard in the use of their opportunities, and 
some of the results were apparent as the Glasgow brethren 
made their visitors welcome. The number of those needing 
sleeping accommodation was about 180, and of these 
140 or more were placed with the home brethren. The 
average attendance at the meetings would be about 400 
while the largest meeting was said to about double that 



number. 

The chief topics of the talks that were given by the 
brethren who addressed the meetings may be said to be 
the "Kingdom of Heaven." Much was said about its constitution, 
the time of establishment, our present responsibility 
towards its interests, and, last but not least, how we 
must prepare ourselves for a place in the Kingdom. One 
brother urged that as the Kingdom is to be given to the 
"saints," only those who charge themselves with its present 
interests will be proved worthy of a place in it. To 
each comes responsibility, and all can do something. Our 
Master did not say, "Stir yourselves for great work in the 
time of harvest." Instead he left us the responsibility of 
the harvest work by saying, "Pray ye the Lord of the harvest 
to send laborers into the vineyard." If all may not 
enter upon active work at least all can pray, and thus 
prove the interest is there. 

The brethren appreciated having Brother McPhail at 
the Convention, and all appreciated your kind thought in 
prolonging his stay for it. The friends had learned to 
love him, and to esteem his ministry, and were glad to 
have the opportunity of seeing and hearing him again before 
his departure for the States. The loving harmony of 
the meetings and the peaceful and happy looks of the 
brethren made a great impression upon some who attended. 
We hope they will seek and find the same peace 
in the one Lord. We heard of many weak ones who 
were confirmed in "this way," and we know of one dear 
brother who came with troubled heart, and lost his 
troubles in consecration to the Lord. May he ever find 
the rest of the people of God. 

On Sunday there were thirty-three brothers and sisters 
immersed, in this manner showing their consecration. 
One was an elderly brother who for a time refused to listen, 
but who now rejoices in the Truth. Another was a 
dear lad of 16 years, one of three brothers who attend the 
Glasgow meeting. We trust for these, as we do for all, 
that the Lord's grace may comfort and strengthen them 
all the way, whether longer or shorter. The elder brother 
just spoken of told us of an unusual experience. He was 
at the railway station in a pondering mood, for he wanted 
some DAWNS and had come to the end of his immediate 
resources. Standing wondering whether or not he should 
ask a sister for some books on credit, he was accosted by a 
man with whom he had a slight acquaintance but with whom 
he had not spoken for ten months or more. "How are 
you for money just now?" said the friend. "Well, I'm 
not exactly 'flush,'" was the reply. Without further 
words L.5 was placed in the brother's hands with the remark 
that nothing was wished back, and the friend immediately 
boarded an outgoing train. The brother at once 
went away to get the books he wanted for his friends, paid 
for them and left some change for the Tract Fund. 

Many of the friends went away on the Monday night, 
but before the Convention proper was closed a message of 
love was sent to yourself. It is probable that you will 



get this from one of the local brethren, but in any case the 
message will not spoil by being sent twice. The message 
is Philemon 6,7, and Hebrews 13:20,21, and it was with 
heartfelt love that the brethren testified to this. Some 
stayed until Tuesday night, when the final meeting was 
held, and at which a good number were present. Many 
who had come long distances went away by the late night 
trains. A good number went to the stations to see them 

R3662 : page 342 

away, and it was good to see the laughing joy, even though 
there were wet eyes. On the Tuesday morning about 
forty brethren said a final good-bye to Brother McPhail, 
and wished him "God-speed," and also a quick return, if 
that should be the Lord's will. But we all want to see 
you again, dear brother. Come soon! 

With much love in the Lord, I am, as ever, your 
brother in Him, J. HEMERY. 



R3665 : page 342 

IN THE GARDEN OF THE LORD. 

Last night I dreamed the Master came to me and gently said, 
"Beloved, lay thy cross aside and come with me awhile, 
For I would have thee rest within the garden of the Lord." 
And then he took my trembling hand and led me through the 

gloom 
Until we came to where a massive gateway barred our path. 
The gates were closed, but opened at the Master's sweet command. 
We entered, and the shadows fled before his radiant smile. 
Oh, vision rapturous, can words be found to tell how fair! 
Ten thousand roses beckoned with Love's crimson hue, and round 
About our feet the violets nestled in their purple grief. 
A passion flower, sad symbol of his dying agony, 
Entwined itself with orchids rare, fair children of the air; 
While velvet pansies, clothed in royalty, together grew 
With lovely, clinging, pink and white sweet-peas, and close beside 
The lilies of the valley bent in sweet humility; 
And everywhere the tender grass— a carpet soft and cool. 

And often as we passed, the Master's hand with loving touch 

Did rest upon some drooping flower, and lo ! at once it seemed 

Refreshed. At last we came to where a stately lily stood, 

Its snowy crown uplifted like a chime of silver bells, 

Whose swaying filled the garden with a fragrance sweet and rare. 

We closer drew, and then I saw, alas! how here and there 

A petal fair was torn and brown, as though by some rude wind 

Or scorching heat. I wondered greatly at the sight, then turned, 

The question on my lips,— when suddenly there rose a storm 

So fierce that every flower in the garden bent its head; 

And then a shower of flaming arrows, hurled by shadowy forms 

Outside the garden's ivy-covered walls, rained down upon 



The lilies, while I clung in terror to my Heavenly Guide. 

A moment only did the storm prevail, and then I heard 

The Master's "Peace, be still!" The tempest ceased and there 

was calm, 
The wondrous light grew dim, the garden vanished,— and I woke. 

The Master had not spoken thus, and yet I seemed to know 
The fair dream-garden was a picture of his "little ones," 
(He neither sleeps nor slumbers in his watch-care over these). 
And then the thought,— if in this garden I might choose my place, 
Would I be like the rose? Ah, no! lest in my passionate zeal 
To show by works my heart of love, I should forget the thorns, 
Dear Lord, and wound thy loving hand! Ah, then, perhaps I would 
The lily be, and sound thy blessed Truth o'er land and sea 
In clear-toned eloquence. Ah! no, I might not bear the storms 
That beat upon the one whose head thou hast uplifted far 
Above his fellows,— and a shining mark for Satan's darts! 
And thus I thought on each and all that garden's lovely ones, 
Then cried, "My blessed Lord, if I might choose, oh, let me be 
The tender grass, that I may rest and soothe thy weariness,— 
A lowly place, safe sheltered from the wind and fiery dart,— 
What rapture this— to lay down life itself beneath thy feet." 
-G. W. Seibert, Sept. 30th, 1905. 



R3662 : page 342 

EFFECTUAL FERVENT PRAYER. 

-NEHEMIAH l:l-ll.-NOVEMBER 19.- 

Golden Text:— "The effectual fervent prayer of 
a righteous man availeth much."— Jas. 5:16. 

NEHEMIAH was a young Jew of one of the prominent 
families of the Babylonian captivity. 
He occupied a confidential position with 
Artaxerxes, the Persian king, somewhat similar to the 
office held by Mordecai under King Xerxes (Ahasuerus), 
the father of Artaxerxes. His official title, "cupbearer," 
does not give the proper conception of the dignity of 
his position. In those days kings needed to be continually 
guarded against poisons, which could be easily 
mingled without detection with their liquid refreshments. 
Consequently the cupbearer was one whose 
loyalty was esteemed irreproachable, and his duties 
afforded him privileges and opportunities for intimate 
intercourse with the king more than others. They became 
confidants of royalty and court advisers, really 
occupying the position of Minister of State. 

Though possessed of wealth and enjoying the king's 
favor, and in every way advantaged so far as this 
world's affairs were concerned, Nehemiah's heart was 
not surfeited with his earthly blessings and privileges, 
comforts and advantages. His brother had been amongst 



those who went up to Jerusalem with Ezra, as narrated 
in our last lesson. That expedition had been partially 
successful and partly a failure. Ezra had heroically 
drawn the line of demarcation between Jews and others. 
The walls of the city had been repaired in a fashion, but 
their enemies had been angered by what they no doubt 
considered the arrogancy of the Jews in considering 
themselves separate and distinct from other peoples, 
refusing to intermarry with them. The sending back 
to their homes of all foreign wives under Ezra's direction 
capped the climax of what they considered to be 
injury done to them. These enemies had spitefully 
attacked the city, broken its walls and burned its gates, 
and the people of Jerusalem, comparatively few in 
number, weary and exhausted, had not the energy to 
rebuild and repair. Moreover, they feared to do so lest 
their enemies would deal harshly with them. 

It was through his brother, who returned, that 
Nehemiah gained information respecting the deplorable 
condition of affairs at Jerusalem. The news made 
him heartsick, for he not only had the usual patriotism, 
but, as a Jew and as a believer in the divine threatenings 
and promises, he had an intensity of love for the 
land of promise, a burning desire to lend his assistance 
in every manner for the recovery of the Lord's people 
and their re-establishment in power as the Lord had 
promised. 

IMPORTUNITY IN PRAYER. 

Our lesson relates chiefly to Nehemiah's prayer to 
the Lord after he had heard of the conditions in Judea— 
his prayer for the Lord's blessing and assistance, to the 
intent that the good promises of the Lord respecting his 
holy city and land might be fulfilled. Nehemiah does 
not give us the words of all his prayers, for we learn 
from other parts of the narrative that he prayed after 
this manner for four months before he began to have 
an answer. What we read, therefore, is supposed to be 

R3662 : page 343 

a general outline of the sentiments which he expressed 
in various forms at different times, praying without 
ceasing during those four months. Of course during 
all this time he attended to his duties, but this prayer 
was always in his heart, the sentiment of his mind, and 
more or less associated with all his thoughts and plans 
and arrangements. 

So it should be with all of the Lord's people of 
spiritual Israel. The things which we have only a slight 
desire for we may mention once or twice at the throne 
of grace, but those things which lie very close to our 
hearts become our continual prayer, associating in our 
minds with all of life's duties and interests, the heart 
gravitating continually toward the thing we have desired 



of the Lord, and on suitable opportunities repeating 
to him the request— making sure that the thing we 
request is in accord with his promises. This is the kind 
of praying which the Lord commended saying, "Men 
ought always to pray and not to faint"— that the Lord's 
people ought to continue asking for the right things 
with some degree of persistency, and should not grow 
weary, hopeless, faithless, faint in their hearts. 

R3663 : page 343 

ANSWERS LONG DELAYED. 

Doubtless there are many reasons why the Lord 
does not promptly grant such of our requests as are in 
accordance with his will, in harmony with his Word. 
We may not know all of these reasons, but some of them 
are apparent. Undoubtedly one reason for the Lord's 
delay in answering us often is to test the strength and 
depths of our desires for the good things that we request 
of him. For instance, he informs us that he is 
more willing to give his holy Spirit to us who ask than 
are earthly parents to give good things to their children: 
yet the giving of his holy Spirit is a gradual process, and 
we are enabled to receive it only in proportion as we 
are emptied of the worldly or selfish spirit. It requires 
time to thus become emptied of self and prepared for 
the mind of Christ— in some it requires longer for this 
than in others, but all need emptying in order to receive 
the refilling. He that seeketh findeth, but the more 
he seeketh the more he findeth; to him that knocketh 
it shall be opened, but his continual knocking and his 
increasing interest in the knocking means his increasing 
desire to enter, so that as the door of privilege, of opportunity, 
swings slowly open before him his courage 
and strength increase as he seeks to avail himself of the 
opening, and thus everyway the blessing is greater than 
if the Lord were to answer the petitions more hastily. 

Whenever we think of prayer and answers thereto 
we should remember our Lord's words, "If ye abide in 
me and my words abide in you, ye may ask what ye 
will and it shall be done unto you." (John 15:7.) Ah, 
there are conditions in this statement. Those who 
abide in Christ must have gotten into him by faith, 
repentance and consecration, and to abide in him means 
that the faith will abide, the repentance for sin and 
opposition to it will abide, and the consecration to the 
Lord and his service will abide and be manifest. 

The other condition also is a weighty one: "if my 
Word abide in you." Ah, how evident it is that the 
Lord meant to associate himself and his Word, the 
Scriptures, in the minds, in the hearts, in the lives, in 
the prayers of all who are truly his. We must search 
the Scriptures to know the will of the Lord, to know 
what he has promised and what he has not promised, 
to know what we may ask and what we may not ask 



for, and ascertaining these, the fully consecrated one 
will not want to be, to have or to do anything except 
that which will be pleasing to the Lord in respect to 
him— "Thy will, not mine be done, O Lord," is his prayer. 
And when this position has been reached we can readily 
see that whatever would be asked by one thus well informed 
respecting the divine promises and fully submissive 
to the divine will, would be things which God 
would be well pleased to grant in answer to his requests. 

We are to think of our heavenly Father as rich and 
benevolent, kind and generous, yet wise as well as loving. 
We are to suppose that he will have pleasure in 
giving us the desires of our hearts if those desires are in 
harmony with his plan, which plan he has already 
framed on such lines as to include our very highest and 
best interests and the highest and best interests of all 
his creatures. So, then, 

"Faith can firmly trust him, 
Come what may." 

And his well-informed children can have all the 
desires of their hearts because their hearts are in full 
accord with the Lord, and they desire nothing of the 
Lord except the good things of his purpose and promise. 

NEHEMIAH'S FASTING AND PRAYER. 

The substance of the prayers of Nehemiah is stated: 
"I beseech thee, O Jehovah, God of heaven, the great 
and terrible God that keepeth covenant and mercy with 
them that love him and keep his commandments." 
Thus praying, he had before his mind the testimonies 
of God's Word respecting his dealings with Moses and 
the prophets and the kings of the past. He did not reproach 
the Lord as having failed with his part of the 
covenant, but, quite to the contrary, acknowledged that 
the Lord's ways and dealings with Israel had been just 
and true, and that the difficulties in which they were 
involved as a nation were the just penalties due them 
for their violations of the covenant made at Sinai. He 
expressed confidence also that the Lord would keep his 
covenant and have mercy upon the people, or upon those 
at least who would seek to walk in his paths. 

He entreated, "Let thine ear now be attentive and 
thine eyes open that thou mayst hearken unto the prayer 
of thy servant which I pray before thee now day and 
night for the children of Israel, thy servants, while I 
confess the sins of the children of Israel, thy servants, 
which we have sinned against thee; both I and my 
father's house have sinned." No proper prayer can be 
offered to the great Creator that does not acknowledge 
in some manner the weaknesses, deficiency, imperfection, 
sin of those who approach the throne of grace. As the 
Apostle declares, even we who are new creatures in 
Christ approach the throne of heavenly grace to find 

R3663 : page 344 



mercy and grace to help in every time of need. But our 

boldness, our courage, is not that of self-confidence, 

but of confidence in him who loved us and who bought us 

with his precious blood— in him who died for our sins 

and under whose covering robe we have peace, forgiveness, 

harmony with God. 

O, how much this means to us! More than it could 
have meant to Nehemiah or others living before the 
great atonement sacrifice had been made. It is our 
privilege to see how God can be just and yet be the 
justifier of him who believes on Jesus. We see that by 
the grace of God, Jesus Christ has tasted death for every 
man, and that ultimately the merit of his sacrifice will 
be made applicable to every man through the Lord's 
own channels and agents. 

Nehemiah was very open in his confession, and we 
believe that such an attitude is the proper one for all 
who would approach the Lord. Sins and weaknesses 
should be confessed to the Lord, however they may be 
reasonably screened from the eyes of others while we are 
seeking to do our best in walking not after the flesh but 
after the Spirit. He says, "We have dealt very corruptly 
against thee, and have not kept the commandments, 
neither the statutes, nor the judgments which thou hast 
commanded thy servant Moses. Remember, I beseech 
thee, the word that thou commandedst thy servant 
Moses, saying, If ye transgress I will scatter you abroad 
among the nations: but if you turn unto me and keep 
my commandments and do them, though your outcasts 
were in the uttermost part of the heaven, yet will I 
gather them from thence and will bring them into this 
place that I have chosen to set my name there. Now 
these are thy servants and thy people, whom thou hast 
redeemed by thy great power, and by thy strong hand." 

"BELOVED FOR THE FATHERS' SAKES." 

This prayer, mentioning the Lord's threatenings 
and acknowledging the justice of them, and acknowledging 
also the transgressions and the infliction of the 
penalties, and this turning to the Lord's promises for 
forgiveness and mercy and reconciliation, exhibit the 
very proprieties of prayer which all should imitate— 
Jew or Gentile. The "Israelite indeed" who transgresses 
the divine precepts and is chastened of the Lord can 
plead the Lord's promise to be very merciful to those 
who are of a contrite heart, and ask forgiveness based 
upon the great redemption sacrifice, and may by faith 
accept the divine promise immediately and enter into 
rest of soul so soon as he shall have done all in his power 
to rectify the wrong bemoaned. 

The Lord did respond to Nehemiah's prayer by 
granting him the opportunity for being associated in the 
rebuilding of the city and the placing of it upon a more 
satisfactory and permanent foundation, but it was not 



God's time for fulfilling all the gracious promises that 
he had made to that nation. It was not for Nehemiah to 
know the mysteries of the divine plan as they entwined 
in all the affairs of the Jewish nation and held them together 
as a separated people for several hundred years, 
until Messiah was sent unto them to gather to himself 
the Israelites indeed in whom there was no guile, and to 
reject, to blind, to give over to be scattered amongst the 
nations the remainder of the Jewish people. Because it 
was not time to reveal the divine plan in all its details, 
therefore the Lord in hearing Nehemiah's prayer merely 
granted him the privileges and blessings and opportunities 
possible for him at the time, leaving the larger 
fulfilments of that prayer and all the prayers for Israel 
to the glorious consummation when the glorified Christ, 
the antitype of Moses, shall stand forth to gather into 
one all nations under his own headship. 

The Apostle Paul had in mind the still greater 
scattering of Israel amongst all nations of the world, 
accomplished at the beginning of this Gospel age by the 
utter destruction of Jerusalem, from which it has not 
yet recovered. To the Apostle it was given to understand 
and appreciate the matter, and to explain to us 
who are of the spiritual Israel that he who scattered 
Israel was the Lord, who also would regather that people 
in his own due time. The Apostle points out to us most 
explicitly that all the history of this nation was known 
to the Lord, including the scattering in fulfilment of our 
Lord's Word, "Your house is left unto you desolate." 
It was in view of this greater scattering that the Apostle, 
full of faith in the promises of the Lord's Word, speaking 
under inspiration, assures us that "the gifts and callings 
of God are not matters of repentance"— that God never 
gave nor promised things ill-advisedly, that he knew 
the end from the beginning, and that ultimately every 
promise would be graciously fulfilled. He explains to 
us that the casting off of natural Israel was the appropriate 
thing during the period that God was gathering 
spiritual Israel to be the Bride, the Lamb's wife, joint-heirs 
with Christ. He assures us that as soon as the 
Church has all been selected, tested, proven, glorified, 
then divine favor will return to natural Israel, and he 

R3664 : page 344 

says, "They shall obtain mercy through your mercy"— 
fleshly Israel shall obtain mercy through the glorified 
spiritual Israel. 

THE RECONCILING OF THE WORLD. 

What a wonderful plan! All for which Nehemiah 
prayed will be much more than fulfilled, not because the 
heavenly Father has changed his plan to suit the prayer, 
but because in his prayer Nehemiah asked in accordance 
with the Lord's plan, yet did not ask as much as God 



has purposed to accomplish. The finite mind cannot 
grasp the lengths and breadths and heights and depths 
of the divine provision. Consequently the Lord is 
about to do for natural Israel exceedingly and abundantly 
more than we or Nehemiah could have asked or 
could have thought. He is about to gather them out 
of every nation, people, kindred and tongue, and to 
reestablish their judges and law-givers as at the first, only 
that these judges and law-givers of the future will be 
perfect, and, more than this, under the direct instruction 
and guidance of the then glorified Christ— Head and 
body. 

Doubtless it was because it would have been beyond 
the comprehension of the Jews that the Lord did not 

R3664 : page 345 

make very plain in all his prophecies that the blessings 
proposed for fleshly Israel were the same blessings which 
later would be bestowed upon all nations, peoples, 
kindreds and tongues. As he veiled the fact that there 
would be a spiritual Israel as well as a natural Israel, 
so he veiled in the promises the fact that in the future 
all the nations, peoples and tongues will have an opportunity 
of becoming Israelites indeed, children of Abraham. 
These gracious promises are indeed clear when we 
attain a proper viewpoint in respect to the divine Word, 
though hidden from any other standpoint. For instance 
we now see the meaning of the Lord's word, "I have 
constituted thee a father of many nations," (Gen. 17:4); 
and again the promise, "In thy seed shall all the families 
of the earth be blessed" (Gen. 12:3); and again the 
Apostle's assurance that as the rejection of natural 
Israel meant the acceptance of spiritual Israel to the 
higher and chief elements of the promise, so the regathering 
of spiritual Israel would mean life from the 
dead to all humanity.— Rom. 11. 

PRAYING TO THE POINT. 

Nehemiah's prayers were to a point, namely, that 
he might have a special blessing from the Lord upon himself 
and upon the mission which he believed the Lord 
would be willing to put into his hand through the 
authority and cooperation of the king Artaxerxes. His 
prayer was, "O Lord, I beseech thee let now thine ear 
be attentive to thy servant and to the prayer of thy 
servants [all true Israelites], who delight to fear thy 
name: And prosper, I pray thee, thy servant this day 
and grant him mercy in the sight of this man." As we 
have already seen, the monarchs of those days were 
absolute in authority, and their ill will might very 
easily be aroused by any plans and arrangements or 
suggestions which might strike them as inimical to their 
own hopes, aims, ambitions and prospects. Nehemiah 
might well doubt that the king would take favorably to 



the suggestion that he be permitted to go to Jerusalem 
to endeavor to establish law and order there and to help 
along his own kindred. The king might very properly 
view this as disloyalty. If he were a loyal servant and 
appreciated his position in the king's confidence and his 
home in the capital city, why should he wish to leave 
these and go elsewhere to reestablish a nation and capital 
which had once been competitors in the race for world 
power. The king in his anger might order his execution, 
or cast a javelin at him. 

Nehemiah's prayer to the Lord that he might grant 
him mercy in the sight of Artaxerxes shows that he had 
faith in the divine power. We have often wondered if 
a deficiency of faith along such lines is not a part of much 
of the trouble of the Lord's truly consecrated people 
to-day— of spiritual Israel. We know that sometimes 
they have severe trials from those who hate them, from 
those who perhaps despise them and deal unjustly with 
them, and we wonder to what extent they remember, 
as Nehemiah did, that God has full power to open ways 
and means before us whereby we may engage in his 
service, if he be willing to accept of our services, if we 
find favor in his sight, if our prayers of lips and of heart 
go up before him as a memorial, acceptable through 
Christ. 

PRAYER AND TRUST IN ALL AFFAIRS. 

We remember in this connection a story told us by 
a sister at one of the Conventions. She said: "My 
husband is quite wealthy, has a large farm, well stocked, 
etc., and, although I have served faithfully for years, he 
is so opposed to the Truth and so seeks to hinder me in 
respect to it that he begrudges me even the small sum 
of the WATCH TOWER subscription or the price of books 
I need. When I heard of this Convention I felt a longing 
in my heart to go and meet with some of the Lord's 
dear people, and I took the matter to the Lord in prayer, 
telling him that if it were his pleasure I should greatly 
enjoy the privilege of attending the Convention, but I 
was willing to leave the matter entirely with him. I 
felt somehow that it would be quite probable that the 
Lord would open the way for me to go, and by way of 
cooperation I suggested the matter to my husband in 
good time, saying that I would like very much to attend 
the Convention. He was violently opposed, and said 
that the distance to the railroad station was so great that 
I could not walk it, and that he would not allow me to 
use a horse. I replied quite calmly that I did not 
know, but somehow I felt that the Lord would be willing 
to have me go and would perhaps open the way yet for 
me. I answered quietly, because I had committed the 
matter entirely to the Lord, and was willing to abide 
by whatever his providence might mete out to me. 
I was even cheerful, therefore, notwithstanding my 
husband's words of opposition. He seemed to read my 



confident expectation and several times referred to the 
matter, reiterating that I should not go, that he would 
not allow me to take a horse, etc. I merely replied 
that I did not know, but that if it were the Lord's will 
that I should go, he would be able to open the way. 
About ten days before the Convention one of my husband's 
best horses took sick, and although he is very 
successful in doctoring his stock, and on this occasion 
called in a veterinary surgeon, the horse died. Then 
another good horse took sick and it died, and a third 
horse took sick. My husband began to realize that it 
might be the hand of the Lord in his affairs, and evidently 
associated his losses with his declaration that I might 
not use a horse to go to the Convention. He brought up 
the subject of the Convention himself, intimating in a 
very mild way a possibility of rescinding his previous 
decision. My quiet answer was the same, that perhaps 
the Lord would open the way. The third horse died, 
and my husband came to me and said, 'You may go to 
the Convention.'" 

WE WALK BY FAITH, NOT BY SIGHT. 

In relating these circumstances we do not wish to 
give the intimation that the Lord would thus deal in 
every such case. We must remember that a part of 
our lesson as the Lord's followers is that we must learn 
to walk in the footsteps of Jesus trustfully— by faith and 
not by sight; that we must learn patient endurance, and 

R3664 : page 346 

thus develop more and more all the fruits and graces of 
the spirit of love. Our object in referring to this case is 
that all of the Lord's people may have the suggestions 
which it offers, in harmony with those of Nehemiah's 
prayer, namely, that God is able to shape all our earthly 
affairs for us, and that a part of our lesson is to learn to 
trust him. He will not suffer us to be tempted above 
that we are able, but with the temptation will also provide 
a way of escape. He does indeed permit us to be 
tried as gold in the furnace, yet as gold is not permitted 
to be consumed in the furnace, so the Lord will not permit 
us to receive injury under any conditions so long 
as we are trusting in him. All things must work together 
for good to them that love God, to the called ones according 
to his purpose. 

As Nehemiah's prayer was delayed of an answer four 
months, and no door of opportunity seemed to offer for 
him to bring the matter to the king's attention, so with 
us— patient endurance and faith may be amongst the 
lessons which the Lord wishes us to learn by the delay 
in the answers to our petitions. Likewise, doubtless, 
that four months of delay was used by the Lord in more 
or less a preparation of the king for cooperating with 
the request of Nehemiah. And so with us it may be 



that, while we are praying, the Lord is not only preparing 
us for the blessing and opportunity and privilege 
we desire, but also preparing the circumstances and conditions 
which will bring us these opportunities and 
privileges in the best form. Let us, then, lay to heart 
and utilize the lessons of our Master's words, "Men 
ought always to pray and not to faint."— Luke 18:1. 
"The effectual, fervent prayer of a righteous man 
availeth much," says our Golden Text. The prayers of 
the unrighteous, we understand, will avail nothing; 
and in this connection we are to remember that "there 
is none righteous, no, not one," and that all the righteousness 
which we have or which permits us to present ourselves 
before the Father, or which guarantees us that 
we shall be heard of him, is the righteousness of Christ 
imputed to us— the merit of his sacrifice covers all our 
blemishes. Let us remember, too, that it is the fervent 
prayer that is the effectual one— the prayer that is 
earnest, from the heart and not merely from the lips. 
It is for this reason that self-denial, fasting and praying 
should be associated in the minds, and in fact we should 
be so earnest, so fervently desire the things that we request, 
and be so confident that they are the Lord's will, as 
guaranteed by the promises of his Word, that we would 

R3665 : page 346 

hold on and wait for the mercies the Lord thus prepares 
us to receive. 

It would be rather unsafe, we think, for any of 
the "new creation" to make request for temporal blessings. 
"After all those things do the Gentiles seek." 
(Matt. 6:32.) They seek those things because they 
know not of and appreciate not the higher and better, 
the spiritual things. Spiritual Israelites are exhorted by 
the Lord to appreciate the spiritual clothing, the spiritual 
food, the heavenly riches, which moth and rust cannot 
corrupt, and to seek for these. 

The Master tells us what we may freely ask, what 
we may be assured that the heavenly Father will be 
very willing to grant to us, though he bear long with us, 
though he give it gradually to us, and not perhaps as 
rapidly and as fully as we request it. His words are: 
"If ye, then, know how to give good gifts [earthly gifts] 
unto your children, how much more shall your heavenly 
Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him." (Luke 11:13.) 
The holy Spirit is the spirit of love— to God 
and to man. It cannot be given to us under present 
conditions except gradually, as the old selfish, wrong 
spirit is deposed from our hearts. This, therefore, must 
be continually our prayer to the end of life's journey, 
that we might be filled with the Spirit of the Lord, and 
thus praying means that we will be thus laboring day 
by day, and that the Lord will continually bless us, 
giving us the fruits of his Spirit in our hearts and in our 
lives more and more, its joy and peace and blessing. 



R3665 : page 346 

ABSTINENCE FOR THE SAKE OF OTHERS. 

--1 CORINTHIANS 10:23-33. --NOVEMBER 26.- 

Golden Text:— "Let him that thinketh he 
standeth take heed lest he fall." — 1 Cor. 10:12. 

BY COMMON consent this date is recognized as 
Temperance Sunday throughout the civilized 
world. No true child of God could feel indifferent 
in respect to a matter of such vital importance 
to our race. Undoubtedly the drinking habit is a cause 
of much of the woe of the world, and hence whoever is 
on the Lord's side, whoever is striving as one of the 
Royal Priesthood to remember the injunction, "Be 
clean, ye that bear the vessels of the Lord's house," 
must feel his responsibility to this question in respect 
to his own person and the example of his daily life 
upon others. Whoever realizes that the whole creation 
is groaning and travailing in pain together and longs for 
the time to come when he may, in association with his 
Redeemer, roll back from the world the weaknesses of 
heredity and bind Satan and estop the course of sin and 
temptation, such an one, truly, heartily and sympathetically 
entering into these hopes set before us in the Gospel, 
will surely be in sympathy with every reasonable and 
legitimate means used in opposition to the great drink 
evil, which, as a brood of fiery serpents, is biting the 
world of mankind and causing all kinds of trouble, 
mental, moral and physical. 

Were there no more important work for the saints 
to do undoubtedly it would be the will of the Lord that 
we should engage our talents largely in combating this 
terrible drink evil. But while seeing still more important 
work for the Lord's ambassadors to engage in, it is 
eminently proper that we should let it be known on 
suitable occasions that our sympathies are with those 
who are fighting in a legitimate manner this hideous 
monster, and that our non-participation is not from lack 

R3665 : page 347 

of sympathy with the cause, but because, from our 
standpoint of view, there is a still greater, still grander 
and still more important work to be done in the proclamation 
of the good tidings of reconciliation to those who 
have an ear to hear our message now and ultimately 
to all the families of the earth. We trust that every one 
who has by the grace of God learned of Present Truth, 
and whose conceptions of divine mercy have been enlarged 
through a grander view of the divine plan, feels 



an increasing opposition to everything and every influence 
working in the world contrary to righteousness, 
purity, truth, and tending to further degrade our sadly 
fallen race. The clearer our view of the divine plan the 
more intense should be our feeling of opposition to everything 
sinful and contrary to that plan. The more we 
appreciate our God and are consecrated to his cause, the 
more we must be opposed to the adversary of souls and 
opposed to everything which is injurious to our fellows. 

THE SCOPE OF THIS STUDY. 

We are glad that those entrusted with the arrangement 
of these International Bible Lessons have chosen 
an apostolic exhortation which is applicable to temperance 
in every proper sense of the word. It is applicable 
not only to food and drink and clothing, but to every 
interest and affair of life; even as the Lord's people, 
consecrated to do his will, are exhorted that whether 
they eat or drink or whatever they do all should be done 
to the glory of the Lord. We have the declaration that 
no drunkard shall inherit the Kingdom of heaven, and 
we assume that intemperance on other lines would 
equally prove in the Lord's sight a lack of proper character 
on our part that would bar us from a share in the 
Kingdom, and that therefore with equal propriety we 
might say, No glutton shall enter the Kingdom of heaven. 
Neither those who devote their lives to fashion and folly, 
dress and frivolity. 

The Lord is seeking for the Kingdom class persons 
of character, and has arranged that those who hear his 
message of grace in the present time and are accepted 
of him through consecration shall sacrifice their own 
wills, the will of the flesh, to do the Lord's will, and therefore 
to no longer surrender themselves to gluttony or 
drunkenness or fashionable folly. The Lord is seeking 
those who surrender themselves to him to be taught in 

R3666 : page 347 

the school of Christ, to there learn the lessons of self-control, 
self-denial, patience, humility, meekness, and 
come to a proper appreciation of the various graces of 
the holy Spirit, and so far as possible to live in harmony 
with their noble conceptions and desires. These are the 
ones whom the Lord is seeking for the Kingdom, and 
we may feel sure that he will accept no others. He will 
find a sufficient number of this kind to complete his 
predestination, and it is for us, if we have heard his voice 
and been accepted of him, to strive daily to be dead to 
the world and to all fleshly desires that we may thus make 
our calling and election sure. 

THE LAW GOVERNING SAINTS. 

The Apostle says that all things are lawful for him 



but all things are not expedient. There is a limited and 
unlimited way of using language. Evidently the Apostle 
has no thought of using this expression, "all things," 
unlimitedly. It would not have been lawful for him to 
murder or steal or do other things which he recognized 
to be contrary to the divine will. He is discussing the 
proper liberties of Christians. Their one law is supreme 
love for God and consequently a love for all mankind. 
This comprehensive law is binding upon them— it is 
the law of their being, to disregard which would mean the 
loss of the holy Spirit and, persevered in, would mean the 
second death. The Lord's children are not governed by 
"thou shalt" and "thou shalt not," in respect to all 
the little affairs of life. It is left to them to apply the 
principles of this law of love to life's general affairs, including 
its trivialities. The Jews were under laws 
respecting various little details, and the Gentiles, the 
heathen, had their customs, usages, laws. The Christian 
stands free from all those, bound only by the one 
law of love. He may do anything that would not conflict 
with that law, but many things that would not so 
conflict might be inexpedient, inadvisable, because of 
the mental and moral condition of those about him who 
might misunderstand his course. 

In this lesson the Apostle is explaining a difficulty 
which perhaps more than any other trivial question was 
troublesome to the early Church. The Apostles at the 
Council in Jerusalem, answering the inquiry of the 
Church at Antioch, had declared that the Jewish law 
did not affect the Gentiles who had accepted Christ. 
Nevertheless they urged upon them amongst other 
things that they abstain from meats offered to idols. 
(Acts 21:25). This proved to be a very difficult matter 
with them because of the customs of that day. In 
Corinth, for instance, nearly all the meats sold in the 
butchers' stalls ("shambles") was meat which had been 
offered to idols. The people, not knowing the true God 
in exercising their faculty of veneration had come to 
suppose that all meats should be first offered to the 
heathen idols, in order that the partaking of them might 
have a blessing and be to their health. Meat of any 
other kind was scarce. The Apostle explains in our 
lesson that if Christians were invited to a feast by some 
of their unbelieving neighbors or friends or relatives, 
as for instance a marriage supper, they would in all 
probability sit down to meat which had been offered to 
an idol. They were in perplexity in respect to the matter 
what they should do: the Apostle was endeavoring to 
make plain to them the path of duty. 

UNDER THE LAW OF LOVE. 

He sets forth, first of all, the basic rule that we who 
are Christians, we who are truly consecrated to the Lord, 
have given up our own wills and preferences in every 
matter with a view to honoring the Lord and doing all 



the good we can in the world in his name. He urges 
therefore, "Let no man seek his own but every man 
another's welfare." (v. 24.) The Apostle here would 
seem to mean that we are to be entirely regardless in 
respect to our own welfare that we may accomplish all 
the good possible for others; yet we believe that we would 

R3666 : page 348 

not be doing violence to the general tenor of the Scriptures 
to suppose the Apostle means that we are not to 
seek our own welfare merely, but are to keep in view 
also the welfare, the interests of others, so that where 
these would conflict we would be ready to make any 
reasonable and proper sacrifice, especially on any matter 
or subject which would relate to the Lord and his Gospel 
message, because we are God's ambassadors and representatives 
of the Truth, his message, in the world. 

In view of these things the Apostle advises that 
those who are advanced enough in the knowledge of the 
Truth to appreciate the fact that an idol is nothing, and 
that the offering of meat to that idol would in no degree 
affect it, might properly enough use their liberties 
and eat the meat, asking no questions, but remembering 
that "the earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof;" 
and, accepting the food as being a part of the Lord's 
bounty, they may give thanks for it and eat it, regardless 
of where it has been, whether offered to an idol or not. 
But if some one should say to the believer, "That meat 
you are about to eat was offered to an idol," giving the 
inference that he believed it would be sin to partake of 
it, then our course should be different: not because our 
own conscience would smite us with the thought it was 
sin, nor with the thought that the meat had been injured 
by laying it before a piece of wood or stone, but 
for the conscience of the one telling us, lest he should 
think we were committing a sin, and lest he should be 
thus led to think lightly of our professions or to similarly 
partake, and that in violation of his own conscience— he 
thinking it to be sinful to eat such meat. 

The Apostle Paul was thus in some degree stepping 
beyond the decree of the council at Jerusalem; but while 
standing up for all that the Jerusalem council had advocated, 
in so far as it would have any bearing or influence 
upon others, he nevertheless would recognize 
the liberty of the people of God, that they are under 
no law except love. He therefore is in this Scripture 
endeavoring to show wherein the law of love would 
have its restraining influence along lines of this question 
of eating meat offered to idols. The Golden Rule of 
love would bid us be careful not to stumble the conscience 
of others, but otherwise it would not restrain us, for as 
the Apostle says, "Why is my liberty judged of another 
man's conscience?" (1 Cor. 10:29.) If it is not my own 
conscience which reproves me why need I put myself 
under bondage in the matter if it will in no wise affect 



the interests or conscience of another? It is in harmony 
with the use of this liberty that the Apostle has just 
suggested that the one discerning his liberty may eat 
food respecting which he may have his suspicions that it 
was offered to an idol, and ask no questions about it, 
so that no one else's conscience may be involved; but if 
the conscience of another were involved the Golden Rule 
would immediately operate, and forbid us doing anything 
which would stumble or injure the conscience of a brother 
and break our good influence over him. 

THE OTHER EXTREME. 

In a very few instances we have heard of people who 
endeavored to use the Apostle's argument here to restrain 
others from their reasonable liberties on various 
subjects. They put a false interpretation upon the 
Apostle's words, saying to the brother, "You ought not 
to do that because I do not want you to do it," or "The 
Apostle says that you ought not to stumble your brother, 
and you are stumbling me by not going to Church with 
me, as I wish you to do and as I think you ought to 
do." 

This is a total mistake, a misapplication of the 
Apostle's teaching. It is an attempt to shackle and lead 
him as a slave, using the Apostle's words as a chain of 
slavery. If a Methodist brother should think that I 
ought to go with him to meeting on Sunday, a Presbyterian 
brother or a Lutheran brother or a Baptist or an 
Episcopalian or a Roman Catholic might each equally 
think that I should go to their services; yet none of 
these brothers could or would attempt to claim that the 
Lord had directed me to go to his particular services, 
nor could he claim that not to go with him would be a 
violation of any moral principle. The wrong in such 
a case would be done by the one who would seek to 
bring the brother into bondage, and would use the 
Apostle's arguments in a sophistical manner contrary 
to their true import and contrary to the Golden Rule, 
for he would be doing to his neighbor contrary to what 
he would wish the neighbor to do to him— he would be 
attempting to reenslave his proper Christian liberties. 

PARALLEL QUESTIONS TO-DAY. 

On the contrary, we have two matters in our day 
which closely parallel this difficulty in the Church in 
the Apostle's day, namely, the temperance question and 
the Sabbath question. The laws of civilized States 
usually provide for abstention from labor on one day of 
the week, and Christian people in general suppose that 
God has particularly required this of Christians— that it 
is a divine law, a bondage upon them. As we have already 
shown,* this is an erroneous view; nevertheless 
Christians are glad of the opportunity to observe one 
day in seven for special worship and thankfulness and 



spiritual feasting. And seeing the general though erroneous 
view that believers have, it becomes not only our 
duty, but love makes it a pleasure and a privilege, to 
carefully abstain from any labors upon that day which 
the general sentiment of our neighbors would consider 
to be a violation of the sacredness of the day. Love for 
them and a desire not to encourage them to violate their 
consciences, not less than love for the Truth and a desire 
to have them appreciate the Gospel of which we are the 
ministers and ambassadors, should lead us to great 
carefulness on this matter. 

The liquor question occupies a similar position in 
the minds of many. True, there is nothing in the Word 
of God which prohibits his people from using all the 
liquors that would do them good, but the majority of 
the Lord's people are well aware that they would be 
better without any, and hence that to use liquors in 
any measure or degree would be to abuse their own 
persons, and to more or less incapacitate themselves for 
the service of the Lord and to do good unto all men 



*MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. VI., Chap. VIII. 

R3667 : page 349 

according to opportunity in his name. But even if we 
might use liquors ad libitum without injury, there would 
be under present conditions and sentiments strong 
reason why we should avoid every appearance of evil 
in respect to intoxicating liquors. We realize more and 
more what a curse it is to the world, and that our influence, 
if thrown on that side of the question, might 
ensnare others, who perhaps would be less strong to 
resist the encroachments and injuries from this demon. 
We can realize that under present conditions in this 
land it would be a reflection against us, against the message 
which we bear, against the Lord whom we represent, 
to have anything to do with the liquor traffic, or 
even to enter a liquor saloon on any other business, or 
to associate ourselves in any manner with so dire an 
evil, which even the unregenerate realizes to be an enemy 
to righteousness in every sense of the word. Some of 
the Lord's people, we feel, are not as particular as they 
should be in estimating the weight of their influence, and 
in determining that by the Lord's grace, as the Apostle 
urges, they will do nothing against the Truth, but will 
do all in their power for the Truth— for righteousness.— 
2 Cor. 13:8. 

THE BREADTH OF PAUL'S ARGUMENT. 

All must agree that the Apostle's argument is 
sound. On the one hand everything that we receive 
is a gift from the Lord, and anything that we can 



render him thanks for would be proper for us to use in a 

becoming manner, and none would have a right to condemn 

us for so doing. None should speak evil of us for 

doing a thing that we can do with good conscience and 

with prayer and thankfulness. On the other hand, however, 

while they have no right to criticize us, we have 

the right to judge our own conduct and to restrain ourselves, 

and to determine, as the Apostle elsewhere 

explains it, that if eating a certain kind of food would 

cause the stumbling of others, we would gladly agree 

never to use that kind of food. We are to see our 

liberties and to use them according to our judgment of 

the Lord's will, because all things are given us richly 

to enjoy (1 Tim. 6:17.) Eating or drinking, whatsoever 

we do, do all to the glory of God. 

But whenever we see that anything in our lives, 
however right it may be of itself, would be a hindrance 
to the spread of the Lord's cause, a dishonor to the Truth 
in the sight of others, it is for us to sacrifice that thing, 
to deny ourselves that right, that liberty, that privilege, 
and give no occasion of stumbling either to Jew or Gentile 
or to the Church of God. 

PAUL'S PERSONAL EXAMPLE. 

Blessed is every teacher who can write, as the 
Apostle does here (v. 33), that his own personal course 
known to the people of God is in full accord with the 
teachings he has set before them respecting self-denial 
for the good of others— "even as I also please all men in 
all things, not seeking mine own advantage, but the 
good of the many, that they may be saved." What a 
noble character was St. Paul's! How willing to lay 
down his life for the brethren! yea, and in the hope of 
turning some from being aliens and strangers to make 
of them brethren through the message of the grace of 
God. Let us all more and more cultivate the Apostle's 
spirit and willingness to be and to do anything or everything 
that the Lord may be glorified and his cause 
advanced, and that his people and all people may be 
blessed. This is the spirit of Christ, the spirit of self-sacrifice, 
the spirit of love, the spirit of a sound mind 
to seek to do others good at any cost. 

We are not to understand the Apostle here to mean 
that he succeeded in pleasing all men, for we know that 
he was stoned, beaten, and finally suffered death because 
he did not please all men; but he was loyal to the 
Lord, which loyalty meant the disapprobation of men. 
The Apostle's meaning evidently is that he sought, so 
far as loyalty to the Lord was concerned and loyalty to 
the principles of righteousness, to do or be everything 
for the advancement of the Gospel and the blessing of 
the people. 

"HIM THAT THINKETH HE STANDETH." 



Our Golden Text appeals to us forcefully in connection 
with this lesson. The Lord's people are sometimes 
in danger through not realizing their own weaknesses. 
The Apostle said, "When I am weak, then am I strong." 
(2 Cor. 12:10.) His paradox signifies that when he 
realized his own weakness, then through this realization 
he was led to rely upon the Lord and the power of his 
might, and thus was stronger than he could otherwise 
have been, strong in the Lord and not in his own strength. 
This principle is still applicable to us. The moment when 
we feel self-confident is the dangerous one; the times when 
we feel our own weakness and are looking to the Lord for 
grace and help and guidance and strength, this is the 
time that by reason of his assistance we are strong. 

Let us take heed, then, lest we feel over-confident in 
respect to our own strength, our own standing on these 
questions of liberties, rights, privileges and self-denials 
for the good of others. It is right that we should think 
that we stand, but it is right that we continually appreciate 
that we stand not in our own strength but in the 
strength that God supplies through his promises and 
through his holy Spirit. We are frequently exhorted in 
the Scriptures not only to rejoice in the Lord and to 
trust in his power, but to fear and take heed lest we 
should in any measure slip away from or fail to rightly 
improve our positions and privileges. On a par with our 
Golden Text is the Apostle's statement, "Let us fear 
lest the promise being left us of entering into his rest, 
any of us should seem to come short of it." (Heb. 4:1.) 
Love is the test to which all of the Lord's disciples are 
subject. Love considers the interests of others and 
seeketh not her own interests; love is willing to sacrifice 
for the good of others and for the glory of the Lord and 
for the advancement of his cause. Let love, therefore, 
abound in our hearts more and more. 



R3667 : page 350 

CONCERNING ONE-DAY CONVENTIONS. 

AT HARRISBURG, PA., ON OCTOBER 8 

WE had a grand season of refreshing, friends attending 
from various surrounding towns. The 
morning rally brought out excellent testimonies 
of love for the Truth and loyalty in its service. 

The afternoon service for the public was held in 
Chamber of Commerce Auditorium and was well attended 
—about 600 being present. The topic, "To Hell 
and Back. Who are there? Hope for the deliverance 
of many," was received with close attention for two 
hours by people not accustomed to sit longer than 
twenty minutes for a sermon. The evening topic addressed 
to the interested was, "Yom Kippur, the Sin 



Atonement or Covering." In this we showed that Oct. 
9, the Jewish Atonement Day, was but a type of the 
greater one, its antitype— the Gospel age. We need not 
give details of this, for many of our readers got in the 
Pittsburgh Dispatch a good report on the day following. 
A midnight train brought us home for Monday's duties 
and privileges. 

AT PROVIDENCE, R.I., OCTOBER 22 

This was a rousing Convention. About 300 attended 
from outside the city, full of love and zeal and 
animation. Of these about 25 came from New York, 
about 100 from Boston, 50 more from cities near Boston, 
and 50 others scatteringly from various points. 

The morning testimony rally was full of enthusiasm, 
and the joys of the inner life shone brightly in all faces 
and was testified by many lips. 

The friends here had advertised with still greater 
energy and wisdom than on the occasion of our previous 
visit. They had placed 580 large cards in store windows 
and on the fronts of cars, and in addition had circulated 
20,000 smaller cards thoroughly in the city 
homes. As a result Infantry Hall, the largest in Providence, 
was crowded, and some were turned away, unable 
to secure admittance. Of the 2,000 gaining 
entrance nearly 300 stood for the two hours of the 
discourse on "To Hell and Back." We learn that 
one of the audience, asking for a WATCH TOWER on 
"Hell" said, "I entered this hall an infidel. I am, 
thank God, leaving it a firm believer in the Bible as 
God's Word." 

The evening session for the interested was not advertised, 
but between 400 and 500 were present. Our 
discourse many of you received in the Pittsburgh Dispatch 
of Oct. 23. Its theme was, "Christ the center of 
the divine revelation." 

AT SCRANTON, PA., OCT. 23 

The Scranton friends, noting that we would be unable 
to reach Allegheny from Providence in one night, 
urged that we give them one meeting on the homeward 
route. We assented cheerfully. We arrived at 2 p.m., 
were met at the depot by five of the elders and soon 
were at the hall, where handshakes and greetings told 
us that the Scranton friends were still filled with the 
spirit of love, joy and peace as before, and in accord 
with the Lord's jewels everywhere. Word had gotten 
out to the friends residing in surrounding villages and 
cities, and some of these were present, among them some 
but a few weeks old in the Truth. 

En route to the hall one of the elders remarked, 
"We have been endeavoring to follow your advice in 

R3668 : page 350 



the DAWNS, Brother Russell, to put to work all of the 
brethren giving evidence of ability, and as a result we 
now have quite a few able to lead Bible studies, to give 
Chart talks and to deliver occasional addresses. Following 
your advice further, we have all realized that the 
field is a broad as well as a ripe one, and have been 
going out here and there, all of us, as the Lord seemed 
to show an open door for the Truth. As a result the 
Truth is making progress here, to our joy and, we 
trust, to the Lord's pleasement. How many of these 
outside meetings do you suppose we are keeping up?" 
We guessed 14; but the reply was, "More than that 
—25." We congratulated them, and again commend 
this plan to all. 

A good audience listened for two hours to a discourse 
on the topic the friends had advertised— "To Hell and 
Back," etc. Then more hand grasps and "God bless 
you's" and we were off for the train, accompanied by 
about a dozen. A special luncheon was thrust into our 
hands as we left for Allegheny, where we arrived at 
7.45 on Tuesday morning. 



R3668 : page 350 

SOME INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 
CONCERNING TOBACCO. 



Question.— Is it wrong to grow tobacco? 

Answer.— The growing of tobacco is on a par with 
the selling or using of it. It is not forbidden in the Bible 
and is contrary to no human law. It is not, therefore, a 
question of conscience, except where found injurious to 
health. Nevertheless, we feel a repugnance to the use of 
tobacco, with its chewing and spitting and abominable 
odor upon the breath and the clothing. We believe 
that Christians as they grow in grace desire to be clean 
every whit— outside and inside, and to give as little 
offense to others as possible. Such we generally find preferring 
other business, other food and other habits. We 
commend this course, wherever reasonable and possible, as 
being in line with what we believe would have the Lord's 
approval. But it is not a question of conscience, but of 
expediency, and each must decide for himself, and often 
according to circumstances beyond his reasonable control. 

SHOULD WE VOTE? 



Question.— Should the Lord's people vote? Would 



it be wrong? or would it duty? 

Answer.— Conscience may have to do with this question 
on either side. And conscience never should be violated. 
It may be educated, however; nay, it is our duty 
to educate conscience, and God's Word is its best instructor. 
The spirit of God's Word is to the effect that the 
elect are a "new creation," whose "citizenship is in heaven," 
and all of whose interests, temporal and spiritual, 

R3668 : page 351 

center in "Thy Kingdom come." Assuredly we must 
have dealings with the world to earn our living decently, 
but all of this class should be on the alert to foster the interests 
of the new nature, and experience proves that the 
less we have to do with the "world" and its politics the 
better will be our spiritual health. What will our votes 
amount to anyway? Even if we all voted the one ticket 
we would change no election. Our advice then is that as 
nothing is to be gained and much time and spiritual energy 
sure to be lost by dabbling in politics, the consecrated 
will be exercising the spirit of a sound mind in the wisdom 
from above in leaving the world's affairs to its own care. 
See further DAWN Vol. I, chaps. 13 and 14; also Vol. VI., 
pp.593,594. 

PRAYING FOR PHYSICAL HEALING. 



Question.— Why might we not pray for physical healing 
if we felt sure we could thereby be of greater service 
in the Harvest work? 

Answer.— We need to analyze our thoughts, and to 
remember that they are deceitful above all things; that 
they sometimes endeavor to cheat us as to their real motives. 
It seems to us that the craving which we all would 
have for physical healing is considerably of a piece with a 
desire we all would have to see some miracle performed— 
a desire to walk by sight and not wholly by faith. On the 
other hand, to our understanding the Lord's wish is that 
we of the Gospel age shall walk wholly by faith and not at 
all by sight. Hence the signs were permitted in the 
beginning of the age, for the establishment of the Church, 
and were subsequently dropped that the Church, established 
by the Word of the Lord in its hands, should walk 
by faith entirely. Another thought which might assist 
the craving for miracles of healing would be the relief 
from pain but this would be in the nature of a selfish wish 
also; and if the Lord should relieve from pain it would be 
one step toward relief from disease, and if disease were 
eradicated why not also pray for relief from homeliness, 
crooked heads, bad dispositions, etc.? In a word, why 
not ask the Lord to make us over again? But this, as will 
be perceived, would be restitution, which is not a part of 
the divine order now, but God's arrangement for the next 



age. The object, as we have seen, of the calling of the 
Church in this age is to sacrifice, and we are to remember 
also that it is not the new creature that is sacrificed, but 
the old creature— the new creature is renewed day by day. 
The Lord heals all its diseases; that is to say, he cooperates 
with us for the healing of spiritual defects, and promises 
a completion of the work in the resurrection of the 
spiritual body. This is what we get in exchange for the 
surrender of earthly rights of restitution. We should be 
glad indeed that, coming to the Lord and being justified 
by faith, our poor old bodies, already almost dead, will be 
permitted to go down into death and the matter reckoned 
a complete sacrifice, whereas it is only a fragment. If, on 
the contrary, we were restored to physical perfection, it 
would mean that we would have a great deal more to sacrifice 
before we could possibly expect to die. Hence it is 
more favorable to us that the Lord reckons our bodies perfect 
and then sacrificed, because we have that much the 
less sacrificial service to perform, yet counted of him as 
complete sacrifice. 

RELATIONSHIP OF THE "HEAD" TO THE "BODY." 



Question.— The subject of our relationship with 
Christ, he as the Head, we the members of his body, is 
not clear to me. How could the Lord be Head over a 
body which was not in existence when he was glorified? 
How can the feet exist in the world without the remainder 
of the body likewise? 

Answer.— To the natural mind, uninstructed from the 
standpoint of the Scriptures, it would seem inconsistent 
to say that Jesus, the Head of the body, was glorified before 
any members of his body had even been called; but 
when we view the matter from the Scriptural standpoint 
we see that this is the very thought presented, and it is the 
essence of wisdom, therefore, to accept the divine statement 
and to harmonize our natural reasons therewith. Similarly 
the entire Church, from our Lord's day to the present 
time, is counted as the one body of Christ— which body 
we are, the living stones, being polished and fitted and 
prepared for the glorious Temple, not yet completed. As 
represented in MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. I., in the Chart 
of the Ages, this union between Christ and the Church is 
a perpetual one throughout this age, the lines of the Head 
being preserved in the Church which is the body of Christ, 
as the lines of the small pyramid are preserved in the lower 
parts of the same. From this standpoint it is entirely 
consistent to speak of the living members of the Church 
as being the "feet class," as it is consistent to speak of our 
Lord at his first advent as being the Head of a body not 
then even called. There are many Scriptures, when you 
come to study the subject, which speak of the last members 
of the Church as "the feet of him." "How beautiful 
upon the mountains are the feet of him who saith unto 



Zion, Thy God reigneth."-See DAWN, Vol. II., 
pp. 141, 142. 

It is in this day in which we are living that the "feet" 
are in special danger of stumbling, as stated in Psa. 91:7. 
-See DAWN, Vol. III., p.241. 

There are two views which may properly be taken respecting 
the members of the body of Christ. One views 
them chronologically from Head to feet, as also the seven 
churches of Rev. 1-3. The other view recognizes the 
Church at any particular point of time as a complete Church, 
having in it the representatives of the various functions 
of the entire body, as described by the Apostle in 1 Corinthians 12. 
In this latter view some of the members of the 
body of Christ at the first advent were more important 
members, representing the quality of eye, ear or tongue, 
hands, etc., while other members represented less important 
functions of feet, legs, etc., as the Apostle explains, 
and this has been true of the Church in any and every 
stage of its existence, and is true today. But these two 
separate views of the matter should not be confused nor 
made to conflict with each other. 



Bibles, Testaments, Students' Helps, Etc. 

SUPPLIED AT WHOLESALE COST PRICES. 



IN presenting our list of Bibles this year we have dropped 
a number which we have previously carried and have 
selected others which we think more desirable. We give 
below a list which, although not very large, we think will 
cover a range sufficiently broad to suit the wants of nearly 
all. However, should any of the friends desire a more complete 
list to select from, we shall be pleased to mail publishers' 
catalogues upon postal card application. 



DIVINITY CIRCUIT TEACHERS' BIBLES 

No. (Add Postage on these, 20c each.) Pub. Our 

04403 Minion, French Seal, div. circ, selected helps, Price Price 

7-1/4x5 1.20 .84 

8301 Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, full teachers' helps, 7-3/4 x 5-3/4 1.45 .95 

(Add Postage on these, 26c each.) 
8701 Long Primer, French Morocco, div. cir., red 

under gold, teachers' helps 8-3/8 x 5-1/2 1.95 1.25 

8709 Same as 8701, leather lined, full helps 2.75 1.80 

COMBINATION TEACHERS' BIBLES 

These Bibles show the variations of the Revised Version at the 



foot of each page. Otherwise it is an ordinary "Teachers' Bible," 
with maps, concordance, etc., illustrated. 

(Add Postage on these, 28c each.) 
610 Bourgeois, French Seal, div. cir., red under 

gold, 8 x 6 x 1-3/4 5.00 1.25 

612 Same as 610, linen lined 5.50 1.38 

614 Same as 610, leather lined 6.00 1.55 

LINEAR TEACHERS' BIBLES 

Hitherto these Bibles have been sold by Subscription Agents only. 
Its special feature, differentiating it from other Teachers' Bibles, is 
that it shows the readings of the Common and Revised Versions side 
by side in the same line. (This is the Bible of which we procured a 
special edition with wide margins and DAWN and TOWER references 
thereon; and of which edition we have no more.) 

(Add Postage on these, 30c each.) 
350 Small Pica, French Seal, red under gold, full 

teachers' helps, 8-3/4 x 6 x 1-1/2 6.00 2.10 

355 Small Pica, French Morocco, div. circ, red under 
gold, leather lined, full teachers' helps, 

8-3/4 x 6 x 1-1/2 8.00 3.15 

360 Small Pica, Levant Morocco, div. circ, red under 
gold, kid lined, full teachers' helps, 
8-3/4 x 6 x 1-1/2 10.00 4.25 

POCKET BIBLES 

(Add Postage on these, 15c each.) 
01 150 Ruby, French Morocco, limp, round cor., red 

under gold, text only, 5-5/8x3-7/8 65 .46 

01153 Same as above, div. circ 75 .53 

03008 Pearl, French Seal, div. circ, linen lined, 

5-3/4 x 3-3/4, references 1.00 .60 

01327 Minion, French Morocco, div. circ. red under 

gold, text and maps, 5-3/4x3-3/4 1.00 .70 

194 Minion, French Seal, div. circ, red under gold, 

text only, 5-3/4 x 3-5/8 x 1 1.10 .75 

01329 Minion, Arabian Morocco, div. circ, leather 

lined to edge, red under gold, text and maps, 

5-3/4x3-3/4 1.45 1.00 

INDIA PAPER POCKET BIBLES 

(Add Postage on these, 8c each.) 
01 103x Diamond, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, 4-1/2 x 2-1/2 x 1/2 1.40 .98 

01 157x Ruby, French Morocco, div. cir., leather lined 

5-5/8 x 3-7/8 x 1/2 2.00 1.35 

03114x Ruby, Persian Levant, div. cir., leather lined 

silk sewed, red under gold, 5-5/8 x 4-3/4, refs 3.25 2.15 

(Add Postage for these, 4c each.) 
0602x Brilliant, Persian Morocco, limp, round cor., 

red under gold, 3-5/8 x 2 x 5/8, (Vest Pocket Bible) 2.25 1.55 
02002x Same as 0602x, div. cir., leather lined, silk 

sewed, references 2.50 1.70 



INDIA PAPER BIBLES 

(Add Postage for these, 15c each.) 

8635 Minion, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, 7 x 4-3/4, only 5/8 in. thick, references 1.75 1.13 

8636 Same as 8635, leather lined, references 2.70 1.89 

9635 Brevier, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, 7-1/8 x 5, 1 in. thick, references 2.75 1.88 

9636 Same as 9635, leather lined, references 3.75 2.50 

03265x Minion, Levant Morocco, div. circ, calf lined 

silk sewed, 6-7/8 x 4-5/8 x 1 1/16, references 4.50 2.85 

03274x Minion, Alaska Seal, div. cir., leather lined to 

edge, silk sewed, red under gold, with maps 

and concordance, 7-1/4 x 5 4.50 3.00 

03554x Brevier, Alaska Seal, div. cir., leather lined 

to edge, silk sewed, red under gold edges, 

full teachers' helps, 8-1/8 x 5-1/2 5.50 3.60 

0865-l/2xLong Primer, Levant, div. cir., calf lined to 

edge, silk sewed, round corners, red under 

gold, full teachers' helps, 7-3/4 x 5-1/4 8.00 5.20 

THE FOLLOWING THREE ARE NEW AND SPECIALLY DESIRABLE BECAUSE 
TYPE IS VERY LARGE AND CLEAR FOR SIZE OF BOOK. 

3596xA Bold Face Brevier, Alaska Seal, calf lined to 

edge, etc. 

full teachers' helps, 7-1/4 x 5 6.00 2.50 

2596xB Same type and binding as 3596x, with Maps, 

Biblical Gazetteer and Concordance 5.75 2.40 

2596xC Same type and binding as 3596x, with Maps 

and Biblical Gazetteer 5.50 2.30 

REVISED VERSION BIBLES 

(Add Postage, 10c.) 
040 Pearl, Cloth, red edges, 5-1/2x4-1/2 40 .30 

(Add Postage, 20c.) 
060 Minion, Cloth, red edges, 8-1/4x5-1/2 1.00 .75 

OXFORD REVISED BIBLES (Amer. Com.) 

(Add Postage on these, 25c each.) 
3750 Brevier, Cloth, round cor., red edges, maps, 

8x5-5/8 1.00 .70 

3752 Brevier, French Morocco, div. cir., red under 

gold, 8 x 5-5/8 2.00 1.30 

AMERICAN STANDARD REVISED BIBLE 

(Add Postage on these, 20c each.) 

160 Bourgeois, Cloth, References 1.00 .80 

172 Bourgeois, French Seal, References 2.00 1.60 

(Add Postage on these, 30c each.) 

260 Long Primer, Cloth, References 1.50 1.15 

272 Long Primer, French Seal, References 3.00 2.25 



LAP BIBLES FOR THE AGED-References, Light Weight 
Large Print 

(Add Postage on these, 25c each.) 

2002 Pica, Cloth, red edges, 9-1/4 x 6-1/2 x 1-1/4 2.00 .90 

2014 Pica, French Seal, limp, size same as 2002 2.75 1.37 

2022 Pica, French Seal, div. cir., size same as 2002 3.50 1.75 

CHILDREN'S ILLUSTRATED BIBLES 

(Add Postage on these, 6c each.) 
252 Minion, French Morocco, limp, red under gold 

32 illustrations, 5-3/4 x 3-5/8 1.20 .84 

254 Same as 252, French Morocco, div. cir 1.40 1.00 

TESTAMENTS 

(Add Postage on these, 5c each.) 
030 Ruby, French Morocco, limp, round corner, 

red under gold, 4 x 2-3/4 30 .18 

033 Same as 030, div. cir 45 .28 

0130 Same as 030, with Psalms 37 .24 

0133 Same as 033, with Psalms 50 .35 

010 Diamond, Venetian Morocco, limp, round cor., 

3-3/4x2-1/4x1/4 50 .35 

014 Diamond, Arabian Morocco, div. cir., leather 

lined to edge, red under gold, 3-3/4 x 2-1/4 x 1/4.. 1.15 .75 
2142px Nonpareil, French Seal, limp, leather lining, 

round corners, red under gold, Psalms, 

self-pronouncing 1.00 .50 

2142x Same as above, without Psalms 80 .40 

287 Brevier, Roan, gilt edge, Psalms, 35 .35 

NEW TESTAMENTS FOR THE AGED 

(Add Postage on these, 10c each.) 

212 Small Pica, Roan, square cor., 5-3/4x8-1/4 35 .35 

283 Same as above, with Psalms, 8-1/4x5-1/2x3/4 45 .45 

REVISED TESTAMENTS 

0100 Brevier, Cloth, red edges, 16 mo., including postage, 23c. 

TEXT BIBLES 

(Postage, 7c.) 

178 Agate type, cloth, red edges, 4 x 5-3/4 15 .15 

(Postage, 12c.) 

131 Nonpareil type, cloth, red edges, 5-1/4 x 7-1/4 25 .25 

THUMB INDEX ON ANY BIBLE, 25c EXTRA 
new page 
CONCORDANCES AND OTHER BIBLE STUDY HELPS. 



First in this list we mention the several volumes of 

MILLENNIAL DAWN SERIES. 

—referring inquirers to the second page of each issue of this 

journal for prices, etc. We commend also, as aids, the following 

publications by other presses, which we supply at specially 

low prices because of the assistance they will lend to the study 

of God's Word. We mention these somewhat in the order in 

which they seem to us to be desirable aids,— putting the concordances 

last, though they are not by any means least 

important. 

THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT. 

This very valuable work, published under the author's 
copyright by Fowler & Wells Co., New York City, has been 
sold by them at $4 in cloth and $5 in half leather binding. For 
several years a friend, an earnest Bible student, desirous of 
assisting the readers of our Society's publications, has supplied 
them through us at a greatly reduced price; now he has purchased 
the copyright and plates from the Fowler & Wells Co., 
and presented the same to our Society as a gift, under our assurance 
that the gift will be used for the furthering of the 
Truth to the extent of our ability, by such a reduction of 
price as will permit the poor of the Lord's flock to have this 
help in the study of the Word. 

REDUCED PRICES.-These will be sold with ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER only. In cloth binding $1.50 (6s. 3d.)— includes postage 
and one year's subscription, new or renewal, to Z.W.T. 
On thin paper, in full morocco leather, divinity circuit, red 
under gold edges, silk sewed leather lined, $2.50 (10s. 6d.)— 
includes postage and one year's subscription to Z.W.T. 

THE TISCHENDORF NEW TESTAMENT. 

This is the ordinary Common Version in cloth binding. 
As footnotes it gives the reading of the three oldest Greek 
MSS., Sinaiticus, Vaticanus and Alexandrine, wherever these 
differ from the Common Version. This is a very valuable 
little work, published in Europe, which we specially import for 
the benefit of our readers. Price, 40c, including postage. 

THE SYRIAC-PESHITO NEW TESTAMENT- 
MURDOCH'S. 

This, too, is a valuable work, and an aid in critical study. 
It is translated from the Syriac instead of from the Greek. It 
is claimed by some that it was the language in which our Lord 
and the apostles spoke and wrote, and that the Greek was translated 
from this. Our price, in half leather binding, postage 
included, $2.00. 

LEESER'S TRANSLATION OF THE OLD TESTAMENT. 



This is the standard translation amongst English reading 
Hebrews, by one of their own rabbis. It is not perfect, but is 
a valuable aid in critical study of the Old Testament. Our 
special price, in leather binding, including postage, is $1.10. 

ANALYTICAL CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES. 

In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Young (Presbyterian). 
A valuable work for all critical students. Price, in 
cloth binding, $5, including postage. We are not permitted 
by the publishers to cut this price; but may and do give postage 
free and give besides a premium of any four volumes of the 
MILLENNIAL DAWN series in cloth binding with each Concordance, 
or six volumes if purchaser pays the expressage. 

THE EXHAUSTIVE CONCORDANCE TO THE 
SCRIPTURES. 

In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Strong (Methodist). 
This is also an able work and useful in critical study. It 
has some advantages over Young's; after getting used to it we 
prefer it. Price, in cloth binding, $6; half leather, $8. We 
will pay mail or express charges on these, and in addition 
give as a premium all six volumes of the DAWN series in 
cloth binding, with each Concordance, or nine volumes if purchaser 
pays expressage. 

CRUDEN'S CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES. 

A valuable work, but scarcely necessary to those who 
have either one of the above mentioned. English only. Cloth 
binding, $1, postage included. 

SMITH'S BIBLE DICTIONARY. 

This is one of the most desirable editions of Prof. Smith's 
work. It is a large volume of 1020 pages. In cloth binding, 
$1.30, including postage. 

"BIBLE TALKS IN SIMPLE LANGUAGE." 

This is the best book of its kind we have ever seen. It 
presents the Bible stories in simple, but not childish language, 
and seems remarkably free from the bad theology so common 
in this class of books. All Christian parents should have a 
Sunday Bible lesson with their children, and this book furnishes 
interesting topics, to which may be added as much concordant 
"present truth" as the age of the children will justify. 
Parents are responsible for their children's training in theology 
as well as morals. This will assist you in the discharge of this 
duty, and thus be a blessing to yourself as well as to your 
children. 

624 pages, 250 illustrations; cloth sides, leather back and 
corners, gilt edges. A subscription book at $3. Our special 
price 75 cents, plus 25 cents postage. 



HEAVENLY MANNA 
FOR THE HOUSEHOLD OF FArTH. 

This is a new publication of our own which we believe will 
be in great demand as soon as known. It is a text-book for 
each day in the year— and good year by year continuously. 

But this is more than a text-book; it has an appropriate 
comment under each text selected from the columns of back 
issues of the WATCH TOWER. 

The pages are of the same width as those of DAWN, but a 
little shorter. The paper, etc., are good and the cloth binding 
is neat and attractive; 190 pages, price 35c postpaid;— to 
WATCH TOWER subscribers at the wholesale rate, 20c each, 
postpaid, or in quantities, charges collect, 15c. Free to any 
WATCH TOWER subscriber too poor to pay for it, on request. 

We hope that this little book will find a place at every 
breakfast table; and that spiritual refreshment may thus be 
enjoyed with the natural food, stimulating thankfulness to the 
Giver of all Good and thus inducing the peace of God and favoring 
both spiritual and natural health and well-being. 

DAWN-SCRIPTURE STUDIES-INDIA. 

Calls for DAWNS divided into small portions, light, convenient 
for the pocket, that could be read on the cars, etc., 
led us to prepare an India-paper edition. The entire volume 
is on this very fine paper reduced to three-eighths of an inch 
in thickness and about four ounces in weight. The type is 
exactly the same size as in the regular editions. It is a beauty. 
Leather covers, gold edges. It costs with postage 68 cents 
per volume, at which price it is supplied to WATCH TOWER 
subscribers. 

One thousand copies of Vol. I. went out quickly and led 
to another edition and the placing of order for the other 
volumes in the same elegant style. We now have the first 
three volumes. Order as you may please. 

"IN DUE TIME." 

Some years ago a Sister presented, as a Christmas 
token, to the editor of this journal, a little oil-painting of a 
chestnut bough bearing two closed chestnut burrs and an 
open one showing three chestnuts; one green leaf and one 
seared and yellow completed the picture. At one corner 
was the quotation from 1 Tim. 2:6, "In Due Time." 

Friends visiting the Bible House admired the picture and 
the lesson it taches: that God's plan like the chestnut burr 
opens not until the "due time" to give us its fruit; that all 
efforts to open it beforehand must ever be fruitless. 

Believing that the picture in many of our homes would 
serve as text for short and interesting sermons we have 
ordered some printed, giving detail faithfully. The 
work comes from Germany, and is promised us by Christmas 
or before. We feel sure that each reader will desire a copy. 
Price including postage is ten cents each. If ordered in lots 
of twenty or more, or if ordered with other mottoes, packing 



and postage being less, we can supply them at five cents each. 



Specimen Lines of Various Sizes of Type Referred to on 
Reverse Page: 

This line is Brilliant type. This line is Diamond type. 

This line is Pearl type. This line is Ruby type. 

This line is Nonpareil type. This line is Emerald Minion. 

This line is Emerald type. 

This line is Minion type. 

This line is Brevier type. 

This line is Bourgeois type. 

This line is Long Primer type. 

This line is Small Pica type. 

R3669 

YOUR "GOOD HOPES" 1906. 



[The plan here proposed we designate "GOOD HOPES," 
because nothing is actually promised— only your generous 
hopes expressed, based upon your future prospects as they 
now appear to you. The plan proved not only so beneficial 
to the cause of truth, but also so blessed to the hopers, for 
some years past, that we again commend it to all as Scriptural 
and good. Those who desire to make use of this plan 
can fill out both of these memoranda. One should be kept 
for the refreshment of your memory; the other mail to us.] 

To the 
"WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY." 

Dear Friends:— I have read with interest of the openings 
for the Dawn and Tract work in foreign lands and here 
at home. I need not tell you that I am deeply interested 
in the spread of the Glad Tidings of the lengths and 
breadths, the heights and depths of redeeming love expressed 
for us in God's great Plan of the Ages. 

I am anxious to use myself— every power, every talent, 
voice, time, money, influence, all— to give to others this 
knowledge, which has so greatly blessed, cheered and comforted 
my own heart and placed my feet firmly upon the 
Rock of Ages. 

I have been considering carefully, and praying to be instructed, 



how to use my various talents more to my Redeemer's 

glory and for the service of his people— those 

blinded by human tradition who are, nevertheless, hungering 

for "the good Word of God," and those also who are 

naked, not having on the wedding garment of Christ's imputed 

righteousness, the unjustified, who stand at best in 

the filthy rags of their own righteousness. I have decided 

that so far as my "money talent" goes, I will follow the rule 

so clearly laid down for us by the great Apostle Paul (1 Cor. 16:2), 

and will lay aside on the first day of each week, according 

to my thankful appreciation of the Lord's blessings 

during the preceding week. Out of this fund I wish to contribute 

to the several parts of the Lord's work specified on 

the back of this letter. Of course, I cannot in advance 

judge or state particularly what the Lord's bounty may enable 

me to set apart weekly, and hence you will understand 

the sum indicated to be merely my conjecture or hope, based 

upon present prospects. I will endeavor to contribute more 

than I here specify; and should I not succeed in doing as 

well, the Lord will know my heart, and you, also, will know 

of my endeavors. 

My only object in specifying in advance what I hope to 
be able to do in this cause is to enable those in charge of 
the work of publishing and circulating the Tracts, etc., to 
form estimates, lay plans, make contracts, etc., with some 
idea of what I will at least try to do in the exercise of this 
my highly appreciated privilege. 

My present judgment is that during the coming year, by 
self-denial and cross-bearing, I shall be able to lay aside on 
the first day of each week for Home and Foreign Mission 
Work (to assist in circulating Millennial Dawn in foreign 
languages, and in publishing the "Old Theology Tracts" in 
various languages, and in supplying these gratuitously to 
brethren who have the heart and opportunity to circulate 
them widely, and in meeting the expenses of brethren sent 
out as "Pilgrims" to preach the divine plan of salvation, 
and in general to be expended as the officers of the Society 
may deem best), the amount of per week. 

To comply with United States Postal Laws, all or any 
portion of my donation may be applied as subscription price 
for Watch Tower or O.T. Tracts sent to the Lord's poor 
or others, as the Society's officers may deem advisable. 

That the work be not hindered, I will endeavor to send 
you what I shall have laid aside for this cause at the close 
of each quarter. I will secure a Bank Draft, Express Order 
or Postal Money Order as I may find most convenient, and 
will address the letter to 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 

"Bible House," Allegheny, Pa. 

(Name) 

(Post Office) (State) 



R3670 

WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTIONS 

-ON GOOD HOPES ACCOUNT.- 

The friends who contribute to the "Good Hopes" (described 
on the reverse of this sheet) at times desire to send 
the Watch Tower to friends who are not yet interested 
enough to subscribe for themselves; or to deeply interested 
friends who are too poor to subscribe and backward about 
accepting our Lord's Poor offer. They are invited to give 
us such addresses below— the expense to be deducted from 
their donations. Give full addresses, and write very plainly 
please, mentioning the length of the subscriptions. 



CHRISTIAN HOME EMBELLISHMENTS. 



For several years we have been supplying our readers 
with handsome text and motto cards for the walls of their 
homes. Their influence is excellent; for they continually 
and cheerfully catch the eye and remind the heart of our 
great favors present and to come, based upon the exceeding 
great and precious promises of our Father's Word. We 
commend these as helps in the "narrow way,"— helps in 
character-building . 

We have laid in a large supply of very choice mottoes 
this year and expect to be able to fill all orders promptly. 
Late orders last year we were unable to supply. 

We have for your convenience put these up in four assortments 
at $1.00 per package, including postage. We also 
have a 50c assortment of the smaller sized mottoes. If you 
get any of these you will be pleased; but if you have already 
had some, mention when and how many, that we may send 
you different ones now. 

OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS. 



These are published quarterly, copies being sent to all subscribers. 
Other copies, for distribution among friends, from 
house to house, for enclosure in letters, and in general for use 
in such ways as seem judicious, are supplied freely, the expense 
entailed by the great demand for them being borne by the 
Tract Fund of voluntary contributions. Write for the tracts as 
you feel able to use them, even if not so well able to contribute 
toward the expense; some who are not able, and do contribute, 
do not have opportunities personally to use all that their 
contributions pay for, so that the matter is equalized 
and all may have a part in this service of disseminating 
the truth. 



A PRIVILEGE AND A SERVICE. 



We are convinced that the Watch Tower lists do not contain 
the names of one-half of those deeply interested in its teachings. 
The total is small enough surely, and we are not content that 
the name of any should be missing. We believe that all such 
will be stimulated and encouraged on the "narrow way" by 
its semi-monthly appearance on their table, reminding them 
afresh of spiritual matters which the world, the flesh and the 
devil continually tend to crowd out of mind and heart. 

Hitherto we have required that all desiring the Watch Tower 
on credit, or free, as "the Lord's Poor," should make personal 
application; but now we request every subscriber to inquire 
among those whom he knows to be interested in present truth, 
and to obtain the consent of all such to send in their subscriptions 
either on credit or free, as their circumstances may necessitate. 
Any getting it on credit may at any future time request 
that the debt be cancelled, and we will cheerfully comply. We 
desire that as nearly as possible the Watch Tower lists shall 
represent all those deeply interested in its message. 

Our object is not the gain of "filthy lucre," but "the perfecting 
of the saints for the work of ministry"— present and to 
come. (Eph. 4:12.) We offer no premiums, desiring the 
co-operation of such only as appreciate the privilege of being 
co-workers with us in this ministry. Our list is now about 
22,000; but it should be at least 30,000, and we confidently 
expect the above program to bring it to that figure. Let as 
many as appreciate it as a privilege, join at once in this service. 

WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTION RENEWALS. 



Most of our subscriptions end with the year, so we take this 
opportunity to remark that we will be glad to hear promptly 
from such as desire the visits of the Watch Tower continued. 
This applies to all who get it on the Lord's Poor list as well 
as to those who pay. When names are dropped and afterward 
renewed it makes us unnecessary trouble. 



page 353 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVI. DECEMBER 1, 1905. No. 23 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 355 

The Sea and the Waves Roaring 355 

A Roman Archbishop's Boast 356 

Inter-Church Federation 357 

The Heavens Rolling Together 358 

Buddhism is Advancing 358 

Christian Fellowship 358 

Berean Bible Study for December 359 

"Who is Sufficient for These Things?" 359 

Nehemiah's Faith and Works 360 

The Feast of Tabernacles 363 

One-Day Convention Reports 366 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers 367 

Public Ministries of the Truth 368 

page 354 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R3672 : page 354 
THE TRUTH IN FRENCH, ITALIAN AND GREEK. 



Besides Vols. I. and II. of MILLENNIAL DAWN, we can supply 
the following in the French language: Booklets on "Hell," 
"Evolution," and "Parousia," at same rates as English booklets; 
tracts Nos. 52, 53, 57, 66; samples free for judicious circulation. 

Besides Vol. I. of DAWN we can supply the following in 
Italian: Tracts Nos. 38, 52, 53, 58 and 59, 66; samples free for 
judicious circulation. 

The DAWNS are supplied at same rates as English volumes. 
See next column for price list. 

We have also tracts Nos. 38, 53 and 66 in Greek; samples for 
free distribution. 

page 354 

ZION'S GLAD SONGS. 



A collection of sixty hymns, with music, for social and 
testimony meetings, and semi-private gatherings. Price, 5c 
each, postpaid. English and German editions. 

WATCH TOWER BINDERS. 



These are substantially made of stiff cloth boards, and can 
hold two years' issues of the WATCH TOWER. They prevent 
soiling and loss. Price, postpaid, 50c. 



German booklet on the Law and the Sabbath, 72 pages, 
postpaid 5 cents each. 



R3671 : page 355 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
THE SEA AND THE WAVES ROARING. 



THE daily press has kept us all informed respecting 
the turmoils in Russia. What a pity that reasonable 
concessions could not be secured from 



the Government without such confusion and bloodshed. 
To those who view matters from the standpoint of the 
Bible the cause is plain: selfishness on the part of all 
concerned. 

We do not expect the complete overthrow of the 
monarchy at present, however, but rather that matters 
will soon settle down on a higher basis, but still an unsatisfactory 
one. Indeed the poor world is too selfish 
to be satisfied with anything reasonable or possible under 
present conditions. Not until wearied by vain 
endeavors will men be in a proper condition even for 
the Millennial Kingdom— which will be an autocracy, 
and for a time quite unsatisfactory to some— until 
they learn of the great blessings therefrom because of 
the perfect rulers and their divine laws, backed by Justice, 
Wisdom, Love and Power. 

Two effects of the Russian agitation may be expected: 
(1) The igniting of violence elsewhere, as in 
Austria and Finland. (2) Then a reaction, the subsidence 
of turmoil in Russia and a temporary opposition 
to lawlessness everywhere. The educated and comfortably 
well-to-do will soon realize that anarchy is of 
doubtful advantage to anybody, and especially to themselves. 
The weight of their influence, swinging to the 
side of government and law and order, will secure peace 
for a time. 

Let us remember to expect various outbreaks at 
intervals, but that the general collapse of all governments 
in anarchy is not to be expected before the close 
of 1914 A.D. What has occurred in Russia is but a 
circumstance compared to what we expect at that 
time; but it gives us a picture, nevertheless. 

THE POOR JEWS SUFFER 

It is notable that the poor Jews suffered in the 
Russian massacres more than others. One public press 
dispatch from Odessa says:— 

"Up to the present time no Christian shops or 
homes have been touched. The principal hotels are 
full of the better class of Jews seeking refuge. There 
was a veritable reign of terror on October 3 1 . After 
the Emperor's manifesto granting a constitution to 
Russia had been published the Jews made the Russians 
furious with rage by making a prominent display of 
red flags, trampling on a portrait of the Emperor and 
tearing down the emblem of the crown. Late in the 
afternoon there was firing in the outskirts of the town 
and the massacre of Jews commenced and lasted during 
the night of November 1 . All Jews found in the 
streets were severely beaten and many were killed in 
their shops, which were ruthlessly pillaged. A leading 
consul, in an interview, argued that the disturbances 
were the result of the behavior of the Jews, who shocked 
Russian patriotism by the manner in which they celebrated 
on Tuesday the publication of the imperial manifesto. 



The Liberals contend that the Governor had all the 
means to stop the outbreak in the first hour, and that 
his inactivity during the three days of massacre and 
his protection of the murderous rabble in the guise of 
patriots prove the real origin of the trouble." 

"PROUD AND STIFF-NECKED." 

True to the Bible's description the Jews are still 
a "stiff-necked generation." Bright, persevering, resourceful, 
economical, money-makers, they prosper 
where others except Orientals would starve. But this 
very success excites the envy and hatred of their less 
frugal neighbors. Keen money-lenders, and not always 
just, the money-borrowers of Russia would be pleased 
to see them killed or driven out of the country. Some 
of them, indiscreet as well as proud, are offensively 
boastful and arrogant and boisterous. We were witnesses 
of such things in this very city of Odessa in 189 1 
and wondered at their unwisdom. 

All mankind are fallen, but not all in the same 
manner or degree. What the whole world needs is the 

R3671 : page 356 

restitution which God has promised, and the Jews will 
doubtless progress as well or better than others under 
the Millennial government and assistance. In the 
meantime only the spirit of Christ will properly offset 
the fallen disposition of any of us. 

"THE WRATH OF MAN SHALL PRAISE HIM" 

Socialism, the coming power in the world, 
when it later shall turn to anarchy, will be like dynamite 
to the whole civilized structure, political, social, 
financial and religious. Many of its theories are good, 
but wholly impracticable under present selfish conditions: 
because organized wealth will permit anarchy 
rather than allow Socialists to carry out all their 
schemes. 

Meantime many well-meaning and fairly intelligent 
men are lending their voices and influence to Socialism, 
not seeing the outcome— not having the light of God's 
Word on the subject. It is not for us to oppose these, 
however, for two reasons: (1) We have a more important 
work— the proclaiming of the good tidings and assisting 
in the perfecting of the saints. (2) We incline 
to think that Socialists are "the Lord's great army," 
though not soldiers of the cross nor followers of the 
"Captain of our Salvation." 

As the Lord has all along permitted the wrath of 
men and of devils to work out features of his plan, so 
we believe he will permit men now to delude themselves 
into the greatest calamity which ever befell humanity: 
"a time of trouble such as never was since there was a 



nation." O, how glad we are that God will make man's 
extremity his opportunity for bringing in the Golden 
Age— the Kingdom of his dear Son! 

SOCIALISM HERE AND IN BRITAIN 

America and Great Britain are behind the other 
civilized nations as respects Socialism, because of more 
elastic and liberal laws. But discontent and aggressiveness 
are being cultivated in these lands by the wonderful 
prosperity which has heaped vast treasures in the 
hands of a comparatively small number; and by the 
fear that the end of this way will mean the eventual 
slavery of the masses to "plutocracy." 

In consequence a socialistic propaganda is making 
rapid headway— as never before. The elections just 
held give a suggestion of the rapidity of the growth of 
Socialism. These voters have no thought of anarchy, 
but as they become enthused by the Socialist propaganda 
they will be led step by step to one and another 
extreme of word and deed to bring it about. 

The Lord's people do well to remember that Socialism 
is not the hope set before us, and that time and 
thought and effort devoted to it are taken from the 
higher work given them as ambassadors for God and 
evangels of the Kingdom of Christ and its reign of 
righteousness and blessing which shall be unto all 
people. 

GERMANY'S REACTIONARY ALLIANCE 

Germany, the hotbed of Socialism, is experiencing 
just now a reaction. A National Alliance against Social 
Democracy has been started recently and already its 
effects are manifest. We give a resume of the objects of 
the Alliance, translated from one of its widely distributed 
circulars, as follows:— 

"On May 9th, 1904, the National Alliance against 
Social Democracy was instituted in Berlin, having for 
its aim to unite for the impending struggle against the 
revolutionary aspirations of Social Democracy all those 
Germans who are loyal to their emperor and the empire, 
irrespective of their religious and political views. Although 
in existence for only a short time, no fewer than 
55,000 members have joined the Alliance. 

"Objects of the Alliance:— (1) To create compact 
organizations against Social Democracy at such places 
suitable for the purpose. (2) To combat by word and 
pen the activity of Social Democracy directed against 
the overthrow of the existing State and social order. 
(3) To bring about united action of all civil parties at 
elections in such districts as are endangered by Social 
Democracy. (4) To render all the assistance possible 
to the workmen and traders oppressed by Socialistic 
terrorism. (5) To establish a solid connection between 
all those unions and organizations pursuing like and 



similar aims." 



This movement has put the Socialists on the defensive. 
Already they have lost heavily in some electoral 
districts. The effect will be to measurably check the 
movement for a little while, giving it a chance to grow 
in other quarters. We have every confidence that the 
end of the "times of the Gentiles" in Oct., 1914, will 
find Socialism not only fully developed but changed to 
Anarchism, as the Word implies. 

A ROMAN ARCHBISHOP'S BOAST 
OF POWER TO FORGIVE SINS, TO CREATE CHRIST IN THE HOST 
AND SACRIFICE HIM IN THE MASS. DECLARES THESE 
GREATER THAN CREATIVE POWERS 



The Albany Telegram publishes the following extract 
from the pastoral letter of Cardinal Klatschthaler, Prince 
Archbishop of Salzburg, Austria. It is worthy of publication 
only as a curiosity and an illustration of how men can 
be deluded by false doctrines, especially after they have 
become hoary with age and weighty with many and influential 
adherents. This man, it will be seen, overestimated 
the stupidity of his countrymen, even in Catholic Austria. 
Thanks be unto God that, although priestcraft still flourishes 
in the Protestant clergy and though it still is often 
arrogant and self-assuming, yet it is a vast improvement 
over this example of the domineering arrogance of the 
"dark ages." 

The extract follows:— 

Salzburg, Austria, Sept. 16.— Your correspondent 
secured a copy of the Lenten pastoral letter by Cardinal 
Klatschthaler, Prince Archbishop of this diocese, in which 
his Eminence extols the power of the priest above that of 
the Son of God and his holy mother. The letter was read 
from all the pulpits on March 5th last, but was immediately 
withdrawn, at the instance of Emperor Francis Joseph, 
it is claimed, who telegraphed his disapproval to Pope Pius. 

R3672 : page 357 

Your correspondent has made a literal translation of the 
remarkable document, omitting only the mere formal 
parts for want of space. 

THE PASTORAL LETTER 

"The Catholic priest is the most venerable dignitary, 
for his powers are beyond words." He has the power to 
absolve man of sin. This priestly power to absolve man 
of sin is greater by far than the power to cure the blind, 
to give back to their eyes the light of day. It is greater 



by far than the power to make the lame and halt walk. 

It is greater than the power to recall the dead from lethargy, 

from the grave itself. 

"The priest's power to absolve man of sin is greater 
than the fiat that created the world and scattered the darkness. 
It is greater than the word of command that formed 
the firmament. It is greater, in short, than the divine 
Being who created the world out of nothing. 

GREATER THAN CREATOR OF THE WORLD 

"The priest's power to absolve man of sin is greater 
than would be the power of creating as many new worlds 
as there are stars in the heavens. For in this act of God 
the Catholic priest is a cooperator, nay more than a 
cooperator. The very word, uttered by the priest's lips: 
I absolve thee of thy sins,' means absolution, means that 
a lost soul is once more entitled to the heavenly kingdom, 
for the word is not a mere announcement of God's grace, 
but in itself means the absolution of sin. As the Holy 
Council of Trent teaches us, the words quoted make the 
sinner a new man or woman, rehabilitate him or her in 
the divine grace. 

"At the moment the priest says: 'I absolve thee,' he 
is imbued with the all-powerfulness of God; and at that 
moment God allows his representative on earth, the priest, 
to participate in the divine power. 

"The patriarchs and prophets, the martyrs and sufferers 
for the faith, the millions of sainted virgins and the 
angels and archangels, and the thrones and principalities 
of heaven, the cherubim and seraphim, even Mary, the 
mother of God, the queen of heaven— none of them are 
equal in power to the Catholic priest. Mary, the bride 
of the holy Spirit, mistress of the world, may pray for the 
forgiveness of our sins, but the priest alone can actually 
forgive sins. He alone is entitled to say, 'I absolve thee.' 

ABLE TO CREATE AND THEN TO SACRIFICE CHRIST 

"Where in heaven is there such power as vested in 
the Catholic priest? With the angels? With the Mother 
of God? Upon Mary's word, 'The Lord's will be done,' 
the grand indescribable mysteries of the transformation of 
the Son of God into man took place. But, beloved Catholics, 
listen to me if you are able to understand the miraculous, 
the un-understandable: Mary's word was not the 
cause of Christ's appearance on earth; it was merely a declaration 
of her obedience to the divine will. But when 
the priest says: 'This is my body,' 'this is my blood,' then 
the all-highest transfiguration actually takes place. 

"The priest sacrifices him, the Son of God, who became 
man; he sacrifices him for the benefit of the living 
and the dead, an unbloody sacrifice, as it were. And 
Christ, the only Son of God the Father, the creator of 
heaven and earth, the divine power upon whose shoulders 
rests the world, Christ performs the will of the Catholic 



priest. 

JESUS OBEDIENT TO THE PRIEST 

"We read with astonishment and admiration in the 
writings of the holy evangelists that Jesus, our Lord, was 
obedient to Mary and Joseph, was subject to their orders 
and criticisms. Hear ye, then, beloved Catholics: I 
repeat what I intimated in the foregoing. Christ gave 
the Catholic priest power over himself, his body, his flesh 
and blood, his divinity, his humanity; yes, and he is obedient 
to the priest. Oh, beloved Christians, reflect on the 
power and great dignity vested in the priest. Am I not 
right when I say that the power of transfiguration, the 
power to consecrate the holy waters, is even greater than 
the power to forgive sins, and we know how great that 
power is? The power to absolve man from sin gave the 
priest dominion over all human beings, but the power 
over the body and blood of Christ gives him power over 
Christ, over Christ's divinity. 

"And with St. Dionysius I ask, 'Shall we call him a 
man who is the select of men, whom God has elevated 
over all men, namely, the priest? The priest, with whom 
God has united himself, whom God gave power over 
his own divinity?' 

"CARDINAL KLATSCHTHALER, 
"Prince Archbishop of Salzburg. 

"Salzburg, March 4, 1905." 

INTER-CHURCH FEDERATION. 



The entire religious world is agog over the Church 
Federation gathering, whose sessions are to open on 
November 15th at Carnegie Hall, New York City. All 
the large Christian denominations are to participate 
through their chosen representatives. The object will 
be to find a basis of cooperation. 

Those familiar with our views of the prophetic 
Word will know that this movement is one we have 
long expected, which will at some later session "give life 
to the image of the beast."-See Rev. 13:15; MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, Vol. III., chap. 4. 

The following items are officially set forth by the 
Convention Committee:— 

"We believe that the great Christian bodies in our 
country should stand together and lead in the discussion 
of, and give impulse to, all great movements that 
make for righteousness. We believe that questions 
like that of the saloon, marriage and divorce, Sabbath 
desecration, the social evil, child labor, relation of 
labor and capital, the bettering of the conditions 
of the laboring classes, the moral and religious 
training of the young, the problem created by foreign 
immigration and international arbitration— indeed, all 



great questions in which the voice of the Christian 
should be heard— concern Christians of every name and 
demand their united and concerted action if the Church 
is to lead effectively in the conquest of the world for 
Christ. 

"The churches, representing 18,000,000 people, 
which have consented to send delegates are eager to see 
the conference result in some tangible organization or 
method of cooperation. Every Church with 500,000 

R3672 : page 358 

adherents is entitled to fifty delegates; those having 
100,000 communicants or more are entitled to ten delegates, 
while all of less than 100,000 membership 
will be permitted to seat five delegates." 

THE HEAVENS ROLLING TOGETHER. 



The prediction that the heavens shall roll together as 
a scroll in the day of the Lord is fulfilling before our 
eyes. The daily press keeps us posted on the various 
steps by which Protestants propose to federate: this is one 
side of the scroll rolling itself in concentration. The 
other side of the ecclesiastical scroll is Roman Catholicism, 
which is also concentrating, or in-rolling. Note 
the following on the subject:— 

CATHOLICS PLAN POWERFUL UNION 

"Cincinnati, O.— All the Catholic societies of the 
United States will be united by a plan being worked out at 
an important meeting in the Burnett House of the executive 
committee of the American Federation of Catholic Societies. 
Bishop McFaul of Trenton, N.J., and Anthony Matre 
of St. Louis are foremost in the work. There are 15,000,000 
Catholics in the United States, all more or less represented 
in the new movement. The Catholic Women's 
organizations are also to be affiliated. Beyond this is also 
a movement to unite the Catholic societies of the world." 
—Fort Wayne News. 

BUDDHISM IS ADVANCING. 



"The advance of Buddhism and the decline of 
Christianity are engaging the most serious attention in 
Germany. The Vossische Zeitung sees an important 
sign of the times in the fact that the Grand Duke of 
Hesse is erecting a statue of the Buddha in the grounds 
of his private country residence at Wolfsgarten, in the 
neighborhood of Darmstadt."— Toronto Globe. 



R3673 : page 358 

CHRISTIAN FELLOWSHIP. 

THERE is a tendency among God's people to 
cement fellowships as well as to make divisions 
upon various unscriptural lines. 

As illustrations: The various branches of the Presbyterian 
family have each its own system of theology and 
its own methods of worship. They are one family and 
have a special sympathy or fellowship upon the doctrine 
of Calvin— that everything that comes to pass was foreordained. 
Among Baptists, although there are many 
subdivisions of them, there is a common bond of fellowship 
in water-immersion. No matter what else a man 
holds or does not hold, if he practice immersion there is 
at once a sympathetic fellowship. So also it is among 
Premillennialists: They feel that any other differences, 
almost, should be overlooked if their point of special 
interest is acknowledged. 

We protest that none of these are true grounds for 
the fellowship taught in the Scriptures; and that the 
rejection of any or all of these is not the Scriptural ground 
for refusing fellowship in Christ. 

The Scriptural basis of fellowship and disfellowship 
is both a much broader and a much more simple 
one. It is simply of two parts: (1) An acceptance of 
Christ as the Redeemer, and (2) A full consecration to him. 
Whoever complies with this scriptural formula is entitled 
to the love, respect, sympathy and care of every 
other such one; for such, and such only, constitute the 
Church which God recognizes— the Church "whose 
names are written in heaven." 

And if the above proposition be true as indicating 
who are worthy of our fellowship, it must be true also 
that any one who cannot claim fellowship upon this 
basis has no claim to it at all. 

All Christians should see that this rule is broad 
enough to unite all of God's people, and narrow enough 
to exclude all others, including those who would seek 
to "climb up some other way." (John 10:1.) And if this 
simple test— the only one recognized by the early Church 
—is sufficient, let us recognize it and none other. 

But, says an objector, such a simple basis of faith 
would let in all sorts of false doctrines and would divide 
the Church of Christ. No, we answer; the Church is 
already divided. It would tend to re-unite the true 
ones and to separate the worldly and the false. Upon 
so broad a platform all true Christians could come together 
for the study of God's Word. Methodists would 
find themselves studying the principles of election, baptism, 
etc., while Presbyterians and Baptists would 
find themselves studying free grace and free agency. 
The result to all (after sectarian considerations were 



gone) would soon be harmony— Bible harmony. 

But, says another, so broad a platform would compel 
us to fellowship Unitarians and Christian Scientists and 
Spiritualists. Not at all, we answer. None of these believe 
in Jesus as their Redeemer. It would exclude all such 
and all others who deny that man is a sinner under divine 
condemnation, and that "Christ died for OUR SINS," 
"the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God." 
It would and should exclude all who do not recognize 
this essential base of Christianity. (Possibly a few believers 
in the ransom may call themselves by the above 
names, ignorantly— not appreciating the doctrines upon 
which they are built. We refer to the views of the leaders 
and the masses of these denominations.) 

A man may be honest and sober and in every way 
moral and be a Buddhist or a Mohammedan or an 
Infidel (an unbeliever as to the claims of Christ) of any 
other shade. Morality and general decency may be 
proper enough grounds for their recognition socially, as 
friends and acquaintances; but these constitute no 
claim whatever upon the sacred name of Christian, nor 
upon the close heart-sympathy which should make 
truly one all who are trusting in the precious blood of 
Christ— our ransom-price from sin and death— and who 
are fully consecrated to him. 

We are living in the time when past and present 
combinations and doctrines of men will be breaking to 
pieces; when many are, and many more will be, seeking 

R3673 : page 359 

fresh grounds for fellowship; when it is important that 
all true Christians should stand fast, and shoulder to 
shoulder defend the foundation principles upon which 
we stand— the rock foundation;— for "other [proper] 
foundation can no man lay." 

How our great Adversary would like to get the 
soldiers of the cross confused and separated, following 
different affinities, rallying around different standards, 
and hence leaving the true standard— "the cross of 
Christ," the "Ransom"— undefended. Let all who see 
the true standard assemble to it, and separate themselves 
in heart and Christian fellowship from all the unclean 
[those unjustified by faith in the redeeming blood, and 
clothed still, therefore, in the filthy garments of their 
own unrighteousness, instead of the wedding garment 
of Christ's imputed righteousness]. Let their efforts be 
for and with each other; to present each other blameless 
and unreprovable, without spot or wrinkle, before the 
Heavenly Bridegroom. Hear the Word of the Lord:— 

"Go through, go through the gates; prepare ye the 
way of the people: cast up, cast up the highway, gather 
out the [stumbling] stones; LIFT UP A STANDARD for the 
people." Isa. 62:10. 

Let us assure ourselves, from a study of God's Word, 
that it is as much a part of our duty to disfellowship (as 



Christians) those who, either directly or indirectly, deny 
that Christ gave himself a ransom [a corresponding price] 
for all, and who, hence, are the worst enemies of the cross 
of Christ, as it is our duty to fellowship any who confess 
him thus as their Saviour; and who, hence, are our 
"Brethren" in him. We are to "have no fellowship with 
the unfruitful works of darkness, but should rather reprove 
them." 



R3674 : page 359 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDY FOR DECEMBER. 

--FOR EXPLANATION SEE PREFACE OF WATCH TOWER 
BIBLES AND WATCH TOWER, MARCH 1, 1905.- 

BROTHERLY KINDNESS (BROTHERLY LOVE) 

41. What does the illustration of "the third-quarter 
mark" signify? F.188, par. 1; F.370, par. 3; Z.'01-9 
(1st col. par. 3,4). 

42. Why is it important that we manifest brotherly 
love now? Z. '05-106 (1st col. par. 3,4; 2nd col. 
par. 3 to 6). 

43. How may we become members of "the Mary class"? 
Z/05-105 (2nd col. par. 2, to 106, par. 1,2); Z/97-242 
(1st and 2nd cols.) 

44. How did Jesus show us a grand example of brotherly 
love and sympathy? Z. '04-292 (1st col. par 2; 2nd 

col. par. 1); Z/01-150 (1st col. par. 6). 

45. How can we fulfill Jesus' command to "wash one 
another's feet"? Z/05-120 (2nd col.); Z/97-242 

(2nd col. par. 3,4) and 243. 

46. How jealously should we guard and increase this 
grace of brotherly kindness? 1 Thess. 4:9,10; 
Z.'97-230(lstcol. par. 1,2). 

47. How may we cultivate brotherly love? Z. '02-308 (1st 
col. par. 5,6; 2nd col. par. 1); Z. '98-183 (1st col. par. 

1,2); Z/04-293 (2nd col.) Z.'0 1-183 (2nd col. 
par. 2); Z.'98-8 (2nd col. par. 2). 

48. What additional thoughts are found in Topical Index 
of "Heavenly Manna," under "Love One 

Another"? 



R3673 : page 359 

"WHO IS SUFFICIENT FOR THESE THINGS?" 

"For we are unto God a sweet savor of Christ, in them that are 
saved and in them that perish. To the one we are the savor 
of death unto death, and to the other the savor of life unto 
life. And who is sufficient for these things? For we 



are not as many who corrupt the word of God, but as 
of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God we 
speak in Christ."— 2 Cor. 2:15-17. 

THIS MINISTRY, which all the consecrated, as 

ambassadors for Christ, have received, is one 

of tremendous import. It greatly influences 

the final destiny of those to whom we preach this gospel 

of the Kingdom, the tendency being either to life or to 

death. The Apostle's language here is another of the 

solemn warnings of the inspired Word against the danger 

of the Second Death, and should awaken to a sense of 

their danger any who have been deluded into the idea 

that there is no such possibility, and are permitting the 

great Adversary thus to deceive them. There is an 

equal responsibility on the part both of those who undertake 

to preach the Gospel and of those who hear it. 

The truth is God's truth, and the responsibility of speaking 

as well as of hearing it is very great. 

The Apostle's words show that many in his day, as 
in ours, failed to realize this responsibility, and, to answer 
their own selfish ends, corrupted the Word of God. 
To willfully or recklessly corrupt the Word of God— to 
vitiate its pure and holy doctrines; to add to it the vain 
philosophies of ambitious men and seek to support their 
theories by perverting its truths; to under-rate its exceeding 
great and precious promises and mystify the 
conditions upon which they may be realized; or to 
minimize or make void the solemn warnings of the Word 
of God— is indeed dangerous business, in which the faithful 
saints will never engage, but in which those who fall 
away from the faith are usually most active— deceiving 
and being deceived. 

To be faithful ambassadors for Christ— faithful 
representatives of the truth and faithful proclaimers of 
it— requires great humility and simplicity of heart. 
It necessitates the complete ignoring of all worldly 
ambitions and aims, and the cultivation of a brave 
spirit of endurance which will not shrink from any 
reproach which fidelity to the truth may bring. And such 
service, the Apostle here shows, is acceptable to God as 
sweet incense, no matter what may be the effect upon 

R3673 : page 360 

those to whom we minister, whether they accept or reject 
the message of divine grace. What God is looking 
for in us is loyalty to him and devotion to his cause; 
and this condition of heart he appreciates, regardless 
of our success or failure to secure large results. What a 
comfort it is amidst all discouragements to know that 
under all circumstances the spirit of Christ in us is as 
sweet incense to God. And the reward of his constant 
approval is richer than all the unwholesome sweets of 
ambition gained by corrupting the Word of God. 
To the hearer of this Gospel, the message must 



prove either a savor of life unto (or tending to) life, or 
a savor of death unto (or tending to) death. His responsibility 
is great: there is no neutral ground; he either 
receives it or rejects it. But observe that the statement 
is not that the rejection of any item of truth inevitably 
dooms the rejector to death, and vice versa, but that the 
tendency of such a course is to death, and of the opposite 
course to life, unless interrupted— changed. 

R3674 : page 360 

Thus, for instance, the Lord, in reproving the 
Scribes and Pharisees, who rejected the Gospel and yet 
claimed to be the children of God and leaders and examples 
of godliness to others, significantly inquired, "How 
can ye escape the condemnation of Gehenna"— the everlasting 
destruction, the Second Death? (Matt. 23:33.) 
In rejecting the truth so plainly brought to their attention, 
and in pursuing the hypocritical course of claiming 
to be faithful and devoted children of God, they 
were forming and establishing such characters that 
repentance would, ere long, be impossible to them. 
Few, perhaps, clearly realize how serious a thing it is 
to be making character, and that every act and every 
thought leaves its impress upon the soul. Every right 
thought and act tends to establish the character in 
righteousness, while every wrong thought and act, and 
every self-deception tends to confirm and establish an 
unrighteous character. And when a wrong course is 
adopted and persistently followed— when conscience is 
stifled, and when reason and Scripture are perverted to 
selfish ends, until the heart is deceived and the judgment 
is overcome— who can predict the repentance of 
such a one? 

Such construct characters or wills so out of harmony 
with God and righteousness as to be fit only for destruction. 
(Heb. 6:4-6.) How can such "escape the condemnation 
of Gehenna"? for God will not permit any 
one to live whose will is confirmed in unrighteousness. 
How responsible then is the position of those who are 
building character in themselves and in others! Remember 
that our characters are manifested by our habits 
of life; and each act, even the smallest, tends to form 
some new habit, or to confirm one already established. 
How important, then, that our thoughts and actions 
should not be aimless, but with a purpose (1 Cor. 10:31); 
and, above all, that our lives should be "transformed 
[re-formed] by the renewing of our minds;" that, putting 
aside the evil, and all influences which tend toward evil, 
we should receive of the Lord, through his Word, the 
"spirit of a sound mind," the "mind of Christ." In this 
view of the case, it is indeed a solemn thing to live, 
a solemn thing to think, and to act; and it behooves us 
to guard well our words, our thoughts and our actions, 
and ever to bear in mind our responsibility to God, both 
for ourselves and for others as ambassadors for Christ. 



"And who is sufficient for these things?" Surely 
none of us in our own strength. We need first of all to 
give ourselves to the Lord without reserve, and then 
daily to drink in more and more of his spirit by communion 
with him through his Word and in prayer; and constantly 
to watch and pray lest we enter into 
temptation. 

Let all the consecrated endeavor more and more to 
realize their responsibility, both in the matter of their 
own character-building and also in that of building up 
others in the most holy faith and in the character which 
is the legitimate result of that faith. The issues of eternal 
life and eternal death are before us, and before those 
to whom we present this gospel; and therefore it behooves 
us carefully and prayerfully to present the pure truth 
of God in all sincerity and in the spirit of Christ before 
God, ever bearing in mind that it is a savor either of 
life unto life or of death unto death. 

"Grant skill each sacred theme to trace, 
With loving voice and glowing tongue, 

As when upon thy words of grace 

The wondering crowds enraptured hung. 

"Give strength, blest Savior, in thy might; 

Illuminate our hearts, and we, 
Transformed into thine image bright, 

Shall teach and love and live, like thee." 



R3674 : page 360 

NEHEMIAH'S FAITH AND WORKS. 

--NEHEMIAH 4:7-20.-DECEMBER 3.- 

Golden Text:— "Watch and pray."— Matthew 26:41. 

IN a previous lesson we noted the devotion of Nehemiah, 

and his prayers to the Lord that he might 

be used in connection with the establishment, 

the rebuilding at Jerusalem and the encouragement of 

the faithful who had returned to Palestine from the 

Babylonian captivity. To-day's lesson gives us a 

glimpse of this noble man working and encouraging 

others to work along the lines of his faith and the Lord's 

promises. 

The Persian king, Artaxerxes, favored the proposition 
of his confidential servant, Nehemiah, and granted him 
an armed escort and royal authority in connection with 
the project close to his heart. Thus far the Lord had 
favored him, and a three months' journey brought him to 
the city where centered his hopes and the hopes of his 
nation, because in it centered the divine promise. In all 
this we see an exhibit of faith in active operation— faith 



with works, as the Apostle enjoins. It will be remembered 

R3674: page 361 

that Ezra, when starting on his expedition, although 
he probably took much more treasure, had no 
armed escort from the king. In this case, Nehemiah, 
with no less faith in the Lord, had the armed escort. 

The reason for the difference of procedure is stated: 
it was not wrong for Nehemiah to use available means 
for the protection of his life and the property under his 
care, which was to be used in the Lord's service, just as 
it is not wrong for the Lord's people of to-day, while 
fully trusting in him, to insure their property against 
loss by fire. It does not imply a lack of confidence in 
God to use every reasonable and proper means for the 
preservation of life and health and property. We remember 
how our Lord resisted the temptation of Satan, 
and would not leap from the Temple pinnacle into the valley 
below— he would not thus tempt God and the providential 
care in which he trusted. Had he been cast headlong 
by his enemies while in the dispatch of duty the 
matter would have been different, and undoubtedly his 
life would have been miraculously preserved, because his 
hour had not yet come. There is a lesson for us in all 
these matters: our faith in the Lord should not lead us 
to expect him to do for us those things which we are 
able to accomplish for ourselves. 

"BE YE WISE AS SERPENTS." 

On his arrival at Jerusalem Nehemiah did not reveal 
his plans. The people merely knew that a Jew high in 
favor with the King, an officer of his household, with a 
small retinue of servants, was in their midst. Had he 
told his plans the enemies of the city would soon have 
heard of them and have taken steps to interfere; besides, 
the course followed was a much better one for the 
awakening of the interest and co-operation of the people. 
Many of the Lord's people need to learn this lesson of 
secretiveness— not to tell everything that they know. 
Our Lord not only exhorted us to be as wise as serpents 
while harmless as doves, but through the Apostle 
also he exhorts that we should be swift to hear and 
slow to speak— not too ready to tell all of our plans 
and arrangements, etc. We even know of some of the 
Lord's consecrated people who have gotten the wrong 
impression that to secrete any matter, to avoid telling 
all that one knows, to avoid giving full answers that 
would reveal all that is asked, would be considered by 
some as sinful, deceptive. It is well for them to have 
their conscience, but conscience requires training, and 

R3675 : page 361 

the safest instruction comes from the words and example 



of our Lord and his apostles. 

Our Lord used this very method of not telling all 
that he knew to those who were not ready for the information. 
He said on one occasion to his disciples, 
"I have many things to tell you but ye cannot bear 
them now." (John 16:12.) When asked questions by 
his enemies who sought to entrap him he avoided answering 
them or gave them evasive answers. In all this he 
was as wise as a serpent, yet harmless as a dove. He 
did not refrain from telling that which was really proper 
to be told, necessary to the comfort or advantage of 
his questioner. The Apostle Paul quotes his enemies 
as charging him with guile— "Being crafty I took 
you by guile." (2 Cor. 12:16.) An evil mind can indeed 
put an evil construction upon the noblest words 
and deeds. This was true in the Master's case also. The 
Apostle exercised wisdom in his method of dealing 
with those whom he desired to bless, hiding from them 
for a time truths which at first they were not prepared 
to receive or appreciate, but afterward, when necessary 
to them, he made plain, assuring us that he had not 
shunned to declare the whole counsel of God. (Acts 20:27.) 
Strong meat for men and milk for babes is the 
thought. Let us more and more seek to exercise heavenly 
wisdom in all our affairs, that we may accomplish as 
much good as possible and choke and stumble none. 

"A MIND FOR THE WORK." 

Nehemiah was a man of action: he had come to 
Jerusalem for a purpose and wasted no time. He arose 
by night, took with him some of his trusted servants, 
and made a thorough inspection of the wall all around 
the city, probably by moonlight, and then he promulgated 
his plan for doing a great work speedily. As a 
matter of fact, the entire wall was reared in fifty-two 
days. How could he have possibly accomplished so 
much in so short a time? The answer is that the people 
had a mind to work— their hearts were in the work, 
they labored not as eye-servants nor as men-pleasers 
merely, but labored as for the Lord and for his cause. 
The method employed by Nehemiah shows not only 
that he prayed and labored but that he planned. His 
project was to divide up the work of the wall amongst 
various parties: for instance, the priests and Levites 
and their families undertook a section, various of the 
notable families undertook sections, guilds and societies 
undertook sections, until the whole work was parceled 
out and each party was pledged for his share in 
the service. The people entered into the matter spiritedly, 
each anxious not only to see the whole wall built, 
but anxious that his own share in it should be substantially 
done, a credit to himself as well as to the city in 
general. 

There was tact in this: it was the endeavor to make 
use of the natural tendencies of the human mind. It 



would be well for all of the Lord's people, charged with 
the building of the wall of righteousness which surrounds 
the people of God, separates them from the 
world, to likewise encourage and stimulate one another 
in the work which all have at heart. To make a practical 
illustration of this to our own time and work in 
this harvest of the Gospel age, we see that there is an 
abundance of labor for all who have a mind to work. 
Some can engage in the colporteur service— many are 
so engaged, much to their own spiritual advantage as 
well as to the profit of those to whom they minister 
the Truth, and to the general upbuilding of the wall of 
righteousness and to the separation of the Lord's people 
from those who are without, the world. Others can 
labor as pilgrims and find plenty to do; still others as 
volunteers can serve the cause by word of mouth, by 
pen and by the printed page, distributing tracts and in 
general co-laboring with the Lord and with the brethren 
in the building of the wall of Zion. Those who are 
in any measure or degree successful have a mind for 
the work, otherwise the harvest work would not progress 
as it does— the Lord would find some other way 
of accomplishing results now due to be obtained. 

"BE NOT WEARY IN WELLDOING." 

The work started with great energy and zeal, but 
was not long in encountering the opposition described 
in our lesson. Sanballat was a governor of the Samaritans, 

R3675 : page 362 

a mixed people partly of Jewish and partly of 
heathen blood; Tobiah was the governor of the Ammonites, 
across the river Jordan; the Arabs of the desert 
as well as the people of Ashdod, a Philistine city in the 
South, heard of the rebuilding of the wall of Jerusalem 
and were opposed to it for several reasons: the fortification 
of that city meant an increase of Jewish power 
and a proportionate decrease of their own influence. 
They remembered how the city had once been great 
and influential, and selfishness prompted opposition to 
it. Besides, religion was the factor with all these peoples. 
Each had his own religious party and creed, and 
the success of the Jews in Jerusalem meant the triumph 
of the God of the Jews and a corresponding lessening 
of influence of those who differed. Furthermore, the 
Jews scattered amongst these various peoples and 
gradually becoming amalgamated with them would be 
more likely to be drawn back to Judaism if its capital 
were again a stronghold and the nation seeming to 
rise more completely from the dust. 

As these enemies of the Jews were wroth without 
a proper reason, from selfish motives, so those who are 
engaged in the harvest work, in the rebuilding of the 
walls of Zion, in the replacing of the doctrines of righteousness 



and truth, overthrown by the Adversary during 

the dark ages, find opposition not only from the 

world, the flesh and the devil, but chiefly from the 

Sanballat followers of nominal Christianity— the "mixed 

peoples" who have a form of godliness without its 

power. All of these opposing influences are ready to 

combine to hinder the reestablishment of the truths 

and principles which properly separate the Lord's consecrated 

people from all others. Various are the schemes 

and hindrances devised. 

In Nehemiah's time the opposition first took the 
form of sarcasm and ridicule, saying that the wall they 
were building was not scientifically done, would not 
stand the tests of "higher criticism;" and a fox even 
brushing against it would be liable to throw it down. 
Those who to-day are building upon the wall of Zion, 
each in his own place, according to his own opportunity, 
must be prepared for similar sarcasm. Who are you? 
What are you? What can you hope to accomplish? Look 
at Romanism, look at Methodism, look at Presbyterianism, 
look at all the wealth and learning represented by 
the various denominations of Christendom! What can 
you hope to accomplish by the rebuilding of the walls 
of Zion? Those who are easily put to shame and who 
give up the work of building evidence thereby that 
they have not the faith which would be pleasing to the 
Lord if they withdraw in spite of all we can do to encourage 
them. We must let them go, although by and 
by they will regret such a course. 

"FIGHTING THE GOOD FIGHT OF FAITH." 

When the enemies of the Jews found that sarcasm 
availed nothing, and that the building of the wall progressed 
with considerable speed, they secretly took 
counsel to make an attack on the city, to break down 
the walls and to discourage the builders. However, in 
the Lord's providence some of those who were building 
had come in from the surrounding country anxious to 
have a part in the work; and the secret messages for 
these to return home because of an attack about to be 
made reached the ears of Nehemiah, who forthwith 
armed the people so that they would be ready to repel 
an attack at any time. The hodcarriers were armed, 
and those who did the mason work had swords at their 
sides, while Nehemiah's special guard, divided into two 
parts, relieved each other at labor and at military service. 
Thus the work progressed under serious difficulties, 
which demonstrated all the more that love and 
zeal were behind the movement. 

Thus it must be to-day with all who are laboring 
in the harvest work— each one needs to be armed: not, 
however, with carnal weapons. "The weapons of our 
warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the 
pulling down of strongholds," (of error). (2 Cor. 10:4.) 
All of those laboring to-day upon the walls of Zion need 



to be equipped with the helmet of salvation, the breastplate 

of righteousness, the sandals of patient endurance, 

the shield of faith and the sword of the Spirit. Whoever 

is not armed is in danger of being overcome by the Adversary. 

The sword of the Spirit as well as the shield of 

faith are necessary every moment. When we are opposed 

we must be able, as the Apostle Peter enjoins, to so 

use the sword of the Spirit as to be able to give to every 

man that asketh us a reason for the hope that is in us, 

with meekness and reverence, from the Word of God. 

Our warfare has reached this stage at the present time, 

our enemies no longer ridicule as at first. Let each who 

is a servant of the Lord and has consecrated his life 

to his service be on the alert continually. Greater is 

he who is on our part than all they that be against us. 

Finding that the Jews could not be taken unawares, 
Sanballat and his associates tried another scheme; they 
invited Nehemiah to a conference, but that wise man 
refused to confer, and sent them word that his work 
was great and urgent, and that he must build the wall. 
Doubtless our opponents now would like to draw our 
attention away from the particular work we have to 
do; they would like to have us discuss with them other 
projects, other reforms, social, political, federations, 
etc. But we cannot join in any of these; we have a 
work to do, the Lord's work; there are few to do it 
and it requires all of our time and energy. 

The next step of the Adversary was to threaten 
Nehemiah. This they did indirectly, not directly. They 
got a certain man to pose as a prophet of the Lord and 
to prophesy injury to Nehemiah, and to advise him to 
hide himself in the sacred precincts of the Temple. 
The thought evidently was that, if the leader of the 

R3676 : page 362 

movement could be affrighted and drawn from the 
work, the others would soon be discouraged and the 
whole matter would fizzle out; but Nehemiah was certainly 
a chosen vessel of the Lord for this very service, 
and could not be thus frightened. May it be so with 
us; may our confidence in the Lord be such that the 
fear of man will not be a snare to us. 

"FIGHTING WITHOUT AND FOES WITHIN." 

While the outer foes were thus seeking to hinder 
the work, other matters tended to discourage the workers: 
(1) The supply of stones for the wall began to 
be more difficult to secure; as the top and loose ones 
were used the others required to be more or less dug 
out; (2) as the wall grew higher it made slower progress 
and required greater effort to carry the materials 
onto it; (3) the burden and heat of the day sapped the 
strength of the laborers and they needed the encouragements 
which Nehemiah continually gave them, that the 



Lord was on their part, that their prayers were heard, 

R3676 : page 363 

and that they should not be afraid of their enemies, 
but remember the Lord which is great and terrible. 
It is so with us, the Lord's followers who are to-day 
building the walls of Zion. At first we felt so glad 
to be rid of the tormenting errors of the dark ages, so 
glad to be free, so glad to know something of the Divine 
Plan of the Ages, we built hard and fast. But with 
the outward opposition came also greater labors as we 
strove for mastery ourselves and to build one another 
up in the most holy faith. 

How many spiritual Israelites of this "Harvest 
Time," who began with great courage and zeal, and shoutings 
of joy, have become more or less disheartened. But 
not all. By the Lord's grace there are encouragements 
and stimulations for the laborers on the walls of Zion 
still. The pilgrim visits, the one-day Conventions, the 
general Conventions, together with the regular visits 
of the WATCH TOWER and the growing numbers and 
volumes of DAWN, have served to encourage and stimulate 
the Lord's faithful, and we are still going on from 
grace to grace, from knowledge to knowledge, and still 
trusting in him who is the Captain of our Salvation. 

"WE THAT ARE STRONG OUGHT TO BEAR WITH THE 
INFIRMITIES OF THE WEAK." 

Another difficulty arose: Nehemiah found that 
some of those who labored on the wall, full of zeal for 
the cause, were made to suffer for their faithfulness by 
the wealthy Jews. The poorer ones getting behind in 
their rents, taxes, etc., were scarcely able to provide 
for their families; and their richer brethren, taking advantage 
of their destitution, had made hard contracts 
with them, taking away their small possessions, etc., 
in payment for debts which they were unable to pay 
because of their engagement in the Lord's service. 
Nehemiah was righteously indignant with this condition, 
and called the offenders and stated the matter 
before them plainly and clearly, and shaking out the 
flowing folds of his outer garment he declared that 
thus the Lord would shake out from amongst his people 
any who had such a selfish spirit. 

We are glad that this condition of things finds no 
parallel amongst us at the present time. On the contrary, 
we find that love of the brethren is one of the 
marked evidences of growth in grace and knowledge. 
Amongst the assemblies of the Lord's people we find 
a general tendency not only to avoid asking the poorer 
brethren and sisters to contribute to the expenses, but 
a willingness to do what each can for the assistance of 
the needy ones. At our conventions, where no collections 
are taken up, there is a forwardness to see that 



none of the entertaining Church are overburdened with 
expense, and also that any in attendance at a convention 
who are not well to do in this world's goods shall 
not suffer for necessities and some of the comforts of 
life. May these evidences of true brotherhood in the 
body of Christ and of the true building of the walls of 
Zion continue and abound with us until the work is 
finished, until our Master shall say, "Well done, good 
and faithful servant, enter thou into the joy of thy 
Lord." 

ONE TRUMPET-VOICE DIRECTS US ALL. 

The last verse of our lesson tells of the arrangement 
made whereby the various workers on the different 
parts of the great wall could be summoned by Nehemiah 
to one place if necessity required. The summons was 
the sound of the trumpet— "In whatsoever place ye 
hear the sound of the trumpet, resort ye thither unto 
us. Our God shall fight for us." Is it not the same 
with us to-day? It is not the voice of man that gathers 
us but the voice of the trumpet— the voice of the great 
trumpet, the seventh trumpet, announcing our Redeemer 
as the Captain of our Salvation, present, gathering 
together his saints unto him, making up his jewels, 
and shortly to establish them with himself in Kingdom 
glory, in the control of the whole world for its blessing 
and uplifting, for the destruction of all who wilfully 
and intelligently oppose him. 



R3676 : page 363 

THE FEAST OF TABERNACLES. 

-NEHEMIAH 8:8-18.-DECEMBER 10.- 

Golden Text:— "Blessed are they that hear the 
word of God and keep it. " — Luke 1 1 : 28 . 

NEHEMIAH was governor at Jerusalem, and after 
the repair of the Temple walls, noted in our 
last lesson, he did not consider that great work 
the end of his mission but rather the beginning of it. The 
wall was necessary first for the security of the people, 
to arouse their national spirit, to revive their hopes in 
respect to the promised Kingdom of God, and afford 
them a practical demonstration of God's favor with 
them in the accomplishment of that work, and thus 
to lead on to trust in the accomplishment of other 
promises of the Word still future. 

In the Lord's providence the work was accomplished 
just at the right time to permit of the rest of the week 
at their homes, and then to have a general gathering 
to celebrate the New Year. The Jewish civil year begins 



with the seventh month, this year September 30, 
but varying a few days either way from that date, as 
their calculations were made by lunar time. In God's 
providence the national interests were associated with 
the religious interests of the Jews. They were God's 
people, and all their political and national hopes were 
associated with the divine promises, and hence a revival 
of interest in their city and nation and national hopes 
meant a revival also in their reverence for God, in 
their religious sentiments, in their desire to honor the 
Lord and obey him, to observe the festivals which he 
had commanded. 

Nehemiah was evidently a prudent man in such 
matters to begin with. Indeed we know that this is 
the Lord's general way of choosing those whom he 
may use in his service. He chooses suitable persons, 
and then adds his blessing to promote the outcome 
which he desires— as, for instance, when instructing 
Moses respecting the intricate devices for the Tabernacle 
structure, the Lord said, "Choose out from the 
children of Israel cunning workmen and I will put my 
spirit upon them." The thought is that the Lord employs 
as little of the miraculous as is necessary— he 
takes advantage of conditions as they are so far as 
possible, and uses them. While, therefore, the Scriptures 

R3676 : page 364 

declare, and all the facts of the case correspond 
to show, that not many great, not many learned, not 
many wise, not many noble according to the course of 
this world are chosen by the Lord for his special servants, 
we are to assume that the Lord chooses as noble, 
as great, and as learned as he can find who are of the 
right condition of heart. 

LOVE AND DEVOTION FIRST. 

We are not to consider that qualifications are 
despised of the Lord, but rather to note that the Lord 
puts first and foremost the qualities of honesty, humility, 
obedience and love, and that these things being 
present in a number, those possessing the greatest number 
of other qualifications would have the preference. 
For instance, we may assume that the twelve apostles 
chosen represented the best material for the Lord's 
purpose every way, yet subsequently when Saul of 
Tarsus, educated, talented and wealthy, consecrated 
himself, saying, "Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?" 
the Lord was willing to use him, and his peculiar talents, 
combined with his deep consecration, humility 
and zeal, enabled him to take a foremost place amongst 
the apostles. 

Nehemiah, the man of opportunity, brought to 
the governorship of the Jews at this important juncture, 
manifested his humility and his zeal in many 



various ways. When calling for the convocation for 
a general assembly of the Israelites for the New Year's 
celebration, called the Feast of Trumpets, he did not 
ignore the worthy ones of the Lord's people and seek 
to take all the honor to himself. On the contrary, he 
recognized Ezra the Scribe, a member of the priestly 
family, as more suitable than himself to take a prominent 
part in the work of educating the people in the 
knowledge of the Lord through his Law. Ezra's chief 
place of importance was the ceremony of reading the 
Law and introducing it to the attention of the people. 
On his right hand were seven of the prominent men, 
on his left hand six more, and the reading was done by 
course, and probably participated in by many if not 
all of these fourteen. 

The place of the reading was on the plaza of the 
Temple. The people, sitting about over a considerable 
area, arose when the Law was read, and after the reading 
of a section they sat down. Meantime amongst 

R3677 : page 364 

them had been scattered various of the Levites, the 
teachers of the people, who explained to them the 
meaning of the words they had heard, giving them the 
sense of the language. This was necessary probably 
for two reasons: first, that the people who had been 
in Babylon had more or less of a corrupt tongue or ear, 
while undoubtedly the Law was written and read in 
classical Hebrew; secondly, even if they had understood 
all the words, a particular explanation of the 
sentiment or meaning is sometimes both convenient 
and necessary. This reading of the Law in sections, 
and expounding it both from the higher platform occupied 
by the fourteen officiating and also its further 
expounding to the people by the Levites who were in their 
midst, occupied all of one afternoon and a good portion 
of the next forenoon. The result was that the people 
had an understanding of God's own message. 

"PREACH THE WORD." 

Here we see the real essence of preaching, as the 
Apostle wrote to Timothy, "Preach the Word." The 
difficulty of much of the preaching of our day is that 
it is not the Word of God that is preached, but the 
traditions of the ancients, or more frequently perhaps 
something that has very little to do with religion at 
all. Higher criticism and evolution theories and general 
agnosticism prevail to so large an extent both in 
pulpit and pew that the Word of God is losing its place 
of importance in the minds of those who are nominally 
God's people. Why should they study the book which 
they no longer accept as divinely inspired. Ignorance 
of the Scriptures is greatly on the increase amongst 
those who profess godliness. Undoubtedly there was 



great advantage in the Scripture studies of olden times, 

even though ignorance and superstition and the false 

theology of the dark ages gave a distorted view to much 

that was studied; nevertheless, fifty years ago the 

Scriptures were very much better known to the masses 

of those professing godliness. The loss is a keen one. 

On the other hand we know how those who have come 

into the light of present Truth, and whose eyes of understanding 

are opened wide to a greater appreciation 

of the lengths and breadths and heights and depths 

of the divine character and plan, are becoming more 

and more deeply interested in the study of the Word. 

This is sure to be the case. No religion, no theory, can 

be either true or helpful that does not bring us to God's 

book and deepen our interest in his message. Canon 

Farrar pays a splendid tribute to the value of the Bible 

as a civilizing influence, in the following words:— 

"It was the Bible that gave fire and nobleness to 
her (England's) language; it was the Bible that turned 
a dead oppression into a living Church; it was the 
Bible which put to flight the nightmare of ignorance 
before the rosy dawn of progress.... It was the Bible 
which saved England from sinking into a tenth-rate 
power as a vassal of cruel, ignorant, superstitious 
Spain, whose Dominicans and tyrants would have 
turned her fields into slaughterhouses, as they turned 
those of the Netherlands, and would have made her 
cities reek as she made Seville reek with the bale-fires 
of her Inquisition." "Let England cling to her open 
Bible." 

"And what the Bible did for England, it did for 
the United States of America. It was the Bible that 
made America what she is." 

"EAT THE FAT AND DRINK THE SWEET AND SEND PORTIONS. 

Evidently this was the first presentation of the 
Law to the people since their return from captivity. 
Evidently Ezra had given his attention to the rearranging 
of the Law and the instruction of the priests and 
Levites therein, but had not up to this time caused it 
to be promulgated amongst the people. Quite possibly 
it was a part of Nehemiah's wise insight as a governor 
to see that the explaining to the people of God's own 
message would be helpful to them; that it was not 
sufficient that the priests and the Levites should be 
learned in the Law and that they should tell the people, 
but that the people themselves should be made to understand 
the divine message. The same is true to-day. 
It will not do that others shall attempt to tell the 
Lord's plan, but ignore the Lord's Word, in order to 
have weight and influence. Those who receive the 
message must know that it is more than man's message, 
must have the evidence that it is from the Lord. 

R3677 : page 365 



When the Law was read and expounded to the 
people they saw at once that they had been under 
chastisement and in difficulties because of their neglect 
of the divine institutions, and they wept; but Nehemiah 
and those conducting the services under his direction 
sent word to the people not to weep, not to mourn, 
but on the contrary to rejoice and give thanks to God 
that they now were at last awake to the true state of 
affairs, that their troubles had come as a result of 
their disobedience, and that they had started in to 
reform and to have God's blessing in their endeavor, 
their effort, to obey his statutes. There is a time to 
mourn, but it is when sin and opposition are prevailing; 
when repentance has come, when contrition for sin 
has led to reformation, it is time to cease mourning lest 
utter discouragement should result. They had met to 
thank God for returning favor, to realize that they had 
received chastisement at his hands, to thank him for 
the same, to take good courage, to start afresh to walk 
in his way, and now were hearing his Law with a view 
to observing the same and thereafter having his blessing 
and favor. The message was, "This day is holy 
unto the Lord your God; mourn not, neither weep. 
Go your way, eat the fat and drink the sweet, and send 
portions to them for whom nothing is prepared, for 
this day is holy unto our Lord; neither be ye sorry,— 

"FOR THE JOY OF THE LORD IS YOUR STRENGTH." 

Spiritual Israel can take an excellent lesson here: 
"Why should the children of the King go mourning 
all their days?" It was proper that we should mourn 
for sin, that we should realize the need for a Savior, 
that we should lay hold upon him by faith; but once 
we have accepted the Lord and realized the forgiveness 
of our sins, the time for mourning is past, the time for 
joy and rejoicing is commenced. To so great an extent 
is this true that the Apostle exhorts that we should 
rejoice in everything, even in tribulation, realizing that 
since we have given ourselves to the Lord and he has 
accepted us as his children and given us the anointing 
of his spirit, adopting us into his family and made us 
heirs with Christ in the glorious promises to be fulfilled, 
our hearts should be so full of rejoicing that all the trials 
and difficulties of the way should seem as nothing. 

Whoever can exercise the proper faith in the Lord 
and in his Word can rejoice; those who cannot exercise 
the faith cannot have the joy and rejoicing in this 
present time, but must wait for their portion by and 
by. The Lord is now seeking those who may firmly 
trust him, come what may; he is seeking those who will 
walk by faith, not by sight. Those who cannot walk 
by faith now will have the opportunity of walking by 
sight very shortly, when the Kingdom shall be established. 
They indeed shall have a goodly portion, but 



the portion which God has specially provided for the 
faithful is joint-heirship with his Son in the Kingdom. 
Let us, then, who have accepted the Lord and his Word, 
cast away everything of doubt and of fear, and live 
rejoicingly day by day while seeking to walk in the 
footsteps of him who loved us and bought us with his 
precious blood. The joy of the Lord is our strength, 
the joy which God gives, the joy which comes from 
realizing that the Lord is our fortress, and that no ill 
can betide us without his knowledge, and that he has 
promised that all things shall work together for good 
to them that love him— with all their heart, mind, soul 
and strength. 

This message that the leaders set forth, uttered 
from the main stand, was repeated to the people by the 
Levites in their midst. The tears were dry and the 
company dismissed to rejoice in the opening of a new 
year, which symbolized to them a fresh start in the ways 
of the Lord and in his favor. The reading of the Law 
on the second day (v. 13) would seem to have been 
principally to the priests and Levites and heads of the 
various families— probably some of the special selections 
of the Law, appropriate to them as persons charged 
with certain responsibilities amongst the Lord's people. 
It was during this reading that it was discovered that 
for some time this feature of the Law had been entirely 
overlooked, namely,— 

THE FEAST OF TABERNACLES. 

They found that in the Law it was commanded 
that at this season of the year, namely, from the fifteenth 
to the twenty-second of the seventh month, 
the Israelites should dwell for a week in booths constructed 
of branches of trees, and keep that week as a 
special festival of thanksgiving to the Lord. It was a 
feast of ingathering or harvest home. Our American 
Thanksgiving day to some extent resembles this. They 
were to live for a week in these booths to remind them 
of how once they had been a people without a home, 
when God delivered them out of Egypt and brought 
them on the way to Canaan. The yearly remembrance 
of this experience would tend to produce in their hearts 
thankfulness to God as the one who had given them 
the land of promise, the one upon whom they were dependent 
for their national existence and freedom from 
slavery, and the one who had promised to bring them 
to a full inheritance of all the glorious things contained 
in the great promise, the Oath-Bound Covenant made 
to Abraham, that ultimately through his seed all the 
families of the earth should be blessed. 

Our general three-day Conventions are somewhat 
after this Feast of Tabernacles pattern, only on a higher 
plane, adapted to us as Spiritual Israelites. This year 
we had such Holy Convocations in June in Chattanooga, 
Tenn.; in July another at Niagara Falls, N.Y.; 



in September one in Denver, Colo., and another in 
Portland, Oregon, besides one in Germany at Elberfeld; 
one in London, England; one in Glasgow, Scotland, 
and one in Stockholm, Sweden. These various 

R3678 : page 366 

gatherings of the Lord's people now in different places 

are made necessary by reason of the larger scope of 

country in which Spiritual Israel resides. We do not 

live in tents and booths, yet our absence from our 

regular homes for a few days implies temporary dwelling-places 

or tabernacles. We are absent for a time 

from some of the conveniences and comforts of our 

homes, yet these conditions may be very favorable to 

us as reminders that here we have no continuing city, 

that we are not to set our hearts upon houses or lands 

or any earthly thing, but to remember that our citizenship 

is in heaven and that our present sojourn is toward 

the heavenly Jerusalem, the Kingdom, and that 

everything in the present time should be considered 

by us as a temporal or tabernacle condition, waiting 

for the eternal conditions which God has promised us. 

R3678 : page 366 

OUR FEASTING IS SPIRITUAL. 

For the entire seven days the Jews rejoiced and 
had a feast of good fellowship one with another, dwelling 
in these booths. The whole people, for a time at least, 
were on a common level. The booths were erected inside 
the city or outside the walls as might be convenient, 
and many of them were on the roofs of the houses, 
which there are usually flat. It was not a feast of 
sensuality nor an occasion for moral abandon, but, 
quite to the contrary, was a time for Bible study. The 
reading of the book of the Law and the expounding of 
it were the main centers of interest, and the people no 
longer wept and repined at the reading of it, but on the 
contrary, rejoicing that the Lord's favor was with them, 
they studied the Word with a view to practising it to 
the extent of their ability. 

This also corresponds well with our Conventions, 
in which Bible study has the chief place and chief interest. 
Surely we do have spiritual refreshing, feasting; 
surely these gatherings, these spiritual feasts in temporary 
tabernacles away from our usual homes, are 
proving very helpful to the Lord's people. For this 
reason they grow more and more to be appreciated 
amongst those who put spiritual matters first. We 
live in a very busy day, when business, money-getting, 
is placed in the first rank by all civilized peoples. If 
worldly people can take vacations to engage in hunting 
and fishing and other so-called "sports," why cannot 
the Lord's people take their spiritual refreshment and 



recreation, and cultivate in their children more and 
more of the desire for the spiritual things? for these 
gatherings so far as possible should be family gatherings, 
and the pleasure of an outing and change of surroundings 
and rest from ordinary work should be combined 
with the highest pleasure of which we have 
knowledge, the pleasure of meeting with the Lord and 
with those who are his, the pleasure of studying the 
divine Word and helping one another onward and upward 
in the heavenly way. 

We exhort that so far as possible all the friends 
of Present Truth shall have in mind the spending of 
one week in each year separate and apart from ordinary 
business and work, in something resembling the 
Jewish Feast of Tabernacles, only on the higher, spiritual 
plane. It is our thought that hereafter the General 
Conventions may best be held under circumstances that 
will permit those of the friends who desire to stay 
longer than the three days, engaging in quiet study 
and reflection upon the things discussed during the 
three days, a rest time aside from the world and its 
hurry, giving special attention to spiritual nourishment 
after the example of our Lord and his disciples. 

HEARING AND OBEYING. 

Our Golden Text should not be forgotten. It is 
important that we should hear the Word of the Lord, 
that we search the Scriptures, that we have them well 
at our command, that we be able to give an answer to 
him that asketh us a reason for the hope that is in us, 
and we need more than all this. We need to obey the 
Word, to practise it to the extent of our ability. True, 
we cannot come up to the demands of perfection, for 
God's law is perfect, but we can have the perfect attitude 
of heart, and nothing less than this will be acceptable 
to the Lord. We can show him and to some 
extent show to others the endeavor of our lives in the 
direction of righteousness and all the fruits and graces 
of the holy Spirit. If we had all knowledge and zeal 
and had not the spirit of obedience it would evidence a 
lack of the spirit of love, and prove us unworthy of the 
divine favor and blessings promised to those who are 
rightly exercised by the message from above. 



R3678 : page 366 

ONE -DAY CONVENTION REPORTS. 

AT KENTON, O., OCT. 29 

We had a grand time at Kenton. Friends from 
nearby towns and cities came in goodly numbers and 
full of the Spirit, and greatly cheered the little company 



of friends of the Truth at this point. Brother 
Russell arrived just at the close of the morning rally 
and gave a few words of cheer respecting the general 
prosperity of the "harvest" work and the evidence that 
"due time" will accomplish all that God has promised. 

The afternoon meeting for the public was held in 
the Opera House. Its large attendance, filling the house 
reputed to hold over a thousand, is said to have been 
the largest religious gathering ever held in the little 
city. Our friends certainly advertised that meeting 
thoroughly, Brother Russell did his best to make plain 
the great divine plan and the report is that the entire 
city and countryside are thinking and talking about the 
teachings of the Bible as never before. 

The evening discourse was specially for the interested, 
but as many of you got the stenographer's report 
in the Pittsburg Dispatch we need go into no details 
here. 

AT FORT WAYNE, IND., NOV. 12 

Our train arrived early and we had great pleasure 
in the Rally and Testimony Meeting in the forenoon. 
Surely it was good to be there. Many tongues testified 
to the Lord's grace and truth and to responding devotion 
and love. 

The afternoon session for the public must have been 
well advertised. It had a splendid turnout of very intelligent 
people from all the walks of life. The sermon 
topic was, "To Hell and Back. Who are there? Hope 
for the return of many of them." The Majestic Theatre, 
seating 1,400, was packed, about 100 standing, and several 
hundred were turned away. The closest of attention 
was given, and we will hope for some good results. 
We may surely hope that a considerable number will 
hereafter have saner and more loving views of our Heavenly 
Father than before. And if only a few grains of 
ripe "wheat" were found we shall rejoice. 

The evening session was for the interested, on 
"Man's Elections and God's Elections," as reported in 
the Dispatch. Here also we were escorted to the depot 
by quite a number of the beloved friends. A night ride 
returned us to the Bible House Monday morning. 



R3678 : page 367 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 

The letter below is from one now a colporteur representing 
our Society in the spreading of the Truth. The writer 
has learned to listen to the Voice of God in his appointed 
way— through His Word and not through spirit "voices." 
We rejoice that the Lord is pleased to use the WATCH TOWER 
to call attention to the precepts of His Word. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

All day and nearly all last night I have been rejoicing 
over the article on the "Increasing Influence of Spiritism." 
I do thank the Lord for it from first to last and you also. 
It is to me another wonderful deliverance, as when I first 
read the Spiritism pamphlet. I praise God for His goodness, 
and for his mighty Arm protectingly thrown around his 
people in this article. What a safeguard! I am most deeply 
grateful. It seems to put away so much of fears and worries 
from me— it is one of the answers long delayed in wisdom. 
It meets my prayers for 15 months past. How thankful I 
am that I burned my "Message Book" about three years 
ago. It was an idol, and a truly Satanic snare. 

This TOWER explains several circumstances in my life 
that have greatly puzzled me, and seems to add clearness to 
the exposition of the Spiritism pamphlet, or makes the 
impress deeper. I certainly have been tormented with the 
"voices" not a little. 

I certainly will keep as far away as possible from all 
such "voices." Their words were as distinct as possible, 
and as beautifully expressed oftentimes as those spoken of 
in the clipping. Praise God for the precious blood shed on 
Calvary, and the glorious liberty wherewith it hath made us 
free. 

And now even Telepathy, which has generally been a 
great delight to me, I am willing to put aside as evil, unless 
it be that good angels do carry messages within the Church. 
But I would rather deny myself this pleasure also, in such 
measure as I have practised it, than to meddle for one instant 
longer with any of these Satanic snares and deceptions. 
"Tho from my life He seems to take 
What I thought wholly blest,"— 

There is no question but I will to love the Truth. It is 

R3679 : page 367 

worth all it costs. And "tribulation worketh patience," 
one of the necessities in the Christian character spectrum. 
I see more and more how the Adversary's deceptions cater to 
human impatience as well as self-esteem, love of ease, avarice, 
etc. It requires patience to think of our buried relatives and 
friends as "sleeping" till the Millennial morning: that is 
why Spiritism has such a mighty hold on the world, even 
unconsciously. 

I pray the Lord for patience, and for self-possession in 
Christ. And I will have them (D.V.). I praise his name for 
this WATCH TOWER and enclose a list of 15 names and 
addresses to which I would like copies sent. Would that these 
could see with me the Almighty Arm beating back the hosts 
of the foe from Christ's little flock. "Thus far and no farther!" 
I praise God for his salvation. Resp'y, A. L. D. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:- 



I believe that you will rejoice with us to know that the 
truth is doing its work over the head of all opposition. 
While we know that the truth will prevail, yet it gladdens 
our hearts to see some outward manifestations. So I write 
to tell you about two Lutheran ministers that I have met 
recently in this city, who are very much interested in the 
truth. They are both still preaching in Babylon. One of 
them I have talked with but little. The other has told his 
people that if they did not want him to preach the truth 
he would give up his position. So we know it will only be 
a short time until he will have to look for other opportunities; 
but he is rejoicing. He said before he got the 
truth he was like a man with a pocket full of nuts and nothing 
to crack them with; but Brother Russell furnished the nutcracker 
and he was now feasting. So we praise the Lord 
for the assurance that they who hunger and thirst after 
righteousness shall be filled. 

Yours in the Redeemer, H. W. DICKERSON,-Colporteur. 



GENTLEMEN:- 

Some little time ago, on opening my mail, I came across a 
curious looking envelope, advertising MILLENNIAL DAWN, 
or "The Plan of the Ages," a beautiful and remarkable book, 
explaining the Bible, and especially interesting to Bible students. 
I would not have noticed this envelope, had it not 
been for the unusual amount of reading matter on it. 

I enclose 50 cents herewith, in payment of this wonderful 
book, bound in cloth. If this is not sufficient, please advise 
at your earliest convenience. 

I am a Bible student, and will be glad to get such a book 
as this, as it will explain many things which I have read in 
the Bible and did not understand. 

Please reply as soon as possible, and oblige, 

Very truly yours, C. B.— Mich. 



page 367 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Two sisters from W , Pa., who spent most of last 

winter here at this boarding house, went home some weeks 
ago. In a letter just received by my landlady from one of 
them she sends me this message: "We are lending the books 
on 'Hell' to our friends. We discuss the matter and already 
there are four of us convinced that Mr. Russell is right on 
that question and some others. I shall have to send for 
some more books. We have great discussions on religious 
questions. Father calls us heretics, but we believe we are 
escaping from heresies." 

Your brother in Christ, J. H. MOFFATT,-Florida. 



R3679 : page 367 

EDITOR OF ZION'S WATCH TOWER:- 

On page 85 of March 15th you speak of Noah's Ark and 
its dimensions. So far as the proportions go the Danish naval 
architect is correct, 300 x 50 x 30, but these are not feet, as 
would appear from the reading, but cubits. The cubit was 
the measure from the point of a man's elbow to the point of 
his middle finger. This was never less than eighteen inches, 
while the Jewish sacred cubit was an handbreadth more, 
amounting to 21.88 inches. Thus reckoning the smaller cubit 
in Noah's Ark, we have a vessel of the following dimensions: 
547.3 feet long, 91.2 feet wide, 54.72 feet high, and of a cubic 
capacity of 2,730,782 feet, tonnage 81.052. 

A shipbuilder in Holland built a large model of the ark 
in 1670 or 1760, and found its proportions eminently fitted 
for carrying an enormous load with great safety through 
rough waters. What else should we expect when we know 
that its plan came direct to Noah from God? 

ROBERT RANSON,-Florida. 



DEAR FRIENDS :- 

I would like to express my feeling of deep gratitude for 
what food I have received in reading the DAWN and TOWER. 
Four years ago I commenced to read these publications and 
have read them over at least twice during that time, but my 
eyesight failing me I have not been able to read at all for the 
last eighteen months. I am so thankful to my dear heavenly 
Father that my sight was spared to me long enough to 
learn of the great plan of salvation. It has been such a comfort 
and blessing to me that words fail to express my deep 
sense of gratitude to my heavenly Father for opening the 
eyes of my understanding to some of the deep things as revealed 
in his Word. May God's blessing rest upon you in 
your efforts to spread the Truth among his people. 

Yours in Christ, C. C. STRONG. -Cal. 



A dear brother less than two years old in the Truth 
writes:— 

"Paul tells us plainly in Galatians 5:20-22 that those 
who practice, among other things, 'enmities, quarrels, 
jealousies, resentments, altercations, factions, sects, envyings, 
cannot inherit the Kingdom of God. This brings us 
one and all face to face with a most serious question, Are 
we— am I— practicing any of these things?" 

Evidently the dear brother's mind is being "exercised 
by use." Would that we all might keep his question well in 
mind and see that we learn to answer it correctly, as the Lord 
would approve: Yes. 



page 369 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXVI. DECEMBER 15, 1905. No. 24 



CONTENTS. 

Tampa Convention and En Route 371 

Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society's Annual 

Report 372 

The Messenger of Jehovah 376 

The Christ in the Flesh— the Elijah 377 

The Day of His Coming 378 

"I the Lord Change Not" 379 

"Prove Me Now Herewith" 380 

Immanuel and His Dominion 380 

Multiplication by Resurrection 381 

How It will be Brought About 382 

Upon the Throne of David 383 

Public Ministries of the Truth 370 

page 370 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



YOUNG'S AND STRONG'S CONCORDANCES. 



There is a little "war" of prices at present, and so long as it 
lasts we can sell these valuable works at specially low prices, 
viz.: Young's, in cloth binding, at $4.00, plus postage, 55c. 
Strong's at $3.00, plus 65c postage. The latter is a wonderful 
bargain. We scarcely expect the prices to go lower. 

THE PITTSBURGH DISPATCH. 



Most of the subscriptions to the Pittsburgh Dispatch expired 
with November. Please note the date tag and let us know if 
you wish us to renew for you. We have a special clubbing arrangement 
by which we can supply this cosmopolitan newspaper 
for $3.00 per year, or just half price. This supersedes previous 
notices. The Dispatch proposes more space for Brother 
Russell's discourses every Monday hereafter. 

APPLICATIONS FOR PILGRIM VISITS. 



These visits are without charge. Those desiring them, 
however small the company are requested to answer as many 
as possible of the questions propounded in our issue of May 1 
last. Pilgrims frequently pass right through places where, we 
afterwards learn, meetings would have been very much enjoyed. 
The service might have been rendered at practically no 
cost to the Society, and the friends were merely a little too 
timid about writing, thinking their request would have no attention 
because of the smallness of their numbers. Do not allow 
this to hinder you. Write at once, if you desire such 
meetings. 

ALLEGHENY CHURCH MEETINGS. 



Preaching and divine worship every Sunday afternoon in 
Bible House Chapel, No. 610 Arch St., at 3 p.m. At 7.30 p.m. 
Bible Study, preceded by Praise Service. The pastor, Brother 
Russell, is usually at home and the speaker on the first and 
third Sundays of each month, except as Convention Notices of 
next column may modify. On other dates brethren of ability 
will address the Church. 

Cottage meetings for prayer and testimony on Wednesday 
evenings; and Dawn Circles for Bible study on Monday, Thursday 
and Friday evenings— various localities. These meetings 
are interesting, and spiritually profitable. 

MEETINGS IN LONDON, ENGLAND. 



Every Sunday at 3 p.m. a Bible Study, and at 6.30 p.m. 
preaching service, under the auspices of the Society, at 24 
Eversholt St., N.W. 



R3679 : page 371 

TAMPA CONVENTION AND EN ROUTE. 

WE had a most auspicious start: About twenty-five 
of the Allegheny friends surprised us by 
appearing at the station and, as our train departed, 
singing "God be with you till we meet again." 
Their zeal cheered us greatly. 

En route to Richmond, Va., we accepted an invitation 
to speak at the funeral of a dear brother in the 
Truth at Lonaconing, Md., where the Methodist chapel 
was placed at our disposal. An audience of about 250 
gave closest attention to our review of Death and its 
cause, and our hope of a resurrection of the dead by 
virtue of our Lord's great sacrifice, "the Just for the 
unjust"— "a ransom for all." 

Richmond, Va., was reached on time, Washington 
brethren joining us en route. The One Day Convention 
was pronounced quite a success. It drew friends of the 
Truth to the number of about sixty for the afternoon 
session, and afforded us sweet privileges in public and 
private communion with these in things concerning the 
Kingdom and its ransom-founded hopes. 

The evening session for the public had been 
well advertised by the dear friends, with the result 
that the large Masonic Temple was crowded, 
about 900 being present. Our discourse on "To Hell 
and Back" was listened to with deep attention, and we 
hope some day to learn of good impressions and some 
fruitage to our Master's praise. 

Columbia, S.C., was our next stop. We had a prolonged 
visit and private talk of several hours with interested 
friends of Columbia and vicinity— mainly a 
question meeting; and in the evening a public session 
with about 225 present— excellent for the size of the 
city and the fact that it was on a week night. 

Jacksonville, Florida, was our fourth stop. The 
"Christian Church" edifice was placed at our disposal 
and we had an enjoyable time with a good attendance 
for a week-day afternoon, about 200 being present. The 
evening session was informal and brief at the home of 
one of the brethren. A goodly number saw us to the 
depot— some of them likewise bound for 

THE TAMPA CONVENTION. 



At Tampa, Florida, the city officials secured for us 
free the principal auditorium of the city— The Casino. 
The dear friends had put forth every effort and the Convention 
was a great success— although, as we had anticipated 
the attendance of friends was much smaller 
than we usually have at our General Conventions. That 
district is but sparsely settled, and thus far has comparatively 
few of "this way." In the sessions of the three 
days Brothers Owens, Moffatt, Bundy and the Editor 
were the speakers. 

Our largest meeting, the one publicly advertised, 
was held on Sunday afternoon when about 500 to 600 
were present. Some good was done, we feel sure, especially 
to the household of faith— the lack of numbers 
being made up for by the zeal of those in attendance. 
The wind-up was a Love-Feast. 

St. Petersburg, the health resort, lies just across the 
Tampa Bay, and although it was not on our list we 
yielded to the requests of friends from there and spent 
Monday with them— a conference of the interested, from 
the time of the boat's arrival until its departure— from 
10.30 to 4.30, with a half-hour's intermission for a 
luncheon served in the G.A.R. Hall, in which our session 
was held. We pray that love and zeal and fruits 
of the Spirit in us all may result. 

Atlanta, Ga., was our next appointment, but unfortunately 
our train was nearly two hours late at Jacksonville 
and missed connections there. We greatly regretted 
the misfortune, and trust that in some manner, 
as yet unknown to us, the disappointment of our dear 
friends at Atlanta may be overruled of the Lord to 
their profit. 

Birmingham, Ala., was reached in due season. 
Friends met us at the depot and conducted us to a 

R3680 : page 371 

splendid dinner, after which we repaired to the place of 
meeting. About 300 were present, crowding the hall. 
We addressed them on the announced topic, "To Hell 
and Back." Excellent attention was given by the audience, 
which was a very intelligent one. The Lord alone 
knows the results. We trust that some now see the divine 
Word more clearly than before, and that in some 
hearts and minds the knowledge of the glory of God's 
character shines more brightly than previously. 

The evening meeting was for the interested only 
and lasted until train time, almost all going with us to 
the train, where they joined in singing "God be with 
you till we meet again." Our visit to Birmingham will 
long be remembered with pleasure. 

Nashville, Tenn., was reached the next morning. 
The Convention met in the principal hall of the city, 

R3680 : page 372 



Watkins' Hall. It was Thanksgiving Day, and that 
was the key-note of the opening session, which at first 
was a testimony meeting. Its closing hour was turned 
over to Bro. Russell, who rehearsed some of our special 
causes for thanksgiving. 

The afternoon session was for the public and was 
well attended. The hall, seating nearly or quite 1000, 
was full, some standing, while some were unable to gain 
admittance. The friends surely labored hard for the 
gathering, and we know that they got part of their reward 
in seeing so many of their neighbors and friends 
present to hear the "good tidings of great joy which 
shall be to all people" in God's due time. The remainder 
of the reward waits for our Master's word— "Well 
done, good and faithful servants; enter into the joys of 
your Lord." 

The evening meeting was for the interested only, 
the topic being, "The secret of the Lord is with them 
that fear [reverence] him, and he will shew them his 
covenant." About a dozen of the dear friends accompanied 
us to the depot to exchange greetings, "Goodbye" 
and "God bless you." 

Knoxville, Tenn., was our next stop. Our train arrived 
two hours later than schedule, but this did not prevent 
about a dozen dear brethren being at the depot to 
grasp our hand and bid us "Welcome to Knoxville!" 

Soon we were at the Public Hall. About half an 
hour was spent as a testimony meeting; then we spoke 
for an hour or more on the freemasonry of the Bible, 
etc. 

The afternoon session for the public drew an audience 
of about 300, some of whom expressed themselves 
as seeing more clearly than ever the goodness and justice 
of God— his severity in the weight of the curse and 
his mercy in providing through Jesus for its ultimate 
removal. 

The evening meeting was held in the Park Street 
Christian Church: about 200 were present. Half an 
hour was devoted to the answering of questions, and 
then at 7.30 came the evening discourse on "The Oath-Bound 
Covenant." The service closed at nine o'clock, 
leaving time for us to reach our train bound for Allegheny. 
Ten brethren accompanied us to the depot, 
where we repeated our "goodbyes" and hopes for 
another meeting— soon or in the Kingdom. The attendance 
from suburban towns was good. 



R3680 : page 372 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY. 
-DEC. 1, 1904, TO DEC. 1, 1905.- 
STRICTLY speaking, according to the terms of our 



Society's charter, its membership consists only 
of those who have subscribed ten dollars or more 
at one time to its funds, each ten-dollar subscription representing 
one voting share. Such voting shares are regularly 
credited in the names of the donors. And the 
arrangements of "Good Hopes" for a year are such that 
those donations during the year amounting to ten dollars 
or more, though paid at different times, would be credited 
as though paid at once. In fact, therefore, our annual 
reports are for these regular members of the Society. 
However, we recognize all WATCH TOWER subscribers 
as being members of the Society in a general sense- 
in the sense that they are interested in the work that is 
being carried on, and that they participate in it to the extent 
of the opportunities at their hand. 

In the Lord's providences our talents vary, some having 
more, some less, of the money talent; others, who have 
comparatively little of this talent, possessing talents of 
time and opportunity for the circulation of the Truth. 
We are sure, therefore, that from the Lord's standpoint we 
may properly consider all who are truly his and walking 
in the light of Present Truth as being members of the 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY-associated and 
co-laboring financially and otherwise for the promulgation 
of the glorious message, with its light upon all the features 
of the divine plan— past, present and future. We are glad 
then to suppose that all of this class are deeply interested 
in every effort that is being put forth in the name of the 
Lord to serve his cause, and that all such at the closing of 
each year feel a deep interest in what our reports will show 
as respects the results of our cooperation. 

These reports are not presented with a view to boast 
before the world or each other of what we are doing. The 
world really knows little about us and cares less, because, 
as the Master suggested, we are not of the world, even as 
he was not of the world. These annual reports are stimulating 
to ourselves, encouraging and helpful. Just so 
every business man likes to take an account of stock at the 
close of each year, and to ascertain just how much his business 
has increased or decreased, just what profits he has 
made or what losses he has sustained. He does not do 
this for the benefit of the public, but for his own satisfaction 
and for the guidance of his affairs during the new 
year. 

YOUR INTEREST APPRECIATED 

We make up our accounts to December first instead 
of January first, because it makes no real difference where 
the year begins and ends, and because this will give you 
all the desired information at the time that it will be most 
interesting and acceptable to you— at the customary time 
for all to make their good resolutions for the new year. 
Amongst the good resolutions and plans for every year we 
want to put first those which affect our own spiritual interests, 
and, secondly, those which have an influence upon 



the spiritual interests of others. And indeed these interests 
unite, because whoever would grow spiritually must 
not only feed but also exercise the strength and grace 
already received in the interests of others. 

As the years roll by, and we realize that those engaged 
in the service have done practically all that they have been 
able to do, we incline to wonder if the succeeding year 
would show as good results. Yet each year, all the way 
back, seems to have shown constant increase of work in 
every direction. And from one standpoint this is certainly 
what we ought to expect; for even though the interested 
ones in previous years may have done all in their 

R3680 : page 373 

power to forward the cause, to serve the Truth, to glorify 
our Father and Savior, yet each either finds others freshly 
interested or becoming more deeply interested who should 
be and continually are seeking for opportunities whereby 
they also may serve the Truth. These rightly say to themselves, 
"It is the eleventh hour, and I must strive by all 
means to use my talents in whatever opportunities the 
Lord will permit me to find." These are coming nobly 
to the front in their departments of the service, and we 
frequently remark that some of the newly interested seem 
to grasp the Truth and to enter into its service with greater 
zeal than some who have possessed it for a longer time. 

The explanation of this no doubt is in part that we 
are drawing nearer to the end of the harvest time, and 
that those whom the Lord is now admitting to a knowledge 
of Present Truth were already in training for it to 
some extent. Furthermore, they have a fresh blessing 
because of their recent reading of the DAWNS. In our experience 
some of the dear friends forget a great deal of 
what they have already read, and thus lose proportionately 
the zeal, the inspiration which they enjoyed at first, while 
the various features of Truth were more freshly in their 
memories. Our general advice to those who give evidence 
of becoming slack in their zeal, or weary in well doing, or 
faint by the way through manifold trials and discouragements, 
is that they read afresh the entire six volumes of 
the MILLENNIAL DAWN series. 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTIONS 

We estimate that the WATCH TOWER subscription 
list stands first as a barometer showing the general interests 
of the cause. Last year showed an increase of our list 
of about two thousand, our present list being about 
22,000. We are glad that there is this increase, but it 
by no means satisfies us. We feel sure that if our list contained 
the names of all the interested ones the number 
would run up to 30,000 or more. We have done all we 
know how to do to secure the interest of the dear friends 
whom we have every reason to believe would be blessed 
by regular visits of the TOWER. Seemingly we must leave 



the matter in your hands. If you receive a benefit from 
the reading of the TOWER, you surely will feel interested 
in helping others to a share in the same blessings and comforts 
and assistances. 

Of the 22,000 subscribers $12,128.00 were received 
last year. The other 10,000 represent some who advise 
us that they are of the Lord's poor, who cannot afford to 
pay for the paper; others who ask for it on credit, saying 
that they prefer to have it so rather than free, with the understanding 
that they will pay at some time in the future 
if ever their circumstances permit. Still others have said 
nothing about the matter, and as they are old-time subscribers 
we hold their names on our list for at least a year 

R3681 : page 373 

after the time paid for, fearing lest a discontinuance of the 
TOWER should result in an utter quenching of the evidently 
glimmering flame of their love and zeal for the cause. 
We could wish that they would at least write us yearly of 
their desire to have the paper continued. 

The amount of money received on the WATCH TOWER 
account was sufficient to meet all of its expenses, and we 
are particularly satisfied with this, and reiterate here what 
we have previously said, namely, that we would like to 
have on our list the names of all interested in the harvest 
message, whether they are able to pay $1.00 a year for it 
or not. It is sent with the best of good will, not only to 
those who request it on credit, but also to those who ask 
for it free without hope of ever paying. We wish that 
every TOWER reader would consider himself a special agent 
for the paper, and assure all the interested of the facts 
here set forth, and urge upon them that they make request 
for the paper, either for the money or on credit or as the 
Lord's poor, that our list may be as nearly representative 
as possible of all who are in the Truth. These requests, 
remember, should be made yearly, and are necessary as a 
compliance with the United States postal laws. 

DISTRIBUTION OF TRACTS 

We place the tract distribution second amongst the 
evidences of the prosperity of the harvest work, not only 
because it represents a work that is being done amongst 
Christian people for the finding and garnering of the wheat 
of this Gospel age, but particularly because it represents 
the deep interest of those already enjoying the Truth, 
which leads to their activity in this branch of the service. 
We may be sure that those who contribute time and influence, 
as well as those who contribute money in the tract 
work, possess considerable of the evangel spirit— the missionary 
spirit— the spirit of love for God and for our fellows, 
who have not yet been blessed to the same degree as 
we in respect to the true light on the divine Word— the 
plan of the ages and the harvest work. 

It means something that without fairs, suppers, or 



prizes, or the publication of names, money is sent us for 
this work. It means something, too, that voluntarily men 
and women, active in the affairs of life, set apart a portion 
of the week for tract distribution. That while endeavoring 
to be faithful in all the duties and obligations of the 
home and family, and while opposed by the spirit of the 
world in every sense of the word, these are willing to give 
up their time and influence to minister the Truth, in the 
hope of reaching the eyes and hearts of some who are the 
Lord's true followers— in the hope of communicating to 
them such a blessing as has already come to their own 
hearts by a clearer appreciation of the divine plan. 

We are pleased that this year's reports show a marked 
increase in the number of tract pages circulated by you all. 
The figures are so large as to be beyond the comprehension 
of the majority of people— for this is so of all calculations 
running into millions. From the itemized statement 
you will see that the total distribution of tracts during the 
year amounted to 183,992,588 tract pages. Comparison 
shows that this is more than 56,000,000 in excess 
of last year's enormous output. It evidently means, either 
that a larger number of the dear friends have participated 
in this work, in which the Lord has seemed so greatly to 
bless the laborers, or else it means that those who have 

R3681 : page 374 

been laboring have been doing accomplishing greater 
work than hitherto. 

We advise the dear friends in every quarter to engage 
in this "volunteer work" of distributing tracts systematically 
from house to house in every city in which there are 
lovers of the Present Truth. And we advise the extending 
of your efforts to adjacent cities and towns where there are 
none in the Present Truth to serve them. Our experience 
is that those who sacrifice something in this way to raise 
up the standard for the people, and let the light of Truth 
shine out to the glory of the Father, receive a great 
blessing in their own hearts, a strengthening and deepening 
of their own faith and love. There is no compensation 
except that which the Lord has promised. The Society 
merely provides the sample tracts free to all who will 
promise to faithfully circulate them, the only stipulation 
being that the person be a subscriber to ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER either for pay or on the free list. All WATCH 
TOWER subscribers are also subscribers to the Old Theology 
Quarterly, for the two club together for the price of 
$1.00 per year, and all subscribers are welcome to extra 
copies for use as samples in any quantity. 

We are pleased to be able to inform you that for some 
reason we have had a much larger number of responses from 
the tract distribution than in any previous year. We are 
not certain how this should be accounted for. Possibly it is 
because the topics presented in the last distribution were 
more attractive, or possibly because the work of previous 
years has helped to awaken the minds of the people, and 



that now they are more ready to inquire for other reading 
matter. Or it may be the general trend of events in Christendom 
today— toward Higher Criticism, Infidelity, etc.— 
is awakening larger numbers of the Lord's people to think 
for themselves, and to be ready and hungry for the spiritual 
food which through these tracts we endeavor to supply 
to them to excite their appetites for more. In any event 
you will rejoice with us that there have been much larger 
returns in inquiries for reading matter than have resulted 
from the tract distribution of any previous year. 

THE VOLUMES OF DAWN CIRCULATED 

All cannot be colporteurs, but amongst those who are 
continually becoming newly interested in the Present 
Truth a certain proportion are able and glad to engage in 
the colporteur service— in the circulating of the MILLENNIAL 
DAWN BIBLE STUDY series. And the increasing 
numbers of the colporteurs means an increasing number of 
books circulated. We should expect that the sales of 
DAWNS would be larger year by year, and this expectation 
has been fully verified, this year being no exception to the 
rule. The output last year exceeded all previous records, 
being over 254,000; but from the figures shown in the 
summary of this report you will see that we have exceeded 
last year's numbers considerably. We find that there is 
practically no limit to the number of books which we can 
publish, nor apparently any limit to the number that can 
be sold when the books are properly introduced to the 
public. 

The question before us respecting next year's output 
is therefore narrowed down to the number of colporteurs 
willing to engage in the work and their efficiency in it. 
We do not recommend any to engage in it who have family 
obligations and responsibilities, but all who are of reasonably 
good address and who have only themselves to 
care for may certainly succeed in this work, and co-labor 
with the Lord in the gathering of the wheat of the present 
harvest as well as in the development of their own hearts 
and characters along spiritual lines. More depends upon 
the method of approaching people and presenting the works 
than is generally supposed. We have gotten out some 
new suggestions for colporteurs which are proving very 
helpful, not only to new beginners but also to many who 
have been long in the work. This is in line with the Master's 
suggestion that we should be "as wise as serpents and 
harmless as doves." 

THE CORRESPONDENCE DEPARTMENT 

This department alone seems to show unfavorably as 
compared with last year. Notwithstanding the larger 
number of letters from the disinterested our total receipts 
of letters were fewer than in 1904. This means that our 
friends have written to us less frequently. We trust that 
it does not signify coldness or loss of interest in the Truth 



and in the work. Indeed the foregoing reports all indicate 
that your interest in the Truth was never greater than 
now. We must, assume, therefore, that the fewer letters 
received imply either that you are becoming more settled, 
more established in the Truth, and have therefore less occasion 
for making inquiries respecting it, or that, seeing the 
general pressure of the work, you fear to encroach upon 
our time, or that you are learning better each year how to 
answer your own questions through the use of the DAWNS, 
TOWER references in the Wide Margin Bibles, and through 
the index at its back and the index in the back of each 
volume of the DAWN series. 

Whatever be the cause for the decline in the number 
of letters received from you we are glad to bear testimony 
to the fact that the general tenor of the thousands of letters 
received indicates clearly, unmistakably, that a good 
work of grace is going on amongst the TOWER readers. 
The letters we received are not merely those indicating 
that curiosity in the Truth has been aroused or is growing 
or is being satisfied by the reading matter, but they 
indicate that the fruits and graces of the Spirit are being 
developed in your hearts, and that efforts are daily being 
put forth to these ends. Along this line are the majority 
of the requests that we remember them in prayer— not so 
much for temporal interests as for spiritual welfare and all 
the experiences and testings and developments which the 
wisdom and love of God sees necessary. We rejoice that 
this is so. 

We can account more easily for the decreased number 
of the letters sent out: First, we were for a part of the 
year short of help in that department, and, second, we 
discontinued the sending of individual postal cards announcing 
the visits of the pilgrim brethren, and instead, 

R3682 : page 375 

during the past year and more, have been sending letters 
of advice to the elders of the churches or to those through 
whom the requests for pilgrim visits were made. Let us 
assure you afresh that we are always glad to have your letters, 
and glad to answer them as explicitly as possible. If sometimes 
the reply seems to be brief, merely references to 
DAWNS and TOWERS where you can find your questions 
answered at greater length, this is so not merely for the 
saving of time and our convenience but largely because it 
will be to your interest to find the full dissertations on the 
topic already in print, and also to your advantage to learn 
that nearly every question that may arise in your mind has 
an answer already provided, which may be found through 
the indexes in the back of the DAWN volumes and in the 
more general index in the back of the special Bibles published 
a few years ago. 

In this connection we remark that we have abandoned 
the thought of getting out a new edition of the Wide Margin 
Bible with special references, and instead we hope to 
be able to announce sometime during the year a topical 



index with references to the Scriptures, DAWNS and TOWERS, 
and a Scriptural index showing where the various 
passages are treated or referred to in the DAWN volumes 
and in the WATCH TOWERS of the past ten years. 

THE PILGRIM DEPARTMENT 

The evidences multiply which prove that the Lord's 
guidance was with us in the establishment of the pilgrim 
department of the harvest work. The dear brethren engaged 
in this branch of the service are such as we believe 
have special fitness and qualifications for the work. Their 
visits to the little gatherings of the Lord's people in various 
parts are not only interesting and refreshing to both, 
but we believe very profitable. The meetings held by 
these pilgrims in no sense of the word interfere with the 
Bible studies and other meetings by which the little gatherings 
are locally progressing and developing, but coming 
not too frequently they are in the nature of special boons, 
special blessings, special refreshment and assistances to all. 
The dear friends often write us of how much they enjoy 
such visits, and of their desire that the stay of the pilgrim 
be increased, but as a rule we think it better that each little 
company of the Lord's people should learn how to help 
themselves, using the Bible studies, DAWN studies, etc., 
thus drawing out all the local talent possessed and using it 
generally. 

They also tell us how much they appreciate the ministries 
of the pilgrims, and uniformly the testimony is that the 
last one is the best, the most helpful. The secret of the matter 
probably lies in the fact that month by month and year 
by year we are growing more and more in grace and knowledge 
of the Lord, and thus growing also in the ability to 
appreciate the Truth by whomsoever presented. It is the 
Truth that grows richer and better, and gradually we come 
to appreciate this fact, so that we can rejoice in and be 
refreshed by the water of life, whether it be sent to us by 
the Lord in a tin, earthen or silver vessel. 

This pilgrim service is not in any sense of the word 
intended to be a bar or hindrance to individual efforts to 
serve the Truth on the part of any of the Lord's people 
anywhere who have a knowledge of the divine plan and 
are blessed with some talent in the clear presentation of it 
to others. We bid all such God speed, and wish them 
success in doing with their might what their hands find to 
do. We pray for them divine guidance. Since we cannot 
know particularly all of the dear friends in various 
quarters who are thus seeking to stir up their talents and 
to serve the Lord and his cause, it would not be appropriate 
for us to style them all pilgrims and to thus directly 
even give them the Society's endorsement. Whoever is 
announced as a preacher of the Truth by the Society must 
always be some one whose professions and character and 
doctrines are reasonably well known to us as thoroughly 
worthy of our recommendation. This does not imply that 
none others would be worthy, but does mean that the dear 



friends in various places where they meet with such will 

need to exercise a still greater degree of discrimination as 

respects their presentation of the divine plan. Not infrequently 

it is today as it was in olden times, when Aquila 

and Priscilla were able to instruct a public preacher, Apollos 

more particularly, in the way of the Lord.— 

Acts 18:25,26. 

For the foregoing reason, and because of the increasing 
numbers of the dear brethren in various parts who are 
seeking to use their talents and to serve the Lord in the 
giving of Chart lectures, etc., it is deemed best by the 
Society that henceforth none shall be announced as pilgrims 
under the Society's auspices except such as are giving 
their entire time to the pilgrim work, either as traveling 
pilgrims or in the office work at Allegheny, engaging 
in the pilgrim work on Sundays. 

Pilgrim Work Summary 

Total number "Pilgrims" 25 

" visits made 1,639 

" miles traveled in preaching tours 154,110 

" public meetings held 1,580 

" parlor meetings held with the interested.... 3,159 

NEWSPAPER HARVEST WORK 

Three newspapers of considerable circulation have 
been publishing "Brother Russell's" sermons weekly during 
the past year, besides which the friends in convention 
cities have secured special insertions in their local dailies. 
These combined represent over 3,000,000 sermons sent 
broadcast; and under divine Providence some results are 
apparent: more we shall hope to learn of on the other 
side the vail. 

We purpose a continuance of this and all the other 
departments of service as the Lord of the harvest may indicate 
to be his will by the opening or closing of the various 
doors of opportunity— financial and others. In our 
day the measure of opportunity for scattering the Truth is 
very nearly a question of the dollars at our disposal. We 
shall continue our course of making no appeals for money. 
The Lord can and will keep the throttle in his own hands 
and let on or diminish the financial steam as he wills, and 
as the interests of his "harvest work" demand. It is for 
him to stir the heart and loose purse strings and ours to 

R3682 : page 376 

serve faithfully as stewards in respect of whatever he entrusts 
to our care. 

HARVESTING IN FOREIGN LANDS 

This report includes practically all of the colporteur 
work and tract work in Great Britain and Australia, but 



it does not include the circulation of free tract matter in 
Germany, Sweden, Norway, Denmark, Switzerland, 
France, Italy. Some further statement of the work done 
in foreign countries may appear in a later issue. 

While much encouraged with the work done on the 
continent of Europe, we are still inclined to believe that 
in the Lord's providence the vast majority of those who 
would be most susceptible to the influence of Present 
Truth have been gathered out of those parts to America, 
where they are receiving the message in many respects under 
more favorable conditions. Thus, for instance, although 
the work in Germany is comparatively slow and 
uphill, the numbers who are upon the WATCH TOWER list 
who are of German descent, as indicated by their names, 
would probably be one-third of the entire number. The 
same is apparently true of Ireland, where a comparatively 
small number are interested, while the representatives of 
this nationality on the TOWER list is very considerable. 

SUMMARY OF THE YEAR'S OUTPUT 

Total number of DAWNS sold at or below cost 254,083 

(These were in various languages and all in cloth or leather 
bindings. DAWN I. in magazine form is included in the statement 
of TOWERS sent out.) 

Booklets sold at cost 28,606 

Total number of tracts of various kinds sent out.. 5,324,000 

Copies of English TOWERS sent out free, 318,492 

These tracts and TOWERS represent (in the usual form of stating 
such matters) tract pages 183,992,588 

These figures are far beyond the comprehension of the 
masses, but they signify an immense quantity. Under the 
Lord's blessing we trust seed has been planted which will 
bear much fruit to our Master's praise and to the profit of 
his true people. 

The "Volunteer" work has been carefully done over 
a wide territory, and we are receiving more responses by 
mail than from any previous effort. 

FINANCIAL SHOWING FOR 1905 

The financial showing seems small when compared with 
the work accomplished. That the work we are doing is 
very economically managed even our bitterest enemies will 
admit. They are continually wondering "where all the 
money comes from." They know something about the 
large sums donated and legacies left to other tract societies, 
supported by Christendom's millions, yet know also that 
our tracts and publications are seen everywhere, while those 
of other societies are rarely met with. The Lord's blessing 
and guidance and your faithful cooperation are all we 
boast. 

We are glad to be able to report that while the work 
as a whole has progressed, we have been enabled to reduce 



the deficit of last year by nearly one-half. We endeavored 
to cut the expenses more closely and to have a balance to 
the credit of the Fund, but always find it difficult to refrain 
from using the opportunities of serving the Truth 
which seem to offer. We hope to wipe out the deficit 
next year. 

In this connection it is proper to remember that the 
dear friends during the past year have been putting forth 
more energy than ever before in connection with One-Day 
Conventions: the securing of choice auditoriums and the 
liberal advertising of these conventions means a considerable 
expenditure of time and money— of money which 
otherwise doubtless would appear in the Tract Fund receipts. 
This implies, therefore, that really the amount contributed 
to the propaganda of Present Truth during the past year 
was much in excess of donations of previous years. 

R3683 : page 376 

Expenditures 1905. 

Deficit of 1904 $ 6,760.15 

Pilgrim Expenses 7,450.87 

Publishing of matter circulated free— including 

freights, postage, office expenses, etc 28,148.33 

Foreign Mission expenditures 10,843.08 



$53,202.43 
Receipts 1905. 

"Good Hopes" $27,609.22 

From Other Sources 21,640.48 

$49,249.70 



Deficit for 1905 $3,952.73 



All things considered, dearly beloved colaborers in 
the spread of the "good tidings of great joy," we have 
great cause for rejoicing in the results of our united labors 
as reapers under the guidance of the great Chief Reaper. 
Ere long he will say, we trust to many of us, "Well done, 
good and faithful servant; enter into the joys of your Lord. 
Thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee 
ruler over many things." 

Let patient endurance work faithfully in us. A few 
more days or weeks or years and our trials and testings 
will be over and we shall see his face. Be sober, be vigilant, 
be zealous. The Lord and his mighty angels look 
on to see us finish our race with joy and to encourage and 
assist us, and to cause that all things shall work out for our 
preparation for the Kingdom. 

"How light our trials then will seem, 



How short our pilgrim way, 

The life of earth a fitful dream, 

Dispelled by dawning day." 



R3683 : page 376 

THE MESSENGER OF JEHOVAH. 

-MALACHI3:1-12.-DECEMBER 17.- 

Golden Text:— "I will send my Messenger, 
and he shall prepare the way before me." 

MALACHI the prophet spoke for and represented 
Jehovah to the returned Israelites. His prophecy 
is supposed to have been written during the 
time of the absence of Nehemiah, the governor, at the 
court of the king of Persia. The interim of his absence 
is thought to have been one of religious declension, as 
the record shows a considerable stirring up and setting 
in order again after his return. Malachi's prophecy, 
therefore, may have served a double purpose— first to 
reprove and stimulate the people of that time, and 
secondly, and much more important, to give a general 
lesson applicable all the way down through the more 
than twenty centuries since. His prophecy is the last 
one of the canon of the Old Testament Scriptures, and 
closes with exhortations and promises respecting the 
coming of Messiah, for whom the Jewish people had at 
that time waited for more than fifteen centuries. 
The Golden Text is the key to this lesson. The 
Messenger whom Jehovah would send is the Christ— 
not alone the man Christ Jesus, who was pre-eminently 
the divine Messenger, but inclusively the whole Christ, 
the Church, the body, the under-associates, with Jesus 

R3683 : page 377 

the Head. As we have already pointed out, this Messenger 
appears in the two following capacities: First as 
the suffering one, the sacrificing one, and secondly as the 
anointed, glorified one, the King, the restorer. The work 
of suffering belongs to this Gospel age, the reign of glory 
belongs to the Millennial age. The suffering began 
with the consecration of our Lord and Master at the 
time of his baptism into death. The three and one-half 
years of his ministry were so much of his delivering himself 
into death or baptism into death, and that personal 
sacrifice was finished at Calvary. During this Gospel 
age, in harmony with the divine plan, our Redeemer has 
accepted a little flock from the world upon their renouncement 
of sin, their acceptance of him as their 
justification, and their consecration of their little all 
to his service, "to be dead with him that they might 



also live with him, to suffer with him that they might 
also reign with him." 

Throughout this Gospel age this overcoming class, 
the Church, has been faithfully laying down, sacrificing, 
life and earthly prospects and interests because of their 
love for the Lord and for the principles of righteousness 
which he represents. Thus this entire Gospel age has 
been one of suffering. As stated by the Apostle, the 
prophets foretold the "sufferings of Christ and the 
glory which should follow." (1 Pet. 1:11.) The glory of 
this great Christ, Head and body, cannot be ushered in 
until all of its sufferings are at an end. Hence, as the 
Apostle urges, it is for us to appreciate the situation and 
understand our privilege to "suffer with him," or "to 
be dead with him," "to fill up that which is behind of 
the afflictions of Christ," to "present our bodies living 
sacrifices, holy, acceptable to God, our reasonable 
service. "--2 Tim. 2:11,12; Col. 1:24; Rom. 12:1. 

THE CHRIST IN THE FLESH, THE ELIJAH. 

As we have already pointed out,* Christ in the 
flesh, Head and body, is the an ti typical Elijah, which 
does a work in the world preparing for and introductory 
to the reign of glory, of the same class, on the spirit 
plane as the Christ of glory, Head and body. The Messenger 
of Jehovah is the same, though under two different 
conditions: first in the flesh, in weakness, in ignominy, 
in sorrow and pain and dying, despised and rejected of 
men; second, in glory, crowned with all power in heaven 
and in earth, establishing righteousness and forcefully 
subduing and bringing into subjection to the divine will 
every creature and every thing, and triumphing so that 
finally, by the end of the Millennial age, this great 
Messenger— by the two parts of his service, first in suffering 
and second in glory— will accomplish all that the 
great Jehovah purposed respecting the race of mankind. 
By these two parts of his service this great and 
glorious Messenger will have prepared the way of 
Jehovah, will have made straight all the paths, all the 
arrangements, all the affairs for the establishment of the 
everlasting reign of the Kingdom of heaven. 

This brings us down to the period mentioned by 
the Apostle respecting Christ: he must reign until he 
shall have put all things under his [Jehovah's] feet. 
Then the Son, the Christ, having put all things into 
subjection, will himself be subject to the Father, that 
the Father may be the all in all of the universe (1 Cor. 15:28), 
though the Father graciously and generously 
provides that his Messenger— whose loyalty will have 
been so thoroughly demonstrated both by the sufferings 
of the present time and the glories of the age to 
come— that this glorious anointed One shall forever be 
associated with him in the everlasting Kingdom, as it is 
written, "Let all the angels of God reverence him."— 
Heb. 1:6. 



"THE MASTER WHOM YE SEEK." 

The word Lord in this second sentence is not in the 
Hebrew Jehovah, but signifies master, superior, teacher. 
Jehovah is represented as the speaker, who evidently 
refers to the Lord Jesus, assuring those who have the 
ear to hear and understand that the Messiah whom they 
seek shall suddenly come to his Temple. There is a 
difference between the significations of "quickly" and 
"suddenly." The Messiah did not quickly come to his 
Temple, for over two thousand years have elapsed since 
this prophecy was written, and the Temple itself ("which 
Temple ye are") is not yet complete, though the living 
stones for it have nearly all been chiseled and polished 
with the adversities of this Gospel age, and we are now 
living in the time when these living stones are being 
brought together on the other side of the veil. When 
the whole work shall have been completed, and the glory 
of the Lord shall fill the Temple, the prediction of this 
Scripture before us shall have its fulfilment. It will be 
a sudden matter in that the Jews, and others outside 
the Temple class, will be in such complete ignorance respecting 
the whole procedure that the results will be 
wholly unexpected, a time to them most sudden. 

In a certain sense or degree, in a shadowy sense, 
Jesus at his first advent offered himself to the Jewish 
people— "he came to his own and his own received him 
not,"— and he said to them, "Your house is left unto 
you desolate." (Matt. 23:38.) That entrance into Jerusalem, 
riding on an ass, hailed by the people with palm 
branches as the King, the Messiah, the Son of David, 
and his entering into the Temple and scourging therefrom 
the money-changers and merchants, was indeed 
a sudden matter, wholly unexpected by the people of 
that time, and to a certain extent it fulfilled this prophecy, 
because that people on that occasion were typical 
of the great presentation of himself as the King, due now 
to be accomplished on a higher plane, on a plane of 
glory, Jesus the Head now presenting himself, not 
merely as the King of Israel, but as the King of the world 
—not merely as the man Christ Jesus, but as the glorified 
Christ with his glorified body, which is the Church. 

THE OATH-BOUND COVENANT. 

Our Lord Jesus was indeed the Messenger or Servant 
of the Covenant, the one through whom the Covenant 
would have its fulfilment. The Abrahamic Covenant, 
the Oath-Bound Covenant, is referred to. It is the 
hope of natural Israel and the hope of spiritual Israel, 
"which hope we have as an anchor to our souls, sure and 
steadfast, within the veil." (Heb. 6:19.) 

The Messenger or Servant of that Covenant is the 
one through whom its provisions will be accomplished, 
namely, the seed of Abraham— "which seed is Christ." 



(Gal. 3:16.) Again, we see that this seed has its two developments, 

one in the flesh, in suffering ignominy, 

the other in the spirit, in power and great glory— the one 

to mediate the Covenant by offering the sacrifice of 

atonement, the other to execute the gracious provisions 

of that Covenant, made possible by the atoning sacrifice. 

The sufferings of Christ sealed or ratified this Covenant, 

and made it possible for him to be the Mediator of it, 

and to extend through that Covenant blessings to the 



*See Millennial Dawn, Vol. II., Chap. viii. 

R3684 : page 378 

entire human family, who were under the curse and 
who are mentioned in the Covenant, "all the families 
of the earth." 

Again we note that in the divine plan the "Church," 
the "saints," the "very elect," the "little flock," the 
"Bride," is associated by the Lord with both phases of 
this work, "in the sufferings of this present time and in 
the glories that shall follow." It requires the work of 
this entire Gospel age to seal the New Covenant. The 
New Covenant is to benefit and bless Israel after the 
flesh and all the families of the earth; its provisions are 
the forgiveness of sins, the renewing of a right heart in 
all those who desire to come into harmony with the 
Lord and a restitution to them of all that were lost 
through the original transgression and its curse. As a 
result of this operation of this New Covenant there shall 
be no more curse, and tears shall be wiped from off all 
faces, and there shall be no more sighing and no more 
dying and no more pain, for the former things shall have 
passed away.— Rev. 21:4. 

JOINT-HEIRS WITH HIM. 

The Church, the Bride of Christ, is made partaker 
reckonedly, by faith, of the benefits and blessings of 
that New Covenant; justification is reckoned as restitution, 
although not actually restored or perfected. 
The sins of the believer are covered and the consecrated 
ones are reckoned as new creatures, even 
though they still tabernacle in imperfect flesh. The 
acceptance of the Bride of Christ is not under 
the New Covenant but under the original Abrahamic 
Covenant, not to be part of those who will be blessed by 
the seed but to be associates and joint-heirs with Christ 
as members of the seed. This the Apostle distinctly 
points out, saying, "If ye be Christ's, then are ye 
Abraham's seed and heirs according to the promise." 
(Gal. 3:29.) If we are heirs according to that Abrahamic 
promise it means that we are members of the seed 
class, and that our great mission is the blessing of all 



the families of the earth. A certain amount of this 
blessing comes to the families of the earth during the 
time of our sacrificing, namely, the reflected or refracted 
light of the glory of God enjoyed by us through his 
Spirit; but the great bulk of the blessing for Israel after 
the flesh, and for all the families of the earth, waits 
until the seed shall have been completed, until the change 
from a body of humiliation to a body of glory, until 
divested of the imperfections of the present and clothed 
upon with the glory, honor and immortality of the 
divine nature, to which we are heirs through our Lord 
Jesus. --2 Pet. 1:4. 

"WHOM YE DELIGHT IN." 

The Jews had exulted and delighted in the promise 
of the coming Messiah for centuries. They were delighting 
in this great promise and the hopes attached 
to it at the very time the Redeemer was in their midst 
and they knew him not and crucified him. They are 
still delighting in this promise of the Messiah— yea, the 
whole world has caught to a large extent the infection, 
and is hoping and waiting for "the Desire of all Nations" 
(Haggai 2:7) that then shall come, although they associate 
with the gracious hope and promise many misconceptions 
and gross error. 

When Messiah's Kingdom shall be established, 
invisible to men— when its reign shall begin, after it shall 
have reached the point of putting down sin, after the 
great time of trouble shall have humbled mankind, 
after the reign of righteousness shall have been thoroughly 
established— it will prove to be the desire of all 
nations, the delight of all nations. The Lord knows 
just what the world wants, but the poor world at the 
present time is blind through sin, ignorance and superstition, 
misconceptions, etc., and must learn its lesson 
and thus be prepared for the blessing which the Lord 
is preparing for it. 

"THE DAY OF HIS COMING." 

"But who may abide the day of his coming? and 
who shall stand when he appeareth? For he is like a 
refiner's fire and like fullers' soap, and he shall sit as a 
refiner and purifier of silver, and he shall purify the sons 
of Levi and purge them as gold and silver, and they 
shall offer unto the Lord offerings of righteousness." 

Ah! there it is. The world is anxious for the blessing, 
but realizes not to what extent the inbred sin is incompatible 
with the reign of righteousness which it 
desires, and in which is the great blessing God has 
promised. Before the blessings come, the day of wrath, 
the "fire of God's jealousy," must pass upon the world. 
It is not to be a fire merely to destroy but specially to 
purify; it is not to be a literal fire but a symbolical fire, 
following which the Lord will turn to the people a pure 



language, a pure message, a clear declaration of the 
divine will and plan of salvation. (Zeph. 3:8,9.) 

While this Messenger will serve the world as an instructor, 
as the antitype of Elijah, reproving sin and 
seeking to bring the world into harmony with God, and 
succeeding in finding only the Israelites indeed, there 
will come an end to this work when the little flock all 
have been found and when their purifying and chastisement 
will be over. The first work of the Messenger of 
the Covenant on the plane of glory will be a work of 
judgment— indeed the entire work of the Millennial 
age is to be a judging of the world in righteousness 
—punishing each sin promptly on its committal 
and rewarding every effort for righteousness 
promptly with blessings and favors. Under that reign 
of righteousness the whole world will have fullest opportunity 
for reconciliation with God, and those who 
will not accept the reconciliation will be utterly destroyed 
from amongst the people.— Acts 3:23. 

"AS A REFINING FIRE." 

The beginning of the judgment will be especially 
upon the sons of Levi. The Levites represented the 
household of faith, who have made a consecration of 
themselves to the Lord. A certain class of these Levites, 
termed in the Scriptures "more than conquerors," will 
constitute the Royal Priesthood, the body of Christ, 
while the remainder of it, called in the Scriptures "the 
great company, who wash their robes and make them 
white in the blood of the Lamb," will be dealt with 
first by the great Messenger of the Covenant, not with 
a view to their destruction or injury, but with a view 
to the destruction of the flesh, "that the spirit may be 
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus." (1 Cor. 5:5.) 

We may even go further than this and understand 
that the living members of the Royal Priesthood will 
be subjected to fiery trials, as the Apostle points out. 
The fire of this day, he says, shall try each man's work 
of what sort it is, and shall prove which have built their 
faith with gold, silver and precious stones, and which 
have built with the wood, hay, stubble of profession and 
outward show and theories of men. (1 Cor. 3:12.) All 
of the gold class will be purified, the little flock; all of 

R3684 : page 379 

the silver class will be purified, the great company, to 
the intent that the offerings that they made to the Lord 
may be fully accepted of him, even as the Apostle exhorts 
us, "I beseech you, brethren, by the mercies of 
God, that ye present your bodies living sacrifices, holy, 
acceptable to God, your reasonable service." If it 
is our privilege to have some share in the fiery trials 
at the close of this age, and at the inauguration of the 
new dispensation, let us rejoice in whatever will bring 



us nearer to our Lord, in whatever will bring us closer 
into harmony with him and his service, purifying our 
hearts and arousing our faith and making us all that 
would be acceptable and pleasing in the sight of the 
Lord. 

"AS IN THE DAYS OF OLD." 

"Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem 
be pleasant unto the Lord as in the days of old and in 
the former years." The fiery trials of the great time 
of trouble will thoroughly purge and purify all who are 
truly the Lord's people, all antitypical Israelites, and 
thenceforth they shall be fully in the Lord's favor and 
have his rich blessing, and only by wilful sins will they 
ever take themselves out of that blessed condition; but 
they may go on from grace to grace, from knowledge to 
knowledge, from opportunity to opportunity, from 
restitution to restitution, until at the end of the Millennial 
age they shall have attained to all the good things 
of the divine provision through this great Messenger 
of the Covenant. 

In that time the Lord will come near in his judgments, 
they will be prompt, the people will learn distinctly 
and in a practical form what is pleasing and what 
is displeasing to the Lord; he will be a swift witness 
against every evil thing and rebuke it, and thus all shall 
be taught of the Lord, and the knowledge of the Lord 
shall fill the whole earth. 

"I, THE LORD, CHANGE NOT." 

The basis for all these hopes of Israel and others is 
in the fact that God is unchangeable; he has promised 
and he will not fail— yea, he has sworn to this Covenant 
and it is therefore an Oath-Bound Covenant, and as a 
result all the families of the earth shall be blessed. 
There can be no failure, no miscarriage of this plan, for 
God has pledged himself in word and in oath to its 
certainty. What a confidence this gives us! This was 
the Apostle's assurance as he thought of Israel after 

R3685 : page 379 

the flesh and how they were rejecting Jesus, and he 
wrote to us, "I would not, brethren, that ye be ignorant 
of this mystery, that blindness in part [temporarily] 
is happened to Israel, until the fulness of the Gentiles 
be come in [until the full number of the elect from the 
Gentiles shall have been completed, the divine predestination 
respecting the Church, the body of Christ]. 
Then all Israel shall be saved [recovered from the blindness 
into which they are now going— the blindness in 
which they have been for nearly nineteen centuries]." 
Rom. 11:25. 
The Apostle quotes in proof of this the divine 



promise, assuring us that the gifts and callings of God 

are things that he will not repent of. (Rom. 1 1:29.) 

It is on this unchangeableness of the divine character 

that the Apostle predicates all of his hopes respecting 

the restoration of Israel to divine favor and blessing 

through the glorified Church, and in turn the blessing 

of all the families of the earth through natural Israel 

under the glorified Church. As the Apostle again says, 

Thus the fall of Israel becomes a channel for the enlightenment 

and blessing of the world.— Rom. 11:12. 

A LOCAL APPLICATION. 

Then follows a part of the prophecy which seemingly 
was applicable to fleshly Israel: the Lord reproves them, 
showing them that his course toward them as a people 
fully conformed to the engagements of their Covenant 
at Sinai. Had they remained faithful to him according 
to their agreement they might have had the great 
blessing even in Malachi's time. There is in this passage 
an exhortation for Israel to return to proper accord 
with the Lord, and to prove him that he would be as 
prompt and faithful in giving them blessings as he was 
prompt and faithful in giving them chastisements for 
their unfaithfulness. The Lord represents Israel as 
not being aware of their true condition, of not being 
aware of how they were failing to keep their Covenant. 
Their hearts had become so selfish, had been so stunted 
in development along all spiritual lines, that they apparently 
did not realize that they were merely praying 
to the Lord with their lips while their hearts were far 
from him. He points out to them that while keeping 
his ordinances in a certain outward and formalistic 
manner, they were not fulfilling the requirements of 
the Law as they should reasonably have understood 
them. 

From the statement here made it would appear 
that, instead of coming to the Lord with the very best 
that they had as offerings to him and his cause, they 
were inclined to seek to perform the letter of the Law 
and to avoid its spirit; apparently they were ready to 
bring sacrifices and offerings, but the selfishness of their 
hearts and their lack of true appreciation of the Lord led 
them to proffer him the weak and the lame and the poor 
while they kept the better for their own use. The Lord 
urges upon them that they test him, prove him, and see 
whether or not he would grant them great blessings 
if they would but enter into the spirit of their consecration 
and offer unto the Lord the best of what they 
possessed. 

A LESSON HERE FOR SPIRITUAL ISRAELITES. 

Spiritual Israel, the Elijah class, the Lord's consecrated 
people still in the flesh and seeking to make their 
calling and election sure to the Kingdom glories, may 



gain a profitable lesson from these sharp criticisms of 
natural Israel. How is it with us? We as spiritual 
Israelites have vowed unto the Lord the first fruits, the 
very best, the very chiefest, the most valuable of all that 
we have and all that we are— of time, influence, talents, 
money, all. To what extent are we rendering unto the 
Lord our offerings and sacrifices in harmony with this 
our Covenant? 

Is it not true respecting many spiritual Israelites 
that, instead of bringing the very best that they have 
to the Lord and to his service, they bring him merely 
the tail-ends, the imperfect things, offerings with which 
he is not well pleased. This is so in respect to all who 
use the best they have in self-gratification, in providing 
chiefly and best for their own natural conditions and 
appetites, honors, dignities, leaving for the Lord the 
remnants, the fag-ends of time, influence, reputation 
and money. Alas, we fear this is true of many Israelites 
to-day: they fail to grasp the thought that they have 
given their all to the Lord, and that what they have, 
therefore, is his, and that they are merely his stewards, 

R3685 : page 380 

pledged to him to use time, money, influence, all that 
he has committed to their care, as his and to his glory 
to the best of their knowledge and ability. 

The argument which the Lord used to natural 
Israel was that, if they properly loved and respected him 
as their God, they would feel that they had nothing too 
good to offer to him and his service, and that it was a 
privilege on their part to be permitted to lay their little 
all at his feet, the very best that they had or could present. 
How much more true is this in respect to spiritual 
Israel, whose eyes of understanding have to some extent 
been opened, who are enabled to see the Lord from the 
new standpoint, to realize what great things he has done 
for us and what wonderful things he has proposed to 
give us if we show ourselves worthy of them by faithfulness 
to our Covenant obligations. 

As our Lord pointed out to the Jews, he requires these 
things not because he is needy, for all the gold and silver 
and the cattle upon a thousand hills are his, but that he 
seeks in us evidences of our sincerity, our faithfulness 
in respect to our Covenant engagement when we pledged 
all that we possessed, houses, lands, father, mother, 
sisters, brothers, yea, life itself, to be all subjected to 
and laid at the feet of our Redeemer and Master, that 
we might at any cost, at any sacrifice, be permitted to 
render such service as he would accept, realizing the 
while that all that he would accept would be a reasonable 
service, and on our part it would be an offering far too 
small to be worthy of our King and our Creator. 

"PROVE ME NOW HEREWITH." 



The Lord's words to natural Israel should come to 
spiritual Israel with still greater force, "Prove me now 
herewith, saith the Lord." If any feel themselves poor, 
if any feel that spiritually they are lean, that they are 
not enjoying such fellowship with the Lord as they would 
desire, that they are unable to draw as closely to him 
as they would like, to all such the Lord says the fault 
is, You have neglected your covenant: here are my 
words, "Prove me," fulfil the terms of your Covenant, 
and see if I will not be faithful, and do for you exceedingly 
and abundantly more than you could have asked 
or thought. 

It behooves us, dear friends, to look about us to 
note to what extent we have been faithful to our Covenant 
of sacrifice and to remember that it is not a sacrifice 
for a day or a year but, "even unto death." "Be 
ye faithful unto death and I will give thee a crown of 
life." (Rev. 2:10.) A little while the trials will be 
over, but until that little while is past we are in the trial 
time, and it is proving us either worthy or unworthy of 
the glorious favors which we seek, the chief blessing, 
joint-heirship. If we appreciate it let us seek it in the 
Lord's way, let us see to what extent there are other 
things in our lives that we might render unto the Lord 
and which he will accept, not through the worthiness of 
the deeds or the sacrifices but through the merit of 
Christ. Let us see if the days and hours as they pass are 
spent in a consecrated manner; let us note to what extent 
moments and days are spent in some selfish manner, 
or wasted upon others beyond the reasonable requirements 
of duty as marked out in the divine Word. Let 
us see to what extent we perform our vows unto the 
Lord; let us take note of what of time or influence or 
money we are using in the divine service and what 
proportion this bears to the whole. 

Of the Jews the Lord required a tenth, a "tithe." 
Of the spiritual Israelites he makes no positive requirements 
but leaves it for us, that by the degree of our 
sacrifices, according to our abilities, we may demonstrate 
the measure of our love. But who would say that 
one-tenth of time, influence and talent would be enough 
for the spiritual Israelite to render to the Lord for all 
his benefits? Surely all would agree that a fourth 
would be a very small measure indeed as compared with 
our true obligation. All should feel that the sacrifice 
is a whole burnt offering, a complete sacrifice of every 
item and element of our talents and powers and privileges; 
all should feel that he may keep for use upon himself 
and for use upon those dependent upon him only such 
measure as would seem to be necessary to decency 
and reasonable comfort and not for what might be termed 
luxury or waste. Those who accept the Lord's proposition 
heartily, and render to him their all to the extent 
of their ability, will find their leanness departing and 
their joy of heart increasing more and more. 



R3685 : page 380 

IMMANUEL AND HIS DOMINION. 

--ISAIAH 9:l-7.-DECEMBER 24.- 

Golden Text:— "Thou shalt call his name Jesus, for he 
shall save his people from their sins."— Matt. 1:21. 

APPROPRIATELY the quarter's lessons culminate 
in a prophetic picture of "Israel's Hope," 
and the "Desire of all Nations," a picture of 
Messiah and his Millennial Kingdom. This lesson is 
especially appropriate also because of its date immediately 
preceding Christmas day, usually celebrated as 
the Memorial of Jesus' death. The story of Jesus' 
birth and whole life and death, and resurrection even, 

R3686 : page 380 

would be of comparatively slight importance if disconnected 
from the prophecies of his glorious Kingdom 
power and reign, under which all the families of the 
earth shall be blessed. It was in view of this grand 
consummation to be accomplished by the Kingdom 
that the angels sang at our Lord's birth of peace on 
earth and good will toward men, and proclaimed "good 
tidings of great joy which shall be unto all people"— 
"in due time." 

We agree with Leeser's translation that the 
first verse of the ninth chapter should properly be the 
last verse of chapter 8— that the second verse of our 
lesson begins a new topic: with it, therefore, we begin 
our present subject. 

"THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD IS JESUS." 

"The people that walked in darkness have seen 
a great light: they that dwell in the land of the shadow 
of death, upon them hath the light shined." After the 
Hebrew idiom this statement pertaining to the future 
reads as though it related to something only in the past, 
just as in verse 6 we read, "Unto us a child is born," 
whereas Jesus was not born at that time nor until 
several centuries later. The standpoint of the shining 
light is still future, the great light is not yet shining 
upon the people, they still dwell in the land of the 
shadow of death. The shadows of our demoralized, 
sinful, dying condition affect all of life's interests for 

R3686 : page 381 

the world of mankind. As the Apostle explains subsequently, 
"The whole creation groaneth and travaileth 



in pain together, waiting." (Rom. 8:22.) The world 
is still waiting for this great Light, which the Scriptures 
promise shall in due time shine forth, "The Sun of 
righteousness with healing in its beams." (Mai. 4:2.) 
Our Lord refers to the same great event, still future, 
and assures us that when that Sun of righteousness 
shall shine forth it shall include not only himself but 
all of his faithful disciples, the ripened wheat of this 
Gospel age. He distinctly portrays this in the parable 
of the wheat and the tares, telling us that at the close 
of the age he would gather the wheat crop of this age 
into the garner— the heavenly state— and he adds, 
"Then shall the righteous shine forth as the Sun in the 
Kingdom of their Father. Who hath ears to hear let 
him hear."~Matt. 13:43. 

We are still in the time when darkness covers the 
earth [civilized society] and gross darkness the people 
[the heathen]. True, there is a measure of light in the 
world: True, also, that light emanated from our dear 
Redeemer, his words and his works, and still shines 
forth from all those who are truly his and whose hearts 
are illuminated by his promises and his spirit. But 
this is not the light of the world scattering all of earth's 
darkness and causing all to appreciate the glory of God. 
It is merely "the light that is in you," in believers; it is 
a light of faith, a light of hope, a light of love ignited 
in the hearts of the little flock, who shine as lighted 
candles in the world. Our Lord's light shone into a 
little corner of the world called Palestine, and from 
his lamp many followers have lighted their lamps. 
The Master's instruction is, "Let your light so shine 
before men that they may see your good works and 
glorify your Father who is in heaven," "Put not your 
light under a bushel but on a lampstand, that it may 
give light to all in the house." But he adds, "The darkness 
hateth the light because its deeds are evil and are 
made manifest thereby," "Marvel not if the world hate 
you; ye know that it hated me before it hated you." 
-Matt. 5:15,16; John 3:20. 

That the True Light is not now shining, that the 
Sun of righteousness has not yet arisen with healing in 
his beams, is fully evidenced by the gross darkness of 
heathendom and by the lesser darkness of Christendom. 
In proportion as the true followers of Jesus have kept 
their lamps trimmed and burning, in that proportion 
a measure of enlightenment has spread throughout the 
world. But all this is merely the shining of light in the 
midst of darkness, and a light at the present time and 
under present conditions is wholly inadequate to dispel 
the night and to bring in the glorious day for which the 
whole creation groans and still waits. That glorious 
day cannot come until the Lord shall first have found 
the members of his body who together with himself 
are to constitute the Sun of righteousness. Meantime, 
as the Apostle declares, the god of this world blinds the 
minds of them that believe not, lest the glorious light 



of the goodness of God should shine into their hearts. 
-2 Cor. 4:4. 

"A LANTERN TO MY FOOTSTEPS." 

The prophet, speaking of the Church during this 
Gospel age appropriating the Word of God, the message 
of life eternal, the basis of our hopes and joys, 
declares, "Thy Word is a lamp to my feet, a lantern 
to my footsteps." (Psa. 119:105.) The need of this 
lamp is most evident. Those who have it not stumble 
on in the darkness: we who have the light of the 
divine Word are not in darkness even as others— "Ye 
are all the children of the light and of the day." (1 Thess. 5:5.) 
We belong to the new dispensation and 
our citizenship is in heaven. By faith we are dead to 
the world and live toward God, and are therefore counted 
as children of the light even in the present darkness; 
and the eyes of our understanding are enlightened by 
the hopes and gracious promises of the divine Word, 
while others rejecting this lamp are in corresponding 
darkness and ignorance. 

The light, as the Apostle says, has shone into our 
hearts and that already through faith. If we look from 
the outward and natural standpoint of affairs, we would 
be as the remainder of the world. It is in proportion 
as we close our eyes to the things that are seen, and that 
we know by faith to be but temporary, and open the 
eyes of our understandings to the things unseen as yet 
and which are eternal, only in that proportion does the 
light by faith shine into our hearts. The glorious prospect 
is that soon the Church will be complete, soon the 
Sun of righteousness will shine and its rays will light 
to the uttermost parts of the earth, and that every 
child of Adam, sharer in his curse, shall ultimately be 
a sharer in Messiah's great work of blessing by being 
brought under the influence of that great Light which 
shall constitute the Millennial age a day of blessing and 
of glory and of knowledge of the Lord. "This is the 
True Light which [ultimately] lighteth every man that 
cometh into the world."— John 1:9. 

The prophecy of this verse goes beyond the living 
of that time and assures us that the light will shine to 
those who are in the shadow of death— in the deadly 
shade, properly a title of hades— those who are in hades, 
in darkness. Upon every member of our race the light 
must shine, because Christ hath redeemed us once for 
all. As all of Adam's children were condemned before 
their birth, so all of them were redeemed, and the majority 
of them before their birth. They are as sure to 
get a blessing from Christ's redemptive work as they 
surely did share in the curse that came upon Father 
Adam.— Rom. 5:12. 

MULTIPLICATION BY RESURRECTION. 



"Thou hast multiplied the nation, thou hast increased 
their joy: they joy before thee according to the 
joy in harvest, as men rejoice when they divide the 
spoil." This, the revised version rendering, is evidently 
the correct one. Leeser's translation also agrees. 
The picture before us represents the world of mankind 
during the Millennial age, brought forth from the 
bondage of death, released from the Adamic curse, 
rejoicing as those who are dividing a spoil, sharing in 
something which is not theirs, something which has 
fallen to them. It will be just so: the blessings of the 
Millennial age will be distributed as divine bounty, the 
curse will be rolled away, the Sun of righteousness will 
shine for all with healing in his beams, bringing restitution 
to all, and none will escape the blessings except 
they wilfully refuse them and do despite to God's favor. 
The same is true now to those who receive God's 
mercy. It is a gift; they can do nothing for it; they are 
merely assured that they are forgiven. The difference 
is that now a very few have the eye to see and the ear 
to hear and the heart to appreciate God's mercy as it 

R3686 : page 382 

is told to us in the good tidings which can be understood 
only by the hearing of faith. By and by, after the selection 
of the elect class, the Church, sight and knowledge 
will largely take the place of faith. The world, then 
realizing the grace of God in Christ Jesus, forgiving 
their sins and providing them with life eternal if they 
will accept it, will generally rejoice to divide the great 
spoil, the great gift of God. 

Verse four delineates the cause for the rejoicing: 
it will be because the great oppressor, Satan, will no 
longer have control; his yoke of sin, pain, sorrow and 
death, his rod and staff of affliction and slavery, will 
be broken and that forever, as the Lord explains, "That 
old serpent the devil, Satan, shall be bound for a thousand 
years that he shall deceive the nations no more 
until the thousand years be finished." (Rev. 20:3.) 
The victory over the great Adversary is not to be a 
slow and gradual one, not to be by missions or any 
power of ours, but the Lord himself shall interpose his 
power. 

"AS IN THE DAY OF MID IAN." 

The day of Midian was the day of Gideon and his 
little band, when suddenly at the breaking of the pitchers 
and the blowing of the rams' horns the Lord overwhelmed 
the powerful hosts of the enemies of his people 
and granted them a great and miraculous deliverance. 
Gideon evidently prefigured our Lord Jesus, as Gideon's 
little band prefigured the little flock of Christ, the 
saints, the very elect. It was after the testing, the 
sifting, of this little company that the Lord granted the 



great deliverance. And thus it will be in the end of 

this age: as soon as the Gideon band, the Royal Priesthood 

under the captaincy of the glorified Christ, shall 

have given their message and let their feeble lights 

shine out, that the Lord will grant the great victory 

for truth and righteousness through a time of trouble 

which shall come upon the world but which will eventuate 

in a great blessing upon all people, the binding 

of Satan and the release of all the oppressed. We read 

of the grand consummation of the matter, the end of 

R3687 : page 382 

sin and trouble, in the figure of the fifth verse, which in 
the Leeser translation reads, "For all the weapons of 
the fighters in the battle's tumult and the garments 
rolled in blood shall be burned, become fuel for the fire." 
The interpretation of this is that all the weapons of 
Satan, all the accessories of sin and death, everything 
that pertained to this great conflict which for centuries 
has prevailed in the world between righteousness on the 
one hand and sin on the other, all these shall be utterly 
destroyed. The picture shows us the world cleansed 
of every evidence of opposition to the divine government 
and law of righteousness, and accords well with 
the statement, "All voices in heaven and earth and 
under the earth and in the sea heard I saying, Blessing 
and glory and honor and dominion and right and power 
unto him that sitteth on the throne and unto the Lamb." 
-Rev. 5:13. 

HOW IT WILL BE BROUGHT ABOUT. 

The word "for" with which the sixth verse opens 
signifies because: hence we read, "Because unto us a 
child is born, unto us a Son is given." The because is an 
explanation of the process by which the foregoing gracious 
prophecy of blessing and release from the oppressor 
shall be accomplished. The Lord would draw the attention 
of all who had the hearing ear of faith to the 
fact that no such Kingdom of righteousness, no such 
enlightenment and blessing of the world could be possible 
until first Messiah should come. He would show 
also that Messiah would be born after the manner of 
mankind, and would nevertheless be the Son of the 
Living God. How beautiful, how simple is the entire 
statement from the standpoint of faith, yet how possible 
it is for the wisdom of this world to stumble over even 
such simple statements as these and to claim, as higher 
critics do, that this prophecy was wholly to the Jews 
of Isaiah's day and that the one of promise was King 
Hezekiah. Blessed are our eyes if they see and our ears 
if they hear the true meaning of this prophecy, and 
thus permit us to recognize in it the Messiah, the Sent 
of God, Immanuel, God with us, to be the great deliverer 
and to accomplish for us all the wonderful things 



which God has spoken by the mouth of all the holy 
prophets since the world began, confirming his promise 
made to Abraham, "In thy seed shall all the families of 
the earth be blessed." 

Continuing, the prophecy pictures the child grown 
to manhood and the government placed upon his 
shoulders— the responsibility falling upon him as a 
royal mantle from the heavenly Emperor, Jehovah. 
The prophecy steps over the earthly trials and sufferings 
of our Redeemer, the Head, and of the Church, 
his body, throughout this Gospel age; it ignores the 
names Beelzebub, prince of devils, man of sorrows, etc., 
and points us to the complete and glorified Messiah at 
his second advent, as viewed from the standpoint of 
Jehovah and from the standpoint from which ultimately 
the whole world shall recognize him, when every 
knee shall bow and every tongue confess to him to the 
glory of the Father. "His name shall be called Wonderful, 
Counsellor, Mighty God [or mighty Lord], Everlasting 
Father [or giver of everlasting life], the Prince 
of Peace." 

HALLOWED BE THY NAME. 

A name stands for or represents the character, disposition, 
or qualities or powers of an individual. Thus all 
these names, these titles given to our Lord, represent his 
majesty, dignity, power and glory of his work. Our 
Lord is already recognized by his true followers, who 
know him as the most wonderful Counsellor: no other 
counsel, no other teaching, is like his. The world in 
general has yet to learn this respecting him, but it will 
be generally known before the close of the Millennial 
age, for unto him every knee must bow and every tongue 
confess to the glory of God the Father. (Phil. 2:10.) 
If after they have confessed him the wonderful, wise 
Counsellor, Teacher, Guide, they then shall wilfully and 
deliberately ignore and reject his teaching and assistance 
and sin wilfully and intentionally, they must die 
the second death, "Be utterly destroyed from amongst 
the people. (Acts 3:23.) He is recognized now by his 
true followers as the Mighty Lord, the Mighty God- 
not as the Father but as the Father's representative, 
voice, mouthpiece, the well-beloved Son whom he has 
clothed with glory, honor and immortality, and given 
all power in heaven and in earth necessary to the accomplishment 
of the great work entrusted to him, the 
fitness for which he demonstrated by his love and loyalty 
even unto death, even the death of the cross. 

Jesus will be the Everlasting Father of the human 
race in the sense that Adam, their father, failed to give 
them life, and that our Lord Jesus redeemed Adam and 

R3687 : page 383 

all his possessions, and thus became the author of everlasting 



life to all who would obey him. This will include 

all of the human family, who will attain to everlasting 

life, except the Church class of this Gospel age, who 

are reckoned as specially adopted out of the world and 

begotten of the heavenly Father, as we read, "The 

God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ hath begotten 

us." (1 Pet. 1:3.) These Spirit-begotten ones are 

separate and distinct, and are scripturally designated 

the New Creation, and are spoken of not as children of 

Christ but as brethren, in one figure, and as his Bride 

and joint-heirs in another. But to the world, Christ, 

the Head, and the Church, his body, will be the everlasting 

Father, the Father or Life-giver, through whom 

all who will may have everlasting life— life to all eternity 

by Jehovah's arrangement. 

Another of his titles shall be the Prince of Peace. 
While his Kingdom will be introduced by the great 
time of trouble such as never was before, the trouble 
will not be of his producing. It will be the legitimate 
result of the wrong course of sin and selfishness fostered 
by the great oppressor, Satan. The Prince of Peace 
will put down, subdue, all enemies, all sin, all unrighteousness, 
all insubordination to the divine will. He will 
not fail nor be discouraged. Nothing shall hinder the 
accomplishment of this great mission entrusted to him 
by the Father. His love of peace shall not hinder him 
from dashing the nations to pieces as a potter's vessel, 
that righteousness may be established upon a firm and 
sure foundation. 

"UPON THE THRONE OF DAVID." 

The word David signifies beloved, and the kingdom 
entrusted to king David was God's Kingdom in a 
typical form, which was promised never to pass away. 
It was maintained by the Lord down to the time of 
Zedekiah, when we are told the crown and diadem of 
authority and power were removed to be overturned, 
overturned until he should come whose right it is. 
(Ezek. 21:27.) Our Lord in the flesh, as a descendant 
of David, was the legitimate heir to that crown of 
authority and dominion, that Kingdom of David which 
should have no end; but instead of establishing his 
Kingdom then, he declared, "My Kingdom is not of 
this world," not of this age, not of this present dispensation, 
and began the selection of the little flock who in 
the world to come or age to come will be his joint-heirs 
and associates in the Millennial Kingdom. This work 
of selecting the Church, the kings, rulers, princes, has 
since been in progress, and we have the assurance of the 
Lord's Word and character that it will reach a final 
and glorious consummation worthy of our God. 

When Christ and the Church in glory shall reign 
over the earth, it will thus be the continuation or exaltation 
of the Kingdom of God which was begun in 
David and natural Israel. This greater David, this 



greater beloved one of the Father, full of grace and truth, 
will establish righteousness in the earth with judgment 
—with punishments for wrong-doing and rewards for 
right-doing. "The zeal of Jehovah of hosts shall perform 
this." Although the Millennial Kingdom will be 
under the direct supervision of our glorious Lord and 
his associated Church, yet behind will be the Father's 
power, communicated, delegated, granted. As the 
Apostle assures us, when it is said that all things will 
be put under subjection to Christ, it is manifest that 
Jehovah is excepted, for he it is that puts all things 
under him. Then shall the Son also be subject unto 
him that put all things under him, that God [the Father] 
may be all in all.-l Cor. 15:27,28. 

Immanuel's government, from the time of its beginning 
to the time it will be transferred to the Father, 
will be one continuous success; there will be no breaks 
or vicissitudes. "Of the increase of his government 
there will be no end." The discipline and order which 
he will establish will be on such a firm basis that day 
by day will see it more secure, until finally the consummation 
having been reached, the testings all being complete, 
the wilfully incorrigible having been destroyed, 
the dominion without ending will be passed to the 
Father. It was the Father's Kingdom from the time of 
David; it will be the Father's Kingdom under the control 
of Messiah during the period of subjugation and 
restitution, the Millennial age; and it will be the Father's 
Kingdom without end after it shall have been "delivered 
up to God, even the Father," and the assurance given 
is that the work of reconstruction will be so thoroughly 
carried out that never again will sin bring a curse upon 
the earth. 

CALL HIS NAME JESUS. 

Our Golden Text sums up the entire work of our 
Lord Jesus and indicates that it is all implied in the 
meaning of the name Jesus, Savior. We sometimes 
refer to our Lord as the Savior of sinners, and properly 
so, because we are all sinners through our share in the 
Adamic fall. We sometimes speak of him as the Savior 
of the world, and properly so, because the whole world 
was lost through Adam's disobedience, and the whole 
world was redeemed and is to have the glorious opportunity 
of reconciliation to the Father through their 
Redeemer. But it is also appropriate that we note 
the statement of this text, "He shall save his people 
from their sins." This statement, that only the Lord's 
people are to be saved from their sins, is in full agreement 
with the other statements that he is the Savior 
of sinners and the Savior of the world, because although 
his salvation must extend to and embrace every member 
of Adam's race, yet only those who when they know 
of the great salvation and of the opportunities accorded 
them accept the same and become his people— only 



they shall get the full salvation and be delivered completely 
from death, and attain to the life everlasting, 
which is the gift of God to all those who obey him, and 
to no others. 

page 383 

Let us each, while rejoicing in the glorious prospects 
of the world in the Millennial Kingdom time, 
and while hoping for a share in the Kingdom itself as 
our Master's joint-heirs, remember that we are still in 
the flesh and must still fight a good fight, war a good 
warfare against sin in its every form and particularly 
against its reign in our own flesh. We will never conquer 
completely every weakness and every imperfection 
of the flesh, and hence our hope for which we wait 
is our change to the new bodies which shall be ours as 
inheritors of the Lord's resurrection blessing. But 
meantime, in order to be accepted of the Father, in order 
to be acceptable with our Master and Lord and Redeemer, 
our hearts at least must show full loyalty to 
the principles of his righteousness and corresponding 
opposition to sin in its every form. 



