A Crime-free World Coming Soon!
WHEN we look at the world situation today, it becomes obvious that it is very difficult to avoid being influenced to do what is bad. Actually, all of us are born imperfect, prone to do bad things. (1 Kings 8:46; Job 14:4; Psalm 51:5) And since Satan the Devil has been ousted from heaven, he is making greater efforts than ever to cause trouble.—Revelation 12:7-12.
The consequences have been terrible. A survey of 4,000 children in Scotland revealed, for example, that two thirds of those between the ages of 11 and 15 had already committed crimes. A survey throughout Britain indicated that nearly every third teenager had no qualms about shoplifting. And over half admitted that if they were given too much money in change, they would keep it.
The Italian book Lʹoccasione e lʹuomo ladro (The Opportunity and the Thief) offers insight into why people steal. The book says that thieves have “a low level of self-control” and that they are “unable to defer gratification.” The book adds that most thieves are not professionals but simply “opportunists who are willing to exploit situations.”
Interestingly, the book also observes why many people “refrain from breaking laws.” It concludes that the reason is not because they “fear legal sanctions but because they have moral values that impede them from doing so.” Where can people learn such proper moral values?
Education That Is Needed
Well, consider what is learned from many channels of communication. For instance, the message generally conveyed by movies and television is that violence, adultery, and abusive behavior are acceptable. It is no wonder, therefore, that people have such a low level of self-control. The Bible, on the other hand, wisely teaches: “He that is slow to anger is better than a mighty man, and he that is controlling his spirit than the one capturing a city.”—Proverbs 16:32.
Considering today’s propaganda, it should not be surprising that many are “unable to defer gratification.” Over and over again, people hear: “Buy now and pay later.” “Be good to yourself.” “You deserve the best.” “Take care of number one.” Self-gratification is presented as both normal and proper. But such a self-centered view is contrary to the Bible teaching about “keeping an eye, not in personal interest upon just your own matters, but also in personal interest upon those of the others.”—Philippians 2:4.
Would you not agree that most who are dishonest are opportunists? Unfortunately, there are increasing numbers of people who are willing to exploit situations for their own advantage. They do not ask whether a certain act is morally right. Their only concern is, ‘Can I get away with it?’
What is needed? As noted above, moral values are needed. These will deter people from committing criminal acts, from disregarding the sanctity of life, from violating the sacredness of marriage, from overstepping the bounds of proper behavior, and from otherwise infringing upon the rights of others. Those who do not learn such values, as the Bible says, “come to be past all moral sense.” (Ephesians 4:19) The criminal behavior of such ungodly ones is what prevents us from enjoying a crime-free world.
How a New World Will Come
Of course, many people try their best to be honest, to treat their fellowman with respect and consideration, and to refrain from unlawful acts. But it would be naive to think that everyone in the world will make this effort. Many will not, even as most who lived in the days of the righteous man Noah were unwilling to do what was right. In that world filled with violence, only Noah and his family refrained from ungodly conduct, thereby gaining God’s approval. By eliminating the ungodly in the global Deluge, our Creator brought into existence a world that was temporarily free of crime.
It is important to remember that the Bible account of the Flood and of the destruction of the ungodly is more than just an interesting story. Jesus Christ explained: “Just as it occurred in the days of Noah, so it will be also in the days of the Son of man.” (Luke 17:26; 2 Peter 2:5; 3:5-7) Just as God destroyed that violent world before the Flood, he will also destroy this crime-filled world.
We have the following fact on good authority, as expressed by Jesus’ beloved apostle John: “The world is passing away and so is its desire, but he that does the will of God remains forever.” (1 John 2:17) The end of this world will make way for a new world in which, the Bible says, “[God] will reside with [mankind], and they will be his peoples. And God himself will be with them. And he will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore.”—Revelation 21:3, 4.
Describing how that new world will come about, the Bible also says: “As regards the wicked, they will be cut off from the very earth; and as for the treacherous, they will be torn away from it.” (Proverbs 2:22) With only the upright left on earth, this Bible prophecy will be fulfilled: “The meek ones themselves will possess the earth, and they will indeed find their exquisite delight in the abundance of peace.”—Psalm 37:11.
In God’s new world, even the animals will become nonviolent. The Bible foretells: “The wolf will actually reside for a while with the male lamb, and with the kid the leopard itself will lie down, and the calf and the maned young lion and the well-fed animal all together; and a mere little boy will be leader over them. . . . They will not do any harm or cause any ruin in all my holy mountain; because the earth will certainly be filled with the knowledge of Jehovah as the waters are covering the very sea.”—Isaiah 11:6-9; 65:17; 2 Peter 3:13.
God’s New World Is Near
The good news is that such peaceful conditions will soon be realized earth wide. Why can we be so sure? Because of what Jesus prophesied would occur immediately prior to the world’s end. Among other things, he foretold: “Nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom, and there will be food shortages and earthquakes in one place after another.” He added: “Because of the increasing of lawlessness the love of the greater number will cool off.”—Matthew 24:7, 12.
An apostle of Jesus also foretold: “In the last days [of this world] critical times hard to deal with will be here. For men will be lovers of themselves, lovers of money, self-assuming, haughty, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, disloyal, having no natural affection, . . . without self-control, fierce, without love of goodness, . . . lovers of pleasures rather than lovers of God.” (2 Timothy 3:1-5) Surely, we are living in “the last days” of this world! Soon, therefore, it will be replaced by God’s righteous new world!
A study of the Bible has convinced millions that a world without crime is possible, and they are acting upon the invitation to be instructed in the ways of our Creator, Jehovah God. (Isaiah 2:3) Would you like to join them? Are you prepared to make the effort to gain life in a crime-free new world?
Jesus showed what is necessary first of all. He explained: “This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.” Thus, your everlasting welfare depends on your studying God’s Word and acting upon what you learn.—John 17:3.
[Picture on page 8, 9]
The Bible describes a crime-free new world and tells how we may enjoy it

