Spiritual Refugees in Israel and Westward
This article concludes the report of the ministerial Journey to the Middle East and Southern Europe made by the president of the Watch Tower Society, N. H. Knorr, and his secretary, M. G. Henschel.
A REFUGEE, without hope, with few or no possessions, often with no one to love—a sad and deplorable fate. The modern world knows well what a major problem its physical refugees have caused. And a world tour in the service of missionary work soon convinces the traveler of the infinitely graver problem involving the world’s spiritual refugees. No all-suitable refuge for the physical refugees within this world’s system has been found, and this is much truer of the spiritual victims.
A few short years ago Israel was hailed world-wide as a modern “Promised Land” for the Jewish people. Now, missionaries there are approached almost daily by residents who fervently desire to go almost anywhere to get out of the land, some even preferring to emigrate back to Central Europe. Israel is a heavily policed armed camp and is surrounded by angry, armed enemy states. Men up to fifty and even childless young women are conscripted.
The population is a colorful assortment of peoples from East and West. Housing is a problem of terrific dimensions, yet the authorities continue to permit the immigration of thousands each month. Of course, rents are therefore exorbitant. The land cannot support such a population, necessitating a severe rationing program.
As a spiritual refuge Israel has been no more successful. We asked a number of persons whether they believed that Almighty God had established the present regime. Few could see anything divine in the Israeli government. The majority more honestly conceded that military might and political maneuvering, not God, were responsible.
There are many highly educated persons in Israel, but a sore lack exists in agricultural workers and laborers. The Arabs formerly did the farming in Palestine, but now most of them are gone. Presenting the message of the Kingdom to such persons in Jerusalem is not easy. Innumerable atheists share the scene with staunchly orthodox Jews. Oftentimes they try to present arguments against the Bible and delve into much ancient history and science. The missionaries thus have no small task in searching daily through reference books, histories and encyclopedias for apt answers.
The missionaries were fortunate enough to locate an apartment in Jerusalem and in this place we met with twenty-four publishers of the Kingdom and persons of good will from Tel Aviv, Jerusalem, Haifa, and the northern villages along the Lebanese border. Some Arab brothers were among them. Others spoke Russian and Polish but German was the most useful language of all. Much diligent effort had gone into advertising a public lecture for the evening of January 24 at the Y.M.C.A. With the attitude of the majority of the people in mind, naturally we all wondered what the results would be. By 9 p.m. we had our answer. Fifty-one listened attentively and most of them accepted a free booklet following the meeting.
Up to the time of our visit the missionaries had confined their activities to territory in Jerusalem. It was evident, however, that the publishers and persons of good will in other places should be given attention. So arrangements were made for one of the missionaries to make regular visits to the companies and interested ones scattered in all of Israel. Holding regular company meetings and Bible studies should assist in bringing the publishers to maturity, and thus contribute toward rapid expansion of the theocratic organization throughout Israel. Though beset with many difficulties, the message of the kingdom of God is proclaimed. In contrast with natural Israel’s many woes, this offers a sound basis for true refuge now under God’s great organization.
SPAIN’S RELIGIOUS DICTATORSHIP
We took leave of our brothers and sisters in Israel on Friday night, January 25, and flew to Rome via Cyprus and Athens. By 6 p.m. the following day we were at the Rome Bethel home. We related our experiences to the missionaries and branch family, and they gave us the thrilling news that the Rome assembly in December had resulted in a new peak of publishers. Our schedule would not permit lingering, and at four the following morning we were taking off for Geneva, where we landed at 6:35. That afternoon a meeting was held in the Salle de Reunions de Plainpalais, a community hall, primarily for the benefit of the French-speaking publishers of Switzerland; but some from France and Italy joined us, making an attendance of 635. Afterward we made a hurried visit to the Society’s Swiss branch office in Berne, returning on January 30 in time to catch our plane for Barcelona.
Spain—what a land of enigma it has been to Western diplomats. Yet it may be described in something less than tones of great mystery. A fascist government and the Roman Catholic religion have fashioned a physical and mental dictatorship almost defying reform. Poverty and oppression are in the very atmosphere. Non-Catholic public religious worship and manifestations are not allowed by law, although it is written that a person has the freedom to practice his own belief without interference. Such written sham is subject to “interpretation” or may be ignored altogether. Under these conditions there can be no Kingdom Halls in Spain. We therefore met in several homes during our visit. The first night, a few hours after our arrival, we saw twenty-two at the home of one of the brothers. The next afternoon fifty-five came together at another place, followed by an evening meeting at still another home with fifty-five again on hand. A few attended all three meetings, but most of them were different individuals, testifying to the fact that the theocratic activity in Spain is on the increase regardless of the obstacles thrown in the way through totalitarian-religious rule. We were pleased to meet witnesses from outside Barcelona too. The spirit of the publishers is excellent and they are determined to carry on with pure worship.
Following a late arrival in Madrid we went to one home where twenty-eight were gathered in a small room four flights up. Some had come in from companies to the south. That night we went to the end of the underground line and walked through the darkness to the home where twenty-five had assembled for a period of spiritual feeding. Currently there are two graduates of Gilead in Madrid and they are doing much good in helping the publishers to maturity. The following morning we discussed service problems with the company servants of Madrid and outside areas. Arrangements were made to help several additional pioneers get into the field and increase the praises to Jehovah’s name in Spain. A brother will go to visit the publishers in various centers of theocratic activity to deliver instruction and to help them with their ministry and meetings for study.
LOVE, UNITY SPUR EXPANSION
Portugal has a bit more freedom of worship than Spain, but complete freedom is not to be found. Jehovah’s witnesses are there with the good news to offer spiritual freedom, real relief, to old-world refugees. Up to now they have not been given recognition by the city government, but they have pressed on with the ministry. Mature leadership is an outstanding need. Our visit proved timely. Several of those associated with the meetings were going contrary to the principles set forth in the Scriptures and they did not wish to listen to fellow publishers who tried through the Bible to point out the right way. So those involved were called together with the aim of restoring the complete unity of the Lisbon group. Others outside Lisbon were getting on well.
Late in the afternoon of February 3 we assembled with ninety-seven publishers and persons of good will in one of the Kingdom Halls. It was packed. In view of the local conditions, strong points were made about showing unity and walking by the spirit, laying aside the works of the flesh. The unity of the body was pointed up, with the goal of mature Christian living stressed. Warm love is required of Christians. It was shown how important it is to appreciate theocratic organization and how there must be no novices appointed as servants according to the Bible. In the pages of the Watchtower magazine timely spiritual food is provided for the benefit of all, and no one should object if consideration is given to new students by repeating an argument that may have been used a year before in connection with a different prophecy or parable. Repetition is good for older Christians too, and that is clearly seen in how the Bible is written—Matthew, Mark and Luke are excellent examples—all things are needed.
The following night another group of fifty-seven assembled in the little Kingdom Hall room and rejoiced in the reports of the faithful service of their brothers in other lands. Shortly after midnight we began the long flight to New York, winging our way toward a brief stop in the Azores, then on across the Atlantic.
We had learned a lot about the problems of the publishers in the field. It was very encouraging to have the appreciation of how the message of the truth was reaching out to distant villages and lands and to see results in the people of many nations coming forward to share in the theocratic ministry. The increasing unrest and violence so evident in the troubled sea of peoples of the Middle East and Iberian lands—yes, and in all the world—and the opposition to the preaching of the gospel do not hold back what Jehovah purposed. Such things only produce the refugees fleeing out of the Devil’s old-world system and provide hearing ears that can be filled with comfort by the news of a true refuge. In all this we see the proofs of the arrival of the time for the execution of God’s judgments against Satan the Devil and all his disunited subjects. When we see these things we rejoice and look for the near deliverance promised by the Son of the Most High God. It is not a time to hide from the troubles about us, but to stand up and speak. The good news tells the people the only way out. We rejoice to explain it to them from the Bible.—Luke 21:25-28, NW.

