Announcements
AIDING “THE DESIRE OF ALL NATIONS” TO COME IN—Hag. 2:7.
Though it might sound almost too good to be true, the Bible assuredly points to the near-at-hand end of all wickedness, sorrow, tribulation and distress. When? Plainly Matthew chapter 24 relates that it will be within “this generation.” The remaining days that the desirable, honest-hearted persons from all nations can come in are numbered! No wonder, then, God is now having the Kingdom message proclaimed loud and clear in all nations. Through it he is drawing out of all nations persons who love truth and righteousness. Having been blessed with an understanding of God’s purposes, all of Jehovah’s witnesses during November will make wise use of the remaining time by telling as many others as possible of what the Bible says will soon take place. From house to house and at all opportunities there will be presented as an aid to people who hunger for truth and righteousness three books and three booklets on a contribution of $1.50, or the New World Translation of either the Hebrew or Greek Scriptures together with one book on a contribution of $2.
FIND OUT WHAT GOD HAS SAID
In these days when so many dubious and even vicious things are introduced to turn people from right ways, it is of vital importance that one should “make sure of all things.” An excellent way to find out for yourself what the Bible says on numerous subjects of great importance is to make use of the handy volume entitled “Make Sure of All Things”. Divided into 70 main sections and 287 subsections, the book lists over 5,000 Bible texts on subjects of outstanding importance to men and women everywhere. Texts are listed under the indexed subjects without comment. They are taken from eleven Bible versions, including Catholic. The best rendering is used to bring out the intended meaning. This handy, 416-page, well-bound pocket-size book is obtainable for only 75c. Send for yours today, and on receiving it you will find, with the help of “Make Sure of All Things”, what God says on subjects that puzzle or interest you.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of November 28: The Fruitage of the Spirit.
Week of December 5: Walking in Good Behavior.

