Kingdom Proclaimers Report
“Happy Is the Man That Has Found Wisdom”
THIS proverb has proved true in Korea, where there are now over 71,000 happy Jehovah’s Witnesses. (Proverbs 3:13) And imagine, 42 percent of these ministers are in the full-time service! The following experiences will show that happiness is the lot of those who search for true wisdom.
A woman in Pusan had attended one of Christendom’s churches for 16 years. She had observed so many unscriptural practices that she began to think that there could be no God. On the other hand, she could not deny God’s existence, so she sincerely prayed to God that she might find the true church if there was such a thing. At this point she suddenly thought of Jehovah’s Witnesses, and she remembered that her church had despised them and warned churchgoers against them because the Witnesses did not believe in a Trinity, hellfire, and other doctrines of Christendom. Maybe they were the true church? With the help of a neighbor, she found the location of the Kingdom Hall. The very next day, she attended a meeting.
She was amazed at the orderliness of the meeting. There was no fanatical shouting or emotional singing as was the case in her church. She was introduced to a Witness who was willing to study the Bible with her, and the first study lasted several hours because of her many questions. At the second study, she announced that she would resign from her church and become a Witness. She told the sister that she would not need to study with her anymore, as she could just attend the meetings. However, she was shown the value of having a personal Bible study in addition to attending the meetings. She accepted the suggestion, applied herself to her studies, and in due time was baptized.
Now she is so happy that she has found the wisdom of the true God, Jehovah, and has the hope of living forever in God’s new world.
Retired General Learns the Truth
The wife of an army general was baptized in 1962. Her husband opposed her at first, but later he stopped opposing her, and on and off for the next 28 years, various brothers studied with him, trying to interest him in the truth. He attended some meetings and conventions, but he was one of those who held back from taking the truth seriously. In 1990 he and his wife went to Japan, where they attended a district convention. On this occasion he listened intently to the talks​—something he had not done before. He was shocked by the bold talks exposing false religion, but these certainly opened his eyes to the hypocrisy of Christendom. He was impressed by the orderliness and happiness of God’s people in Japan, which was just the same as he had seen in Korea. Returning to Korea, he began a serious Bible study and finally was baptized.
So after his baptism what should he do? He resigned his position as president of a famous tourist hotel and joined his wife in the full-time pioneer ministry. He feels that being a regular pioneer is the best way to make up for the 28 years he lost while holding back.
He now realizes that the proverb “happy is the man that has found wisdom” also applies to him!

