VOL. XXXVI JUNE 15 No. 12 
A. D. 1915-A.M. 6043 



CONTENTS 

Conquest of the Antitypical Canaanites 179 

Christians to be Non-Resistant 179 

Battle of Spiritual Israel Today 181 

Courage in this "Hour of Temptation" 181 

Prayer— Its Use and Abuse 182 

"Abide in Me and I in You" 182 

Blessings Easily Gained not Appreciated 182 

Evidences of Possession of the Holy Spirit... 184 
The Source of True Promotion 185 

Putting Down and Setting Up in 

the Church 186 

"Ask What I Shall Give Thee" 187 

Are Dreams Significant? 188 

Dedicating the Temple 188 

Preparation of the Living Stones 189 

Work of the Glorified Church 189 

How We Are to Wait on the Lord 190 

Traits Necessary to Success 190 

An Interesting Letter 191 

Colporteuring in Office Buildings 191 

page 178 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N.Y., U.S.A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 



not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



ADDITIONAL CONVENTIONAL GATHERINGS 

(Continued from April 15th issue.) 
Information respecting board and lodging at economical 
rates, etc., should be obtained from the Class Secretaries: 
TOLEDO, O., July 11. 

H. R. E. Kuehn, Sec'y, 517 Magnolia St. 
OLEAN, N.Y., July 12. 

F. S. Ganoung, Sec'y, 204 East Ave. 
TORONTO, ONT., July 18. 

Thos. W. Kirby, Sec'y, 75 Yonge St., Arcade. 
BELLEVILLE, ONT., July 19. 

Mrs. Wm. Rose, Sec'y, 96 Dundas St. 
BERLIN, ONT., July 20. 

Mrs. W. A. Schmidt, Sec'y, 39 Mansion St. 
OWEN SOUND, ONT., July 21. 

Jas. Frizzell, Sec'y, 774 10th St., W. 
LONDON, ONT., July 22. 

John Kumpf, Sec'y, 372 Grey St. 
CHATHAM, ONT., July 23. 

Albert Sheldrick, Sec'y, 120 King St. 
BRANTFORD, ONT., July 24. 

G. A. Oliver, Sec'y, care Express Office. 
HAMILTON, ONT., July 25. 

P. A. Lee, Sec'y, 374 Main St., W. 
SPRINGFIELD, MASS., July 25 to August 1. 

H. F. Spear, Sec'y, 48 Scott St. 
PORTLAND, ME., August 12 to 15. 

I. I. Margeson, Sec'y, Westwood, Mass. 



I.B.S.A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR THE MONTH OF JULY 

Questions from Manual on Series Second of 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
STUDIES VIII.-IX. 

Week of July 4 Q.24 to 29 Week of July 18 Q. 8 to 14 

Week of July 11 Q. 1 to 7 Week of July 25 Q.15 to 21 



Question Manuals on Vol. II., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 5c. each. 



R5705 : page 179 

OUR CONQUEST OF THE ANTITYPICAL CANAANITES 

"Be thou strong and very courageous."— Joshua 1:7. 

JOSHUA records these words of Jehovah God, 

spoken to him at the time when, after 

Moses' death, he took command of Israel. 

The Israelites had then had their forty 

years' experience in the wilderness, and were 

just about to cross the Jordan and take possession 

of the land of Canaan. Joshua 

had become Moses' successor. The people 

had learned many lessons in their wilderness 

experiences; and now that Moses was 

dead, they looked to Joshua as their leader. 

Joshua expressed his inability to serve in the place of 
Moses, through whom God had signally manifested Himself. 
But the Lord assured Joshua that He would bless 
him all the days of his life, even as He had blessed 
Moses. Joshua had been found faithful in all his experiences. 
He was one of the two survivors of the wilderness 
experiences who, when starting out from Egypt, were 
over twenty years of age. Because of the faithfulness 
of Joshua and Caleb, the Lord had promised them that 
they alone of all the adults who left Egypt should enter 
the Promised Land. The others had died in the wilderness, 
save Moses and Aaron, Aaron dying in Mount Hor 
and Moses a little later in Mount Nebo, before the people 
crossed over Jordan. 

The Lord's exhortation for Joshua to be strong and 
very courageous was in connection with the instruction 
that the Israelites were to take possession of the land of 
Canaan and destroy the inhabitants of the land. This 
command of God has been a stumbling-block to many. 
They have supposed that the Bible could not be of God 
when it bears such instructions. They have felt that it 
would be an act of injustice for the Israelites to go in and 
possess Canaan. What right, they say, had Israel to kill 
those people and take possession of their land? It belonged 
more to the people who already possessed it than 
to anybody else. To invade their country, destroy their 
lives and confiscate their lands and their possessions 
would be very unjust. The course of Israel is held up 
as an illustration of the "land-grabbing" disposition of 
the natural man, which has seemed to grow stronger century 
by century, notwithstanding the increase of civilization 
and his professed appreciation of justice. 

This is the view that many take, and much to their own 
injury; for they do not understand the matter they discuss. 
When we say that they do not understand the 



matter, we do not mean that they are people of inferior 
mind, but that they have not taken God's viewpoint. 
From any other than the right viewpoint, the whole course 
of Israel in this matter must seem to be unjust and ungodlike. 
From the right viewpoint, however, the matter 
is seen to be reasonable, just and righteous altogether. 
The sins and abominations of these Gentile people were 
such that their destruction was a very desirable thing. 
God had a great surprise in mind for this land of Canaan, 
which they inhabited. Moreover, the Jewish Age was an 
Age of Types. Both Israel and these corrupt Gentile 
nations were typical. 

R5706 : page 179 

CHRISTIANS TO BE NON-RESISTANT 

In the present Age, the Lord's people are not to take 
possession of either the persons or the property of others. 
They are not to destroy life under any circumstances. 
They are not to battle with any kind of carnal weapons. 
They are to be non-resistant. We are not of those who 
would defend the course of the professed Christian nations 
of modern times along these lines. As Christians, guided 
by our Master's example and instruction, we should seek 
to do good to all men as we have opportunity, and to leave 
them in peaceable possession of their homes, their property 
and their liberties. There is a great difference between 
the Divine Law of Love, which is the motive power 
operating in the true children of God today, and the law 
of selfishness, under which the masses of mankind— including 
the vast majority of nominal Christendom— still 
operate, and will continue to operate until the New Dispensation 
shall be fully ushered in by Divine Power. 

Nevertheless, seeing that the true Church is separate 
from the world in the Lord's Plan and His dealings, we 
can look with comparative equanimity upon the overriding 
of justice and equity by the kingdoms of this world, and 
may realize that the Lord, especially at the present time, is 
taking advantage of their natural disposition toward warfare 
and conquest and empire-building. He will cause 
the wrath of man thus to work out certain features of His 
Plan which will prove later on to be for the blessing of 
the whole world, those now in their graves as well as 
those yet living. 

Not being able to see behind the veil into all the gracious 
purposes of our Heavenly Father, and not being wise 
enough to know how these purposes could be carried out, 
the peoples of the earth are groping on in darkness, thinking 
they are managing their own affairs, not knowing that a 

R5706 : page 180 

Mighty Hand is so directing the affairs of nations that His 
own glorious designs shall be outworked in all things, not 
knowing that nothing can thwart His purposes. The 



Lord's people occupy largely the position of spectators in 
respect to the course of this world— its policies, politics, 
conquests, its frantic efforts to carry out its selfish projects. 
-John 17:16. 

Were we to take a hand in the affairs of the world, 
on either side of the great questions with which they are 
grappling, we would surely be working contrary to the 
Divine Program. The Lord does not purpose to give the 
victory now to either party in the strife. We are to be 
separate from the world and to give our thought and attention, 
our sympathy and interest, to the affairs of the 
Heavenly Kingdom; and while our voices, if ever raised 
at all on such questions, should be raised on behalf of 
justice, mercy and peace, yet we can view with great composure 
whatever events and changes may take place in 
the world, knowing that our Heavenly Father has all 
power to overrule these matters to His own praise and 
to the ultimate good of mankind. 

A RETROSPECTIVE VIEW 

But the world tells us that we are too peaceable. They 
say that mankind could not get along without a certain 
amount of warfare. We answer that no one can understand 
God's methods except as he is guided by His Word, 
by the Spirit of the Truth. God's dealings are different 
in different ages and for different purposes. These seemingly 
conflicting presentations of God's will are perfectly 
reasonable and harmonizable from the proper viewpoint. 

Let us see. Back in Eden, the sentence, "Dying thou 
shalt die," was pronounced upon Adam because of wilful 
disobedience to the Divine instruction that a violation of 
God's command would bring death. After the fall, mankind 
gradually became more and more estranged from the 
Lord. Many of the angels, who then had access to earth 
with powers of materialization, fell from their holy estate. 
Mankind became a prey to these angels who "lusted after 
strange flesh." (Genesis 6:1-4; Jude 6,7; 2 Peter 2:4, 
Diaglott.) This condition of things was finally overthrown 
by the great Deluge of Noah's day. 

But in time the world again became very sinful. Then 
God made selection of one man from amongst mankind; 
namely, Abraham. He promised that if Abraham would 
walk in His ways, He would guide Abraham's affairs to 
his good and make of him a great nation and would bless 
his seed. And so we have Abraham, Isaac and Jacob as 
God's special servants. The descendants of Jacob, God 
took into covenant relationship with Himself during the 
days of Moses. Under Moses as their mediator, God 
promised to be their God and to recognize them as His 
people. If they would be loyal to Him, He would bless 
them. If they should be disloyal to Him and go over to 
the idolatry of the neighboring nations, then He would 
punish them for their sins and give them chastisements; 
but He would not forsake them. 

The peoples of Canaan were in a very degraded condition 



morally. They had progressed so far in sin that it was 

no longer advantageous that they should continue in possession 

of Canaan. The Israelites were to drive out these 

peoples— and they were to be destroyed when necessary. 

There were certain nations which God especially commanded 

Israel to utterly destroy.— Deuteronomy 20:10-18. 

When thinking of this command of God, we are to rid 
our minds of the superstitions of the past. These people 
who were to be slain did not go into eternal torment, but 
into death, into Sheol, Hades, the tomb. This would be 
an unconscious sleep. Those who perished by the sword 
are still asleep; they are not in pain, not in anguish of any 
kind. They are merely cut off from life until the general 
awakening time; for God has made a provision whereby 
those people may return to life, may be called forth from 
their sleep. All the blessings of everlasting life God has 
made provision for through Messiah. Messiah is to have 
a Kingdom; and this Kingdom is to rule the world in 
righteousness (see Psalms 96, 97, and 72), blessing not 
only the living, but also those who have fallen asleep in 
death. (Isaiah 25:6-9; Hosea 13:14; Romans 14:9; 8:20,21, 
Diaglott.) Many Scriptures declare this in unmistakable 
terms. Indeed this is the tenor of the entire 
Word of God. The Divine Plan runs like a golden chain 
through the whole Bible, both Old and New Testaments. 

This great Messiah, who is yet to bless all the race of 
Adam, must needs be their Redeemer, and thus the Owner 
and Deliverer of the people, as the Scriptures declare. 
Through His sacrifice for man He has obtained the "keys 
of Hades and of death," as He tells us. (Revelation 1:18.) 
He gave His life as the offset to Father Adam's 
life. This purchase price has not as yet been applied for 
the world in general, but will be applied, we believe, in 
the very near future. The Millennial Kingdom of Christ 
is for the very purpose of giving all of Adam's children, 
not previously enlightened, as well as Adam himself, a full 
opportunity for everlasting life, after having had experience 
in the nature and results of sin. 

From this broad viewpoint, we see that with these 
peoples of ancient Palestine— the Canaanites, the Amorites, 
the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, the Jebusites, etc. 
—it was a blessing that they died at the time they did. 
Vile and debased in morals, they were no benefit to themselves 
or to others. It was all the same whether they died 
by some kind of disease— consumption, pneumonia, cholera 
—or in some other manner. 

Should any one ask, Why did God choose to have these 
ancient peoples die in battle instead of by disease? The 
answer is that the peoples inhabiting the land would be a 
constant menace to the morals of the people of Israel. 
They were not only idolatrous, but practised licentious 
rites, divination, etc. Furthermore, God purposed that the 
land should be put to a far different use. He had a great 
Plan, in which it was His design that Canaan should play 
an important part. The land and its inhabitants were to 
be typical of God's dealings with Spiritual Israel in the 



Gospel Age. The type in which the land of Canaan was 
designed of God to figure could not be carried out without 
the expulsion of these heathen, or their destruction. 

SPIRITUAL ISRAEL EXPELLING THE CANAANITES 

Is it asked what type was here shown? We believe 
that the expulsion and destruction of these sinful nations 
by Israel was a type of how the people of God today, 
Spiritual Israel, are to take possession of their human 
bodies. We are, as New Creatures, to conquer, to destroy, 
these tendencies of the flesh which would enslave us. If 
we do not overcome and destroy them, they will overcome 
and destroy us. We are to vanquish the evil propensities, 
evil habits, vices, thoughts, desires, which have inhabited 
our minds, and are by our new wills to take entire control 
and fill the place of the former occupants with holy, pure 
thoughts, desires, ambitions, purposes, habits. 

These human bodies are now the property and possession 
of the Spiritual Israelites, the New Creatures in 
Christ. There is to be no peace between the New Creature 
and his flesh. We are to take warning from Natural 
Israel in this respect. Failure on their part to drive out 

R5706 :page 181 

and destroy their enemies completely, as God commanded, 
was a source of constant trouble and ensnarement, and a 
cause of much idolatry and sin to Israel. And their experiences 
"were written for our admonition." Our warfare 
against spiritual foes must result in the utter destruction 
of the fleshly mind, and will also mean the death of 
the human body. 

This warfare of Israel against their enemies may also 
be a picture of conditions in the Millennium. During the 
Millennial Age the world, under the guidance of Christ 
and the Church, will be brought into a condition which will 
fit them to have possession of the whole earth. Satan will 
be bound for a thousand years. Sin and the curse of 
Adamic death now resting on the world will be destroyed, 
together with everything contrary to righteousness. All 

R5707 :page 181 

these things belong to the reign of that "strong man" who 
has so long oppressed the world. Christ, the Antitype of 
Joshua, will then be in control, and will show man how to 
exterminate these things of sin and thus eventually come 
into possession of the earth, the Eden of God, and each 
man be a king, a sovereign. 

While the Natural Israelite was to be a man of battle 
and to take possession of the land of the enemy, we are 
not to see in this fact anything that was not in it. For instance, 
it was not the Israelites who were to say that they 
would go up and possess the land of Canaan. It was God 
Himself who was to give them possession. Nor are we to 



think that God was negligent of the real interests of these 
Gentile peoples. He declares that their iniquity had come 
to the full. It was no longer profitable at that time that 
their lives should be prolonged. Thus we see that justice 
was not infringed upon in giving the Israelites that land 
for an everlasting possession. This had been previously 
foretold by the Lord; but the testimony of the Lord, at 
the time the promise was made, was that it would not then 
be an appropriate time for its fulfilment, but that there 
should first be a dark time, until the iniquity of those nations 
had come to the full. 

BATTLE OF SPIRITUAL ISRAEL TODAY 

Coming down to the Gospel Age, we see that the 
Spiritual Israelites have had a great conflict. It is a warfare 
against the whole world— no warfare so mighty and 
so momentous has ever been waged. Yet the conflict 
fought by the Lord Jesus and His followers has not been 
a fight with guns or other carnal weapons. We have today 
millions of people in great camps intent upon destroying 
one another. They are being goaded on by their rulers. 
There may be here and there a Christian among them, one 
who has truly given his heart to God; but these are the 
exceptions. The great mass of the world acknowledge 
that they have taken no such step as consecration to the 
Lord. Yet they are instructed by their rulers that they are 
God's people and are fighting His battles. 

According to the Bible, only the saintly, only those who 
have taken the specific steps laid down by the Master for 
His disciples, are Christians at all. All others professing 
to be Christians are merely imitations— "tares." Through 
a study of the lives of saints of olden time true Christians 
are enabled to see more clearly the mind of God, the will 
of God, for themselves. They gain from the lives of 
Moses, Joshua, the Prophets, and other faithful ones of 
past ages lessons of faith, of courage, of zeal. They are 
instructed that all these Scriptural records are meant as 
types and as admonitions for the Gospel Church; and they 
are thereby warned, strengthened and encouraged. 

The Lord's people should not feel strong in themselves 
nor boastful, but, on the contrary, very humble and very 
insufficient— just as Joshua did. All of God's children are 
to realize their insufficiency in their own strength. They 
should feel that God has called them to a great work, and 
that they would make an utter failure unless the Lord 
gives His blessing. They are to look to the Lord and to 
receive His promises into good and honest hearts, believing 
that these promises are theirs, so long as they are 
loyal and true to Him. Thus doing, they may be strong, 
very strong; they may be very courageous. 

SHINING EXAMPLES OF THE PAST 

We have noted the courage of our Lord Jesus Himself, 
with a whole nation against Him! It has been thus 



with all His faithful followers— most of them the poor of 
this world, who have had very little wealth or influence or 
honor of men. The true people of God throughout 
the Gospel Age have been a humble class, yet they have 
been very strong and courageous. The people in the days 
of the Apostles "took knowledge of them that they had 
been with Jesus" and had learned of Him. Those disciples 
of Jesus had seen His readiness to lay down His 
life in the Father's service. They had seen His courage 
when He was facing death of the most cruel kind, when 
He said, "The cup which My Father hath poured for Me, 
shall I not drink it?" And so we who have followed the 
Master since then have taken note of the spirit which our 
dear Lord manifested at all times, under the most trying 
and crucial experiences; and it has proven a wonderful 
inspiration to us. 

The faithful ones have all along as a rule been little 
known in the world. They have not usually been of the 
great, the learned, the rich. In the past there may have 
been some prominent ones, some of noble birth, who were 
saints of God, living up to what light they had in their 
time; but they were the exceptions. We know that there 
have been many true saints who have lived quiet, uneventful 
lives, yet who have seemed to live up to all the light 
they possessed and to walk with God until they fell asleep 
in death. The world has generally ignored these saints 
of God, even when they were not actively persecuted. We 
cannot surely know who are entirely loyal and sincere at 
heart; but we may be sure that "the Lord knoweth them 
that are His."— 2 Timothy 2:19. 

COURAGE IN THIS "HOUR OF TEMPTATION" 

Coming down to our own day, there never was a time 
when more strength of character and more courage were 
needed than just now. The iniquities of the whole world, 
and especially of so-called Christendom, have now about 
come to the full; and all present governments are about to 
be swept away, to make room for the glorious Kingdom 
of God under the whole heavens— the glorious Reign of 
the King of kings. All the ecclesiastical systems of today, 
calling themselves the Church of Christ, are arrayed on 
the side of error and are battling against the Truth and 
its advocates. So we need to be strong in the Lord and in 
the power of His might. 

Whoever starts out to battle in his own strength against 
this stronghold of error will be sure to be defeated. But 
if he goes in the strength of the Lord of Hosts, and has 
Divine direction as to what he shall do or say, he may well 
be of good courage. Many earnest hearts are now asking 
for the Bread of Life, they are captives in Babylon or 
are famishing out in the "field," the world. These need 
our assistance. 

Our strength will be tried— our hold upon God and 
upon the Truth, and our courage in defending the Truth. 
These will surely be put to the test; for Babylon is opposing 



our way. God will not have any in the Kingdom who 

R5707 : page 182 

have not faithfully endured. Yet in meekness let us seek 
to instruct those who oppose themselves to the Word of 
the Lord; and let us look for the hungry and thirsty ones. 

We do not know in what form some of our trials and 
tribulations will come. But we who are living in this "evil 
day," yea, in the very close of this day— in the final "hour 
of temptation"— surely need to have on the whole armor 
of God. We need to have our loins girt about with 
Truth; we need the helmet to protect our minds, our intellects, 
from the shafts of error; we need the breastplate 
of righteousness; we need the Sword of the Spirit— 
the broad two-edged Sword; we need the sandals of "preparation 
of the Gospel of Peace." We need all these to 
overcome the Canaanites in our own breast, and to overcome 
all the surrounding obstacles. 

Thus armored and furnished, we may indeed come off 
"more than conquerors" in the great conflict, which is 
daily increasing. We shall conquer "through Him who 
loved us and bought us with His own precious blood." 
Let the promise of the Master be our daily inspiration: 
"To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with Me in 
My Throne." 

"Arise, then, O Army of Gideon! 

Let him that is fearful return; 
Jehovah wants only the zealous, 

Whose hearts with the love of Truth burn! 

"Your sword is the 'Sword of the Spirit'; 

Your lamp is the light from His Word; 
Your pitcher, this poor earthen vessel 

You break at the voice of your Lord. 

"Is your light burning bright in your pitcher? 

Doth your trumpet give forth certain sound? 
Soon the Sword of the Lord and of Gideon 

The enemy's host will confound. 

"For sure is the victory promised, 

And great is the peace He awards; 
Then 'stand' in your place, all ye faithful— 

The battle's not yours, but the Lord's!" 



R5707 : page 182 

PRAYER-ITS USE AND ABUSE 

"And He spake a parable unto them to this end, that men ought 
always to pray and not to faint." "Pray without ceasing." 
—Luke 18:1; 1 Thessalonians 5:17. 



IN THE first text under consideration, we see 

that our Lord used a parable to point out 

the lessons He designed to give. A parable 

is a word-picture designed to illustrate some 

truth, but is not necessarily a statement of 

facts. On the contrary, it seems very rarely 

to be a statement of facts, but is merely a 

suppositionary case. More than this, in a 

parable the thing said is never the thing 

meant, literally. The wheat and the tares 

of one of Jesus' parables were not literal wheat and tares, 

but were the children of the Kingdom and the children 

of the Adversary. So the parable here is of an unjust 

judge, who had no appreciation of justice. Notwithstanding 

R5708 : page 182 

this, a poor widow came to him again and again importuning 
for help. To get rid of her he finally gave her 
the relief desired. 

The Lord uses this parable as an illustration of our 
coming to the Heavenly Father— not that the Heavenly 
Father is an unjust Judge nor that the Church is a 
widow, but that the parable is merely an illustration of 
the reward of importunity in prayer. The woman's persistency 
in continually coming to the judge illustrated 
what Jesus wished to emphasize. In concluding the 
parable, He says that if an unjust judge would grant this 
poor widow her petition because of her continued asking, 
what might we expect of our Heavenly Father? When 
His children cry unto Him day and night, He is sure to 
hear their prayers. This implies that the prayers are 
proper ones for the Lord to answer. We cannot think 
that God would do anything but that which is just and 
right and proper, and in harmony with this thought the 
instruction to the Lord's people is that in coming to the 
Lord in prayer we should make sure that we ask only for 
the things pleasing to Him. Therefore Christians who 
live near to God are the best qualified to offer prayer that 
would be acceptable and would be answered. 

"ABIDE IN ME, AND I IN YOU" 

Our Lord Jesus was thoroughly informed regarding 
proper prayer. We have His own testimony, "I know 
that thou hearest Me always." He never had a refusal, 
because he always asked the things in harmony with the 
Father's will. There must be two conditions met in 
order that our prayers may be answered. We must first 
have accepted Jesus as our Savior, and then have made 
a consecration to God in His appointed way. These steps 
must both be taken before we can be in Christ at all. 
When accepted of the Heavenly Father in Christ Jesus, 
we become New Creatures in Him. It is to the New 
Creature that all God's promises apply. Whoever has not 



become a New Creature by being begotten of the Holy 
Spirit is outside of all these promises— but not outside 
of hope; for we see that, in God's Plan, there is a broad 
hope for all the world. But in this "acceptable time," 
none can offer acceptable prayer except in this special 
appointed way. 

There is but one sheep-fold in the present time. Only 
those who are in this fold are in God's favor. These 
have a right to pray. But there is a second consideration, 
after consecration has been made; namely, Are these 
abiding in Christ or are they going out of harmony with 
Him? God's Word must abide in us— not merely that we 
should once have read the Bible through, or that we 
read so many verses or chapters each day— but the Word 
must remain in us, its teachings and principles must be 
assimilated and incorporated into our lives. Thus we 
shall be able to see what God's mind is, what is pleasing 
to Him, what we should ask for and what we should not 
ask for, under His terms. All who thus abide in Christ, 
and in whom His Word abides, may ask "what they will." 
They may ask anything that is guaranteed in God's Word, 
and this means that they may ask whatsoever they will; 
for His Word dwells in them richly, and they would not 
think of asking anything not authorized therein. 

BLESSINGS EASILY GAINED NOT APPRECIATED 

Our lesson teaches continuity in prayer— not merely 
that we pray once, and then say, "I have prayed about 
this matter, and now I will leave it." But the question 
may arise, "Why continue to ask? God knows every 
need. Why not leave the entire matter with Him?" The 
Scriptures seem to answer this question by showing us 
that we need to ask for our own benefit, that we may be 
ready to appreciate the answer when it comes. If we 
get things without our realization of our need of them, 
they would come to us so easily that in our fallen condition 
they would be unappreciated. 

Indeed it is true that the majority of people receive 
daily many, many blessings that they are never thankful 

R5708 : page 183 

for; they do not appreciate them. God sends the sunshine 
and the rain, as our Lord Jesus told us, upon the 
evil and the good; and He intimates that these are great 
blessings from God. Yet how few people really appreciate 
the rain as a blessing from God! How few, when 
they see the sunshine, appreciate the blessing God is 
sending to them through the sunshine! Because these 
blessings are very common, and come without the asking, 
they are very little appreciated by the majority. 

But the Christian, having the eyes of his understanding 
opened, appreciates more and more all these blessings 
as from the Lord. Therefore as he comes to realize his 
needs, and what is promised in the Lord's Word, he knows 



that he may advantageously go to the Lord in prayer that 
these needs may be supplied. His heart has come into 
that receptive attitude where he is ready to receive God's 
blessings thankfully and profit by them. 

What, then, should we ask for as God's children? 
What do the Scriptures tell us to ask for? In the first 
place, they tell us not to use "vain repetitions." How 
should we understand this? Our Lord explains that we 
should not use vain repetitions "as the heathen do," who 
think that they will be heard on account of the number 
of times they repeat the prayer. The Chinese, for instance, 
have praying wheels, by which they can say a 
hundred prayers a minute. Thus they save time, voice, 
etc. But such prayers are only vain repetitions. Many 
professed Christians, we believe, practise vain repetitions; 
they say many prayers, which we fear often do not come 
from the heart, but are said over and over from an 
imaginary sense of duty or obligation. 

NOT FOR OLD CREATURE, BUT FOR NEW 

The proper heart condition would be one in which we 
would feel the need of the Lord's blessing and assistance, 
and would go to Him in a trustful attitude, presenting our 
petition, and waiting for His time and way to answer. 
As to the things that we should ask for, the Master points 
out in one of His discourses that the heathen, the people 
of the world in general, all not believers, ask for earthly 
blessings— "What shall we eat? What shall we drink? 
Wherewithal shall we be clothed?" So might a child pray 
for these earthly things in its innocence of mind. But 
children of God should pray for earthly blessings only to 
the extent that they would minister to the growth or 
usefulness of the New Creature. 

As the Christian grows in grace and in knowledge he 
should come to realize more and more that he is a New 
Creature, and that the New Creature is to pray for itself 
and not for the old creature. The New Creature must 
take into consideration the needs of the mortal body 
which is its tabernacle and its servant, but must ask for 
this body only what will be necessary that the New 
Creature may properly develop, and may accomplish the 
work given him to do by the Lord. He may ask nothing 
merely that the old creature may be gratified; for the old 
creature is reckoned as dead. He may ask the Lord to 
supply his real needs according to His unerring Wisdom. 

We should pray for strength to overcome the flesh, for 
wisdom to know how to deal with ourselves, for strength 
of character and for the development of the fruits and 
graces of the Holy Spirit. We should pray for spiritual 
food, for grace and wisdom to keep our garments unspotted 
from the world and to put on the whole armor of 
God. We should ask for wisdom as to how to understand 
the Word of God, and how to appreciate the Spirit of 
the Truth. All these things would be proper subjects of 
prayer, because they are part and parcel of what goes to 



make up the New Creation. 

In these prayers for the higher things, we are not 
ignoring the body and its needs, though we are not to seek 
after the things that the Gentiles seek (the name Gentiles 
including all those who are not in covenant relationship 
with God). Those who are in this covenant relationship 
with God should not ask as do those who are not in such 
relationship. God does not hear the prayers of those who 
have never come into His family. They have not been 
instructed to pray. And we are to pray for things different 
from those for which they would pray. In all the 
words that Jesus spoke there is no suggestion that His 
disciples should pray for better shoes or dress or better 
home or how to pay off the mortgage. Jesus and the 
Apostles never prayed for such things. What they prayed 
for is a suggestion of what we should pray for. 

We are to distinguish between prayer, petitions to God, 
and adoration. Any one may worship God, may bow 
down and adore Him. But in the matter of prayer there 
is a limitation. Only certain persons may pray to the 
Lord with any assurance of being heard. And these are 
they who have become His people by a definite covenant. 
Any who have come into such covenant relationship with 
God have the privilege of prayer. This was true of the 
Jews under the Law Covenant arrangement; and it is true 
of us who have made a Covenant of Sacrifice with the 
Lord through Jesus Christ. But even when privileged to 
pray, we must note the conditions of acceptable prayer. 
The conditions are that we should pray in harmony with 
the Divine will and not seek to bend the Divine will to 
ours. This would lead us to study the Word of God to 
find out the things which the Lord has promised us, and 
we should not ask outside of the Divine promises. 

BODY CARED FOR AS PROPERTY OF NEW CREATURE 

We should appreciate the fact that throughout the 
Gospel Age the Lord deals with His children as New 
Creatures in Christ, and that all His promises to us are 
to the New Creature. The New Creature is interested in 
the old body, because this body is its property. The 
body's interests are ours as New Creatures only in so far 
as these interests are beneficial to us in making our calling 

R5709 : page 183 

and election sure to our Heavenly inheritance, in so 
far as their consideration will in no wise interfere with 
our spiritual interests— but no farther. We are not, 
therefore, to tell the Lord what we prefer, but are to take 
what He sees best to give; for this will be what is for 
our best interests. This does not mean that we are not 
to mention to God our bodily needs. But we are to do 
so in the way that our Lord indicates to us in His sample 
prayer: "Give us this day our daily bread," our daily 
provisions, acknowledging that the daily food comes from 



Him, whether it is fine or common, bountiful or not. 
It will all be for the best interests of the New Creature. 
The prayer of one who asks only in harmony with the 
Lord's Word is certain to be answered. Good earthly 
parents are pleased to give good gifts to their children, 
gifts that they see are for their children's real interests. 
But if they see that the child is unappreciative of favors 
received, they might the next time withdraw the favors 
until proper appreciation is manifested. And so it is 
with our Heavenly Father. In bestowing His best gifts 
He waits for us to become really hungry for them. He 
does this that His blessings may do us the more good 
when they are granted. 

PRAYER FOR SPIRIT-BEGETTING UNNECESSARY 

In respect to the giving of the Holy Spirit some people 

R5709 : page 184 

have a wrong conception. Many not consecrated pray 
that the Lord would give them the Holy Spirit; but they 
have not studied the Scriptures enough. The Lord gives 
the Holy Spirit without our asking for it specifically, 
just as with the disciples at Pentecost: they presented 
themselves before the Lord and waited. They were praying, 
but they did not know enough about the Holy Spirit 
to pray for it. But the Lord gave the proper thing at 
the right time. And so it is with us, irrespective of 
prayer for the Spirit, provided we meet the required conditions. 
When we make our consecration to God through 
Christ, we do not need to ask for the begetting of the 
Holy Spirit— no more than a child in its natural conception. 
The child does not ask for its own begetting. How 
could it? But after we have received the spirit-begetting, 
we should pray that we may have God's sentiment, God's 
mind, God's will, as our sentiment, our mind, our will. 
God loves righteousness and hates iniquity. So we, 
realizing that we are surrounded by evil and selfishness, 
need to cultivate the spirit of love, that we may have that 
spirit which would appreciate and love righteousness. We 
are to learn gradually to love righteousness and to hate 
injustice and iniquity in large things and in small. We 
are to hate unrighteousness so much that we would scorn 
to do an injustice or an injury knowingly to anybody. 
The New Creature sees these things but dimly at first— 
what are just and what are unjust things, what are righteous 
and what are unrighteous things. We wish to have 
the Lord's sentiment as our sentiment in everything. Thus 
by studying the Lord's character as revealed in His Word, 
and striving day by day to be conformed thereto, we are 
"changed into the same image, from glory to glory, by the 
Spirit of the Lord." And thus we become more and more 
filled with the Spirit. 

EVIDENCES OF POSSESSION OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 



As the child of God develops, the possession of the 
Holy Spirit is more and more evidenced in his meekness, 
patience, long-suffering, brotherly-kindness, love. These 
are the elements of character, of disposition, that God 
wishes us to have. These are to rule in our hearts, in our 
thoughts, and more and more in our outward lives. Anger, 
malice, hatred, strife, evil-speaking, envy, jealousy, all 
these are evidences of the unholy spirit, the spirit of the 
world and the Adversary, which we as children of the 
Heavenly King are to put away. They are the works of 
the flesh and the Devil. 

Since all of us have a measure of the unholy spirit 
in our flesh, some more and some less, it is right to pray 
daily for a larger measure of the Spirit of the Lord, more 
and more of the spirit of harmony with His perfect will. 
But we must cooperate with these prayers; for the Lord 
never arbitrarily fills any heart with His Spirit, even after 
the begetting has taken place. By coming to the Lord 
in sincere prayer for these blessings continually, by asking 
along these lines, we shall be preparing ourselves to look 
for the evidences of the Holy Spirit in our life. We 
shall be enabled to see whether we have more meekness 
than we once had, or whether we still lack in meekness. 
We shall perceive whether we are more gentle and more 
patient, whether we have more self-control, and in what 
respects we especially need to develop more in spiritual 
fruitage. Undoubtedly all of these qualities are lacking 
to a greater or less extent; but as we watch and pray, we 
shall learn to find the answer to our prayers; and as we 
grow in knowledge, in love, in Christlikeness, we grow in 
likeness also to our Father in Heaven. 

IMPROPER VIEWS OF PRAYER 

Prayer, as we have shown, is very essential, absolutely 
indispensable, to Christian growth, yea, to spiritual existence. 
Yet we have never thought of praying in the extreme 
way that some do. We have never thought of telling 
the Lord all about His Plan and of our wishes as to 
how He shall govern the Universe, and when and how to 
bring to pass our own will. We think there is far too 
much praying along this line. The sooner it is stopped 
the better. In answer to the request of His disciples, the 
Master gave them a sample prayer, which was surely very 
different from the prayers that the majority of people 
offer, who seemingly do not heed the example at all. 

The proper thing is to hearken to the Word of the 
Lord and not do too much speaking to Him. We are to 
do a great deal of listening, while He speaks to us. The 
poet has well expressed this important thought: 

"Master, speak! Thy servant heareth, 

Waiting for Thy gracious Word, 
Longing for Thy voice that cheereth, 

Master, let it now be heard! 



I am listening, Lord, for Thee! 
What hast Thou to say to me?" 

We understand that the Bible is the Divine presentation 
of the Divine will, purpose, plan, concerning us as 
His children. It is the Truth that the Lord designs shall 
sanctify us. "Sanctify them through Thy Truth; Thy 
Word is Truth." So declares our Master. He does not 
say, Sanctify them through prayer! The Master's prescription 
is that we study the Word and become sanctified 
thereby. And who is wiser than He? If we have not 
written a volume on prayer, it is because we find no 
Scriptural authority or precedent for so doing. 

While prayer is absolutely indispensable to the Christian, 
as we have said, yet it is the Word of God which 
teaches us God's will and Plan and which points out the 
way for us to go. We believe it is the failure to see this 
that has been largely responsible for the great want of 
faith of many professed children of God. No amount of 
praying will make up for a neglect of the study of the 
Lord's Word, which is the only Lamp to our feet given 
us as our Guide in this long, dark night in which sin has 
reigned in the world. "Thy Word is a lamp unto my feet 
and a light unto my path."— Psalm 119:105. 

We are to "pray without ceasing." We are to do this 
in the sense of not being discouraged when the good 
things promised us and asked for do not come quickly. 
We are to remember that the Word of Promise is sure. 
We are to rest in these promises and to continue to ask 
and to wait for their fulfilment— patiently, hopefully. 
Thus we pray unceasingly, "Thy Kingdom come," not by 
repeating the words every moment or every hour, but by 
continuing the thought, the expectation, the waiting for 
it, and by laboring in the interests of that Kingdom and 
in the preparation of our characters in order that we may 
have a share in it. We have known some to fall into 
difficulty by supposed communion with God— remaining 
on their knees for some time beside an empty chair on 
which they tried to imagine the Lord to be seated, etc., 
etc. We believe that they were in danger of falling into 
a snare of the Adversary by such unscriptural proceedings. 

For our part we feel that the Lord has already granted 
so many blessings that we would be ashamed to ask for 
many more. Our own requests, therefore, must be few. 
The Editor's presentations at the Throne of Heavenly 
Grace are thank-offerings, praise-offerings, indications of 
his devotion to the Lord and trust in Him, petitions for 
wisdom and grace to guide in life's affairs. We recall the 

R5709 :page 185 

Divine promises all the time, and not merely when on our 
knees. We seek to live in harmony with our prayers, and 
would encourage others to do the same. However, we 
are not all constituted alike; and having stated the matter 
from the Bible viewpoint, as we believe, also as viewed in 



the SCRIPTURE STUDIES and in other WATCH TOWER articles, 
we must leave it, trusting that the Lord's providence 
will guide His people aright. 

THE HOLY SPIRIT THE SPECIAL OBJECT OF PRAYER 

The reason why the prayers of so many Christians are 
unanswered is that their prayers are for things God has 
not told us to pray for or that they were not offered in 
sincerity. They have asked for wealth or temporal blessings, 
or perhaps for the conversion of a specified number 
of souls at their revival meeting, or something else unauthorized, 
or they have not really desired what they asked 
for, if it was for spiritual blessing. The Lord might 
grant a request for some temporal thing to a babe in 
Christ who prayed in his ignorance, not being properly 

R5710 :page 185 

instructed. But it would be different with an advanced 
Christian. The little child at the table might ask for 
something improper and violate the rules of etiquette 
without blame; while a person of mature age, advanced 
in education and in knowledge of etiquette, should know 
better. The things for which the Lord's children should 
especially pray are specified in His Word. The Holy 
Spirit is the special gift of God to His children. 

When we come to know that the Holy Spirit is the 
influence, the disposition of God, then we know what we 
are praying for. We want more and more of the Holy 
Spirit of God, that it may make us more gentle, more 
kind, more loving; we want more and more of the mind 
of Christ (mind and Spirit being used here interchangeably). 
We realize that we must strive to have this mind 
of Christ. If we day by day cultivate the spirit of the 
Devil, we cannot expect ever to attain the mind of Christ. 
If we determinedly cultivate the Spirit, the mind, of 
Christ, then the spirit of the Adversary can gain no entrance 
into our hearts; and we shall become more and 
more sound in mind. We come to know more and more 
the perfect will of God as we are filled with His Spirit. 
Thus we are being prepared for an abundant entrance 
into the everlasting Kingdom. 

PRAY IN FAITH, NOTHING DOUBTING 

The Lord in the lesson under consideration, tells us 
that we must not "faint," the word faint being used in 
the sense of faint-heartedness— "Consider Jesus, ...lest 
ye be weary and faint in your minds"; "for in due season 
we shall reap, if we faint not." We may ask for more 
of the Holy Spirit, feeling that we need grace along some 
particular line. For instance, we may feel that we need 
more patience. While praying for patience, we should 
not say, "I shall never be patient; I was not born that 
way!" But we are to expect our prayer along this line 



to be answered. We are to ask and then wait for the 
patience, continuing our petition, knowing that the patience 
will come, if we strive for it in harmony with our 
prayers. An excellent and practical way to assist in this 
is to impose a punishment upon ourselves for every outbreak 
of impatience. 

The Lord's people have long been praying, "Thy Kingdom 
come; Thy will be done on earth." This prayer has 
been offered for more than eighteen hundred years, and 
God's children have not yet seen His Kingdom established. 
Shall we cease to pray? Ah, no! We are assured 
that it will indeed come. Even now it is at the very 
doors! God's Kingdom shall be fully set up; and the time 
will come when there will be no disloyalty in all the earth, 
as now there is none in Heaven. Our prayers will not 
bring God's Kingdom one minute sooner than He has 
planned, but we pray by way of assuring the Lord that 
we are waiting for the Kingdom and expecting it in harmony 
with His sure promise. By so praying and not 
fainting, the children of the Lord are strengthening themselves. 
God's glorious Kingdom will be manifested— and 
soon! Then all who have attained the character-likeness 
of our Lord Jesus Christ shall be exalted to reign with 
Him in this Kingdom. 



R5710 :page 185 

THE SOURCE OF TRUE PROMOTION 

"Promotion cometh neither from the east, nor from the west, 
nor from the south; but God is the Judge. He putteth 
down one, and setteth up another."— Psalm 75:6,7. 

ONE watching the stars night after night, 
would observe that while each one has its 
own motion, yet all seem to revolve around 
a fixed point which we call the North Star. 
This fixed star is apparently motionless, and 
therefore is a point by which a man may 
gage his course. As we all know, the magnetic 
needle of the mariner's compass always 
points due north. 

From the clearer astronomical knowledge 
of our day, it has been ascertained that while the planets 
of our solar system revolve around our sun, yet there 
are vast numbers of other suns each having its own 
retinue of planets, which with their satellites are revolving 
around it as a center. Furthermore, Science declares 
that there is a far mightier Center, around which these 
countless millions of suns revolve, accompanied by their 
planets and satellites. This great Center seems to 
be associated with the Pleiades, particularly with Alcyone, 
the central star of this renowned group. For this reason 
the suggestion has been made that the Pleiades may represent 



the Residence of Jehovah, the place from which 

He governs the Universe. This thought gives new force 

to the question which the Almighty asked the patriarch 

Job: "Canst thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades, 

or loose the bands of Orion? Canst thou bring forth the 

constellations of the Zodiac in their season?"— 

Job 38:31,32. 

There seem to be fewer stars in the North than in 
any other part of the heavens. Thus the North seems to 
have been given a very prominent position, the other 
points of the compass giving it homage, as it were. This 
fact was observed by the ancients, as the Prophet Job 
declares— "He stretcheth out the North over the empty 
space, and hangeth the earth upon nothing." (Job 26:7.) 
Throughout the Scriptures the North seems to be 
closely associated with Jehovah's government of the earth. 

LESSONS IN THE RESULTS OF SIN 

For six thousand years this planet Earth has been a 
rebellious province in the Universe of God; and God has 
permitted mankind to work out their own designs, to 
manifest what they could do. He not only gave His 
chosen people Israel certain promises and blessings, but 
He afterwards gave opportunity also to various nations 
of the world to exercise great power, to become indeed 
world-empires, as representatives of Gentile wisdom, to 
show what the unregenerate heart could give to men in 
the way of order, law, prosperity, blessings, peace. The 

R5710 :page 186 

period during which He gave this opportunity to the 
nations is Scripturally called the "Times of the Gentiles," 
a period of 2,520 years, which began with Nebuchadnezzar 
king of Babylon at the time the Lord permitted His own 
typical kingdom of Israel to be overthrown, to so remain 
until Messiah's Day.— Luke 21:24; Ezekiel 21:25-27. 

During this interim the world has had four great universal 
empires. These world-governments have attempted 
to bring various blessings to mankind, yet they have all 
proven weak so far as righteousness is concerned, and 
strong so far as evil and viciousness are concerned. 
Evidently this is the great lesson which God designed 
that mankind should learn— that in this fallen condition 
human government cannot be a success; that perfection 
of being and perfect conformity to the Divine Law alone 
can give true happiness; that mankind in their present 
sinful, dying condition, can meet with only ultimate failure 
and disaster. Thus through actual experiences mankind 
will come to realize their own helplessness and 
their need of God. 

But while God has been permitting man to prove his 
own weakness, He has also been preparing for the blessing 
of the whole world, as He has foretold in His Word. 
The time when He will take charge of man's affairs, 



through the Kingdom of Messiah, will be the time when 
true and lasting promotion will be realized. All who will 
then come into harmony with God will receive this true 
promotion— the attainment of all the good things which 
were originally provided for mankind in God's Plan, but 
which were lost by the disobedience of our first father 
and our first mother, Adam and Eve. 

"God is the Judge; He putteth down one and setteth 
up another." The Lord will put down the attempt of 
the great usurper Satan to rule the world. Satan, originally 
Lucifer, conceived an ambition to exalt himself to 
"sit upon the sides of the North," to "be like the Most 
High." (Isa. 14:12-17.) But very soon now he will be 
bound for a thousand years, and will finally be destroyed. 

So far as earthly kingdoms are concerned, we may say 
that God has a general supervision over them in so far 
as they might otherwise thwart His purposes; and He 
sometimes puts down one and favors the exaltation to 
power of another. We are not able to say, however, that 
this putting down or setting up is in the nature of 
Divine judgment for sin; for some of those put down 
have not been the unworthy, and some of those raised to 
power have not been the best, but often very evil. God 
has been merely so overruling as to cause all things not 
only to work together for the ultimate outworking of the 
great Plan which He has arranged, but also to teach men 
the necessary lessons of the exceeding sinfulness of sin. 

"MOUNT ZION ON THE SIDES OF THE NORTH" 

God's particular dealings with the world will be in the 
future, and for the first thousand years will be through 
the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ. All things are of 
the Father, and by the Son. In this glorious work of 
judging the world, Christ Himself will be the Judge, and 
the Church, His Body, will be the associate judges. They 
will render righteous judgment in all cases, will set up 
only those who come into full accord with God, and will 
overthrow and eventually destroy all others. 

In the meantime God has a special dealing with His 
people— those who have already left the world, who have 
consecrated their lives to Him, who have been accepted 
through the Lord Jesus Christ and counted members of 
Christ's Body. These are in the way to a promotion, a 
prominence, greater than that of all others. Satan's ambition 

R5711 :page 186 

was for self-exaltation; Christ's ambition, on the 
contrary, was to please the Father and to do good. So 
likewise the class called to be Christ's associates in the 
Kingdom have a similar purpose and spirit to that of 
their Lord and Head. They also seek to do only the will 
of the Heavenly Father. They also are moved, not to 
promote their own selfish interests and to gratify their 
fleshly propensities, but to lay down their lives in carrying 



out God's great Purpose and Plan. 

This is the class which will receive the preeminence 
over all other classes, all other stations, in earth or in 
Heaven. With their Lord they are to receive glory, 
honor, immortality. They will be exalted far above angels 
and be granted the Divine nature, as has been their 
Master and Forerunner. (Romans 2:7; 1 Corinthians 15:53,54; 

1 John 3:2,3; 1 Corinthians 1:26,27; 2 Thessalonians 2:14; 

2 Peter 1:4.) These will share the First 
Resurrection, Christ's Resurrection. (Revelation 20:5,6; 
Philippians 3:10.) Their mortal bodies, now merely 
the instruments of the New Creature, will be laid down 
forever in death— "Sown in weakness," they will be 
"raised in power"; "sown in dishonor," they will be 
"raised in glory"; "sown an animal body," they will be 
"raised a spiritual body." 

A careful study of the above citations of Scripture 
will be very helpful to those who are comparatively new 
in the study of the High Calling of the Church of Christ. 
It is a subject but little understood by Christians in general. 
But such is the great promotion which God purposes 
to give His true saints of this Gospel Age, and this 
promotion can be received from no other quarter than 
God Himself, on His own terms. This is the glorious 
inheritance of Zion. When she has been thus exalted 
and glorified with her Lord, it will be said of her, "Beautiful 
for situation, the joy of the whole earth, is Mount 
Zion, on the sides of the North, the City of the Great 
King." (Psalm 48:2.) Thus the great eminence which 
Lucifer in his pride and presumption sought to grasp, 
that he might "sit upon the sides of the North," will be 
granted as a reward to The Christ, Head and Body. 

PUTTING DOWN AND SETTING UP IN THE CHURCH 

This is the great prominence which the people of God, 
called to this high station, should be seeking, by faithfulness, 
humility, love and zeal in the service of the Lord. 
During the present life, experiences of developing and 
testing are necessary preparations for this exaltation. 
All those begotten of the Holy Spirit as New Creatures 
are now called the Church of Christ, although the elect 
Church proper will not be organized and completed until 
the First Resurrection. Not until then will the personnel 
of the Church of glory be manifested. But God deals 
now with all those who have made a Covenant of Sacrifice. 
(Psalm 50:5.) When they meet, even two or 
three of them, the Lord's presence is in their midst; and 
each has the Lord's blessing in proportion as he has His 
Spirit. God is now judging in the Church through His 
Son. He is not judging the world at present. 

The principle expressed in our text is operating now 
in the Church— the setting up of one and the putting down 
of another. That the Lord does take an active part in 
the affairs of the Church we truly believe. St. Paul says 
that "God hath set the members, every one of them, in 



the Body as it hath pleased Him." (1 Corinthians 12:18.) 
This surely indicates a Divine supervision in the Church. 
We believe that a great deal of trouble is caused by the 
failure of many of the Lord's people to view matters 
from this standpoint. They are too apt to forget about 
the supervision and oversight which the Lord is taking 
of His Cause. Some therefore have felt great distress 

R5711 :page 187 

if they were not elected to be a Deacon or an Elder in 
the Church. Instead of looking at the matter from this 
viewpoint— that the Lord Himself has the supervision of 
the affairs of His Church— they are too liable to think, 
It was that brother who opposed me, or this brother, etc. 

We believe that these take a wrong view. Perhaps 
the Lord permitted the matter to result thus in order to 
test their humility. The Apostle James intimates something 
of this kind: "Let the brother of low degree rejoice 
in that he is exalted, and the brother of high degree 
in that he is made low." We should look beyond the 
mere circumstances of the moment; we should consider 
and remember well that all prominence, all promotion, 
and all control of the Church, is in the hands of the 
Lord. Not only might the Lord wish to give a lesson to 
a brother who might have been a faithful Elder or a 
faithful Deacon, but it might also be a good lesson to 
the Class. They might have failed to appreciate what 
zeal, energy and ability this brother had. If so, their 
neglect to reelect him to the position would in time prove 
a lesson to them. The same is true in the case of a 
brother who has energy, zeal and ability with spirituality, 
who has never been elected to eldership by the class. 

In any event it is for each of the Lord's children to 
exercise faith, and to remember that real prominence, true 
exaltation, is of the Lord. As the Apostle Paul shows, 
he that "desires the office of an overseer [from a real 
wish to serve], desires a good thing." So it is not wrong 
to appreciate such office in the Ecclesia; and we are to 
appreciate it when we are chosen Elders, because we 
shall thus have special opportunities for service and for 
laying down our lives for the brethren. But we are not 
to be self-seeking in the matter. 

When brethren who have served as Elders or 
Deacons are not reelected, yet are rightly exercised and 
manifest no resentment, but say, "I am just as glad to 
serve in one place as another," and enter cheerfully into 
whatever service is open to them, it will no doubt prove 
a blessing to their own hearts, and also a blessing to the 
Class, who note their Christlike spirit. So such brethren 
should say to themselves, "I will do everything I can to 
forward the Lord's Cause. The vote of the Class has 
not given me the responsibility of initiative and direction, 
but I will do my best to help on in other ways the work 
of the Lord." Thus they would show the proper spirit 
of humility and submission to the Lord's providence in 



the decision of the Class. 

"HE CALLETH HIS OWN SHEEP BY NAME" 

We believe the principle of our text should be considered 
in the daily lives of all the Lord's people. Some 
may fail to see the particular interest which the Lord 
takes in each one who is His. Every true child of God 
is the Lord's in the particular sense of having entered 
into a Covenant of Sacrifice. We should always remember 
this. Thus as we grow in grace we shall undoubtedly 
come to see that all "the steps of a righteous man are 
ordered of the Lord, and He delighteth in his way." "He 
keepeth all his bones; not one of them is broken." (Psalm 37:23; 
34:20.) The Lord will surely direct the path of 
such. The Master emphasized His peculiar and personal 
interest in each of His followers. He calls Himself their 
Shepherd, and says, "He calleth His own sheep by name, 
and leadeth them out." (John 10:3.) This means a very 
special supervision of the affairs and interests of each 
one of His true disciples. Whatever may come to these 
is not a matter of chance or luck. 

The steps of the world are not ordered of the Lord. 
But God's people in proportion as they walk by faith and 
realize that "all things are working together for good to 
them that love God, to the called according to His purpose," 
in that proportion will they be able to have joy, 
blessing and peace in every experience that comes to 
them. Failing to do this, some of God's people, we continue 
to see, are fretting and chafing, feeling that things 
are working wrong with them, fearing that the Lord has 
forgotten them, or that the brethren have forgotten them, 
and that everything is amiss in their case. They are 
failing to recognize that God has to do with all backsetting. 
If He sees best not to promote them, not to use 
their talents for a time as they would like, let them learn 
a lesson of humility and submission, of patience and trust. 
Let them be willing to cheerfully await God's own good 
time for their promotion. 

To us, then, the great lesson of our text is that promotion, 
exaltation, cometh neither from the East nor 
the West nor the South, but from Jehovah, who alone 
is the Judge, who setteth up one and putteth down another 
—and all in love. If the putting down seems at 
times to be the result of mistakes or lack of appreciation 
on the part of the brethren, let us remember that it has 
come in the providence of the Lord, and is designed of 
Him for our good, and perhaps for the good of others in 
one way or another. The experience will prove a blessing 
if received in the right spirit. "No good thing will 
He withhold from them that walk uprightly." Nothing 
can by any means hurt us if we keep close to the Lord. 
Then in due time, we shall be promoted to sit with Christ 
in His Throne. 



R5714:page 187 

"ASK WHAT I SHALL GIVE THEE" 

--JULY 18.-1 KINGS 3:4-15.- 

WHAT ARE DREAMS?-- WHEN THEY SHOULD BE FOLLOWED 
-SOLOMON'S DREAM-HIS HEART CONDITION REFLECTED-HIS 
REALIZATION OF HIS RESPONSIBILITIES-HIS HUMILITY 
-HIS REQUEST OR CHOICE-GOD'S APPROVAL AND THE 
HAPPY RESULTS. 

"The fear of Jehovah is the beginning 
of wisdom."— Proverbs 9:10. 

WE HAVE nothing to indicate that Solomon 

ever became very haughty, proud, although 

he certainly would have been a marvelous 

man had his great wisdom, honor and wealth 

not affected in some degree the childlike 

simplicity which he expressed to the Lord in 

the dream recorded in today's lesson, which 

gives us a wonderful insight into Solomon's 

true character. Incidentally, it is valuable 

to every man, every woman, particularly at 

the beginning of life or in connection with the starting 

of any enterprise, and in proportion as the enterprise is 

a serious or a difficult one or one directly related to God 

and His Word. 

Solomon initiated his reign by making a feast to 
some of his friends and the prominent people of his 
realm. The place chosen was Gibeon. The account tells 
us of his offering a thousand burnt offerings unto the 
Lord. This does not signify that a thousand animals 
were burned entire; but rather that certain portions of 
them, particularly the fat, were burned as an offering to 
the Lord, while the food portions became the basis of the 

R5714:page 188 

feast. Less meat was eaten then than now, except on 
such feast occasions. We can see the wisdom of such a 
general acknowledgment of God and of His inauguration 
of a new king; and the feast for the people signifies 
figuratively the good will of the king and his desire to 
make his reign one of prosperity, blessing, rejoicing, and 
helpfulness to all. The Divine ordering of the matter 
was recognized by the Israelites, who perceived that all 
things were to be done with an eye to God's approval. 

ARE DREAMS SIGNIFICANT? 

It was during this feast, which probably lasted several 
days, that Solomon had the wonderful dream here narrated. 
That it was supernatural there can be no doubt. 



Similarly God revealed Himself to others in ancient 
times, and especially to His people Israel, who had come 
into covenant relationship with Him at Mount Sinai under 
Moses. But God was not in similar relationship with 
other peoples, who were, as we read, strangers, foreigners, 
outcasts— not in covenant relationship with Him. 

Although the Christian Church is peculiarly in relationship 
with God, and in a much closer relationship than 
were the Jews under their Law, nevertheless we must not 
suppose that all dreams which even consecrated Christians 
may have are to be regarded as inspired. Very evidently 
the majority of our dreams are merely wanderings of 
our mind because we are not soundly asleep. For God to 
make fewer communications with Spiritual Israel by 
dreams would not signify a lesser interest in their affairs, 
but rather that He has otherwise provided for them, for 
their guidance— in the Bible. Additionally, we learn that 
He wishes us to walk by faith and not by sight; and to 
direct us continually by dreams would be to interfere with 
this walking by faith. 

St. Paul gives us the key to the matter, saying that 
"the Word of God is sufficient," that the man of God 
may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every good 
work." (2 Timothy 3:16,17.) But there is nothing to 
hinder God from using a dream as a means of instructing 
His spiritual children if that should seem at any time 
to be the appropriate course. Many of the Lord's people 
have had more or less experience with such profitable 
dreams, which seemed to give them the needed instruction 
or suggestion. Nevertheless there is but one sure way 
of receiving dreams; namely, to interpret them only in 
full accord with the Scriptures. The Apostle suggests 
that if an angel should proclaim to us any other Gospel 
than this, it should be rejected; and similarly, if a dream 
should suggest any other Gospel, it should be rejected. 
The Divine Word is to be the great talisman, test, standard, 
for everything for the Christian. 

SOLOMON'S WISE CHOICE 

In Solomon's dream the Lord appeared to him, saying, 
"Ask what I shall give thee." So God is asking of 
all who would become His children. He desires to do 
them good, but He wishes them to realize their needs 
and to make requests accordingly. The Apostle suggests 
something along this line, saying, "If any man [Christian] 
lack wisdom, let him ask of God, who giveth liberally." 

Solomon's answer in his dream shows us a beautiful 
simplicity of character for a young prince just come to 
the throne. He recounts God's mercy to his father David, 
and declares that this was in proportion as King David 
had walked faithfully with God in righteousness of heart. 
He expressed appreciation of the fact that God had 
brought even him to the throne because of Divine appreciation 
of his father David. Then he recounted to 
God his own littleness, weakness, and insufficiency for 



the great position. Touchingly he declared, "I am but a 
little child." This reminds us of the Apostle's words, 
"When I am weak, then I am strong." This was really 
the strength of Solomon's character; namely, that he was 
meek, was teachable, like a little child— not boastful or 
self-confident, not blind to his privileges and obligations. 

Because of the responsibilities of the kingdom, for 
which he felt himself so incompetent, Solomon prayed, 
"Give therefore Thy servant an understanding heart to 

R5715 :page 188 

judge Thy people [to administer justice to them], that I 
may discern between good and bad: for who is able to 
judge this Thy so great a people?" Is it any wonder that 
we read further that in the dream the Lord manifested 
His good pleasure at this request? "And God said unto 
him, Because thou hast asked this thing, and hast not 
asked for thyself long life; neither hast asked riches for 
thyself, nor hast asked the life of thine enemies; but hast 
asked for thyself understanding to discern judgment 
[justice]; therefore, I have done according to thy words: 
lo, I have given thee a wise and an understanding heart; 
so that there was none like thee before thee, neither after 
thee shall any arise like unto thee. And I have also given 
thee that which thou hast not asked, both riches, and 
honor: so that there shall not be any among the kings 
like unto thee, all thy days." 

"I knelt before Thy gracious Throne, 

And asked for peace with suppliant knee; 

And peace was given: not peace alone, 
But love, and joy, and ecstasy." 



R5713 :page 188 

DEDICATING THE TEMPLE 

-JULY 25.-1 KINGS 8:22-30.- 

WHAT THE TEMPLE TYPIFIED-DOUBLE ANTITYPES-THEIR 
DEDICATION-KING SOLOMON'S PRAYER-GOD'S PERSONALITY - 
HIS DWELLING-PLACE IN HEAVEN-"THE GLORY OF 
THE LORD FILLED THE TEMPLE" -ITS ANTITYPE. 

"My House shall be called a House 
of prayer for all people."— Isaiah 56:7. 

POSSESSED of reverence for the Lord, full 
of zeal for Him, full of appreciation of the 
Divine promise that King David's successor 
should build the House of the Lord, the 
Temple, for which David had for years 
made preparations of money and valuables, 



we find King Solomon speedily giving attention 

to this matter. In the fourth year of 

his reign, preparations had reached such a 

development that the construction of the 

Temple was begun; and seven and a half years later the 

scenes of this Study were enacted— when the Temple was 

ready for dedication. Strange to say, it was dedicated 

about a month before it was completely finished. Doubtless 

this contained some important typical lesson, which 

we may some day more fully understand. 

Built of white marble, the Temple must have been a 
very imposing structure, although not lofty. It was of 
but one story; nevertheless, its position on the mountain 
top surely gave it a very commanding appearance, its 
glittering, white walls overtopping the entire landscape. 
But we are interested in the Temple of Solomon more 
than in any other building because it was a type, as well 
as a reality. Let us note the Apostle's references to it 

R5713 :page 189 

and his declaration that its antitype is found in God's 
holy people— the Church. We read, "Know ye not that 
ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God 
dwelleth in you?" "For ye are the Temple of the living 
God; as God hath said, I will dwell in them, and walk in 
them; and I will be their God, and they shall be My 
people."— 1 Corinthians 3:16; 2 Corinthians 6:16. 

PREPARATION OF THE LIVING STONES 

In the picture which the Apostle thus brings to our 
attention, the Church corresponds to the Tabernacle rather 
than to the Temple. As God was with the Children of 
Israel from the time they entered into covenant with Him 
until the Temple was dedicated by Solomon, He indicated 
His presence by a manifestation of the Shekinah Light 
in the Most Holy of the Tabernacle. And so with us now 
as Christians: from the time we become sons of God— 
from the time of our consecration, justification, sanctification 
and begetting of the Holy Spirit— our bodies are 
tabernacles, or temporary dwelling-places, of God's Holy 
Spirit. His Spirit in us is represented originally by the 
begetting influence which we receive as the start of our 
new existence as New Creatures in Christ Jesus; and that 
light, or holy illumination, spread abroad in us fills us 
with the light of the knowledge of the glory of God more 
and more. The Tabernacle in one sense of the word was 
a temple— in the sense that any place where God is would 
properly be called a temple, a holy place. But, as suggested, 
it is preferable that we think of our fleshly bodies 
as tabernacles of God— His temporary dwelling-place. In 
a fuller sense, by and by, there will be a great transfer. 
The Lord's saintly ones will be changed from flesh to 
spirit by the power of the First Resurrection, and will 
thus be more perfectly represented by the beautiful 



Temple which Solomon built. 

But there is a still more beautiful thought brought to 
our attention by St. Peter. He tells us that the various 
members of the Church of Christ— the saints— are living 
stones, which are in process of chiseling and polishing, 
preparatory to the uniting of all these in one grand, 
glorious Temple of God beyond the Veil. (1 Peter 2:5,9.) 
Any not enduring the chiseling and polishing will be 
discarded as unfit for the glorious Temple. 

The bringing together of these living stones beyond 
the Veil will be by the Resurrection Power, beautifully 
illustrated in the erection of Solomon's Temple, of 
which we read that its stones were prepared at the quarry 
and then finally assembled for the construction of the 
Temple, and that they were so perfectly shaped and 
marked for their various places that they came together 
without the sound of a hammer— without need for chiseling 
or for other labor upon them at the time of the construction. 
So, St. Paul says, the Church is God's workmanship. 
(Ephesians 2:10.) And His work will be so 
perfectly accomplished that there will be no need of 
rectification or alteration beyond the Veil. 

It is this viewpoint that is especially interesting and 
profitable to the Lord's people. Such of them as can 
realize that they have been called of God to this High 
Calling, to membership in the Temple, can fully appreciate 
thereafter the necessity for the trials and difficulties 
of life which are shaping them, fitting them, for Heavenly 
glory, honor, immortality. These are the "all things" 
working together for good to them that love God— preparing 
them for the spiritual blessings and services of 
the future.— Romans 8:28. 

WORK OF THE GLORIFIED CHURCH 

When we think of the Church as the Temple under 
construction, it impresses upon us the thought that there 
is a future work to be accomplished. Why construct a 
Temple, and then not use it? Serious injury came to us 
through various errors of the past: for instance, the 
thought that the Church alone is to be saved and all the 
remainder of mankind to be lost; and a further thought, 
that at the Second Coming of Christ the world is to be 
burned up, and the Divine Plan ignominiously terminated. 
With such a view, the construction of the Church as the 
great Temple would seem to be a waste; since there 
would be nobody to be blessed by it. 

However, as our eyes of understanding open more 
and more clearly, we begin to see beauty in the Divine 
Plan and arrangement. So far from God's Plan terminating 
at the Second Coming of Christ, it will merely 
begin there, so far as the world is concerned. The 
Church, in one figure, will be the Royal Priesthood for 
the blessing of all the families of the earth. (Galatians 3:29.) 
In the other figure, the Church will be the great 
Temple through which all the world of mankind may 



have access to God and return to harmony with Him. 
Thus, eventually, this glorified Church, or Temple, 
will be the House of Prayer for all people, all nations— 
not that they will pray to a house, but that they will 

R5714:page 189 

approach God through the glorified Church, in which His 
Presence will be manifested and His mercy will be available 
to all. From this viewpoint, the Temple with its 
Shekinah glory represented the Church in the glory of 
the future, in association with Christ; and God will dwell 
in and operate through that glorious Church for the 
blessing of the world, represented by all those who will 
worship God looking toward His Holy House. 

DEDICATING THE TEMPLE OF GOD 

There is an important thought in connection with a 
dedication which some seem to overlook. It was necessary 
for the Tabernacle to be dedicated, or set apart to 
God, before He deigned to recognize it and to use it. 
Similarly with all of God's people; it is necessary that 
they should positively and formally dedicate themselves 
to God and to His service before being recognized of 
Him and filled with His Spirit. It is not enough that they 
should know of Him and of the Lord Jesus Christ, and 
be persuaded of these things— not enough even that they 
should know something of the glories of the Coming Age 
as revealed in the Word of God. It is necessary, also, 
that they make formal dedication of themselves to God, 
fully surrendering their own wills that God may come 
into them by His Holy Spirit and, accepting their sacrifices, 
constitute them thereafter His tabernacles. 

When the Temple was ready for dedication, Solomon 
presented it to God with the prayer which constitutes the 
basis of today's Study— a prayer beautiful in simplicity 
and indicative of King Solomon's perception of the great 
truth that God is a personal God, whose dwelling-place 
is not everywhere, but in Heaven. It shows us that the 
king fully understood that the Temple which he had 
made, like the Tabernacle before it, merely represented 
God's power and grace amongst His people. The presence 
of the Temple indicated that there were sinners who 
needed to be atoned for by its arrangements, and that 
mercy and forgiveness would be needed and that prayers 
toward God would be appropriate. "Hear Thou in Heaven 
Thy dwelling-place; and when Thou hearest, forgive." 

So during the Millennium, all the world will have the 
opportunity of approaching God through His great 
Temple of which Jesus is the Chief Corner-Stone, and 
the Church the living stones under His Headship. And 
God will hear the prayers thus properly presented, and 
will forgive the sins of the people; and as a result the 

R5714:page 190 



work of Restitution will progress to a grand completion. 

As Solomon dedicated the Temple, so the Church of 
Christ will be dedicated, formally presented to the Father. 
The great Antitype of Solomon will do this; namely, the 
Lord Jesus Christ, presenting us all as His members, as 
the Temple which is His Body, reared up on the Third 
Day— the Third Thousand- Year Day from the time of 
His death-Hie dawning of the Great Sabbath. (John 2:19-22.) 
As a result of the dedication, the glory of the 
Lord will fill the House. The fact that the typical Temple 
was filled with the glory of the Lord before it was entirely 
completed seems to imply that at this present time there 
will be some manifestation of God's favor toward His 
Church in glorification while yet the work of construction 
is not quite finished. However, it is difficult to read 
prophecy in advance of its fulfilment. We must wait to 
see what will be the fulfilment of this feature. 

"God moves in a mysterious way 
His wonders to perform." 



R5711 :page 190 

HOW WE ARE TO WAIT ON THE LORD 

"Wait on the Lord, be of good courage, and 
He shall strengthen thine heart."— Psalm 27:14. 

THE expression, "Wait on the Lord," does not 

mean so much a rendering of service to the 

Lord, as a waiting for the Lord, a waiting 

before Him, to see what is His will for us. 

We do not understand that it has the 

thought of ministering to the Lord, as a 

servant would wait on his master, but of 

patient watching until we learn what our 

Lord would have us do. Each child of God 

should wait to be guided by Him, and not 

run on before Him unmindful of what is the Lord's 

purpose for him. "Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, 

R5712:page 190 

and lean not unto thine own understanding. In all thy 
ways acknowledge Him, and He shall direct thy paths," 
is the counsel of the Wise Man. (Proverbs 3:5,6.) Many 
of the children of God have made mistakes along this line. 

Having committed our ways to the Lord, we should 
go forward only as He leads us. If we are not clear as 
to His will, let us not be in too great a hurry, nor try to 
guide ourselves, but present the matter to the Lord in 
earnest prayer, asking that we may have no will or way 
of our own, but may be guided only as He wills. Then 



let us wait and watch for the indication of His providence, 
and follow as He seems to lead, leaving the results 
with Him. We are not to follow our own choice, without 
evidences that it is God's will. The question may sometimes 
be asked of us, "Are you going to do this way or 
that way? Are you going to this place or to that place?" 
Our attitude and our reply, if we have not as yet clearly 
ascertained the Lord's will in the matter, should be, "I 
am not yet fully decided. I will consider the Word of 
the Lord, to see how His instructions seem to apply in 
this case." Or, "I am watching to see what the Lord's 
providences seem to indicate, and am praying over the 
matter, that I may be guided aright." The poet expressed 
the right thought: 

"I am afraid to touch 

Things that involve so much." 

Those who wait on the Lord do not always seem to 
prosper best, from outward appearances. But the Psalmist 
declares that we should be of good courage as we thus 
wait on God. We are pursuing the right course, and shall 
have His blessing. We make no mistake when we wait 
upon Him. Others may seem to be getting ahead of us 
at first, but we are to "wait on the Lord." 

Take no step unless you feel sure that the Lord is 
directing and guiding. Watch for the meaning of His 
providences. Study His Word. Let not your faith depart 
from its moorings. "Be of good courage!" "Good" 
courage is courage of a good degree, not merely a little 
courage. Be of strong courage; "and He shall strengthen 
thine heart; wait, I say, on the Lord." The word heart 
here may be understood to mean the soul, the being— 
especially the intelligent portion of us. The Lord will 
support us, He will fortify us and make us strong to bear, 
strong to do His will as it is made known to us. They 
that wait upon the Lord shall not want any good thing. 

TRAITS NECESSARY TO SUCCESS 

Courage, fortitude, persistency, in the service of the 
Lord are very necessary to the child of God. Such traits 
are needful even to the world. Whoever lacks these qualities 
of character is pretty sure to make poor success in 
life. Lack of courage, lack of hope, is one of the chief 
causes of failure in the world. Our text, however, calls 
attention, not to the world, but to those who belong to 
the Lord. The precious promises of God's Word, which 
are only for His people, those who are wholly His, give 
these every reason for hope; they have full authority to 
be strong and of a good courage. The children of God 
will have trials and experiences similar to those of the 
world, besides experiences and trials peculiar to them as 
followers of Christ. These come not to us in a haphazard 
way, however, as to the world, but are under the direct 
supervision of the Lord. 



Those who are new in the service of the Master might 
think for a time that matters should run smoothly for 
them, that they should not have the difficulties common 
to the world; that now as they were God's children He 
would protect them from afflictions and mistreatment. But 
as they study the Lord's Word, they soon see that this is 
not true; they see that they are to walk by faith, and not 
by sight. They learn that they are not to expect to have 
outward and tangible manifestations of His favor, but 
that they are to suffer with Christ— that hereunto they 
were called. (1 Peter 2:20,21; Acts 14:22.) They learn 
that they must be obedient, and they come to see what 
obedience means. 

The Master learned obedience— learned what obedience 
meant— "by the things which He suffered." The 
narrow way is not an easy path. His followers learn that 
the Lord is now calling a class that have faith in Him, a 
class who accept His Word fully. In time they come, 
too, to see that "If God be for them, who can be against 
them?" If matters do not go as they had expected, if 
trials come, they will say, "We know that all things work 
for good to them that love God." 

So these learn, as they are guided by the Word of the 
Lord, that they are to be of good courage as they pursue 
their onward way. There are many difficulties to be surmounted, 
and it requires courage to surmount difficulties. 
But the courage born of faith in God and in His "exceeding 
great and precious promises" strengthens them when 
otherwise they might be overwhelmed. It gives them a 
strength to which all others are strangers. 

TRUST WHERE WE CANNOT TRACE 

If a child of God becomes discouraged and loses his 
hope and strength, it is because he has lost his hold upon 
the Lord's promises to help. To lose courage is to lose 

R5712:page 191 

faith. Loss of faith and courage makes a child of God 

powerless before his foes. We must trust our Father 

even when the meaning of His providences is veiled from 

our eyes and when our efforts to serve Him seem to be 

hedged up. We look back at the Apostles and their experiences. 

The Apostle Paul was very desirous of carrying 

the Message of the Gospel to others. Several times 

he tried to go into Asia, but he was not permitted to go. 

He began to wonder why this was, why his efforts continued 

to prove failures. But the Lord revealed to him 

that he was to go into Greece instead. In his first Epistle 

to the Church at Thessalonica, he writes, "Wherefore we 

would have come to you, even I Paul, once and again, but 

Satan hindered us." (1 Thessalonians 2:18.) But we 

are sure that the Lord would overrule the machinations 

of Satan and cause them to work out His own glory, and 

the lesson of patience and submission would be a blessing 



to His children. 

We see that in the Garden of Gethsemane our Lord 
had not lost faith in God, but was fearful for a time. 
As He came to the closing hours of His experiences on 
earth, He wondered whether or not He had faithfully 
conformed to all the Father's requirements. He knew that 
the slightest infraction of God's Law would mean His 
death. Had He completed His sacrifice acceptably? 
Would He be ushered from death into Heavenly glory by 
a resurrection? Then He received from the Father the 
assurance that He had been altogether faithful. All the 
trials and difficulties which the Master underwent in the 
laying down of His life preceded Him as a sweet incense, 
a precious perfume, beyond the veil, into the Most Holy 
as shown in the type.— Leviticus 16:12,13. 

A PROPER FEAR 

After the Jewish high priest had crumbled the sweet 
incense upon the fire of the golden altar, after its fragrance 
had penetrated beyond the second veil and had 
covered the Ark of the Covenant and the Mercy Seat, he 
then himself passed beneath the veil. Every time the high 
priest raised the veil thus to pass under it he probably 
feared; for in case he had failed in any particular to carry 
out his sacrificial work acceptably he would have died as 
he passed under the veil. So our Lord Jesus knew that 
His work must be acceptable in the most absolute sense, 
else He would forever forfeit His existence. He would 
become as though He had not been; He would lose all. 

There was no earthly being to give our Lord encouragement 
along this line. There was no one to say, You have 
done everything perfectly; you could not have done better. 
So the Master went alone to the Father for this assurance 
and for strength and courage. He prayed, "Not My will, 
but Thine be done"; and the Father heard His prayer and 
gave Him the needed assurance and strength. He was 
heard in respect to that which He feared; and during all 
that night and the following day, up to the hour of His 
crucifixion, He was calm and courageous. 

So the Lord's people should have a proper fear. Proper 
fear is good for them. But it should not proceed to the 
point of hindering their efforts and dissipating their courage. 
They should have the fear enjoined by St. Paul 
when he said, "Let us fear, lest a promise being left us of 
entering into His rest, any of us should seem to come 
short of it." (Hebrews 4:1.) This proper fear the 
Master had. He never became discouraged, never held 
back from the work which the Father had given Him to 
do. His fear was a filial one, which engendered a watchfulness 
and care, a circumspection of walk and of life, 
that He might be wholly pleasing to the Father. This all 
Christians should have. We should watch lest we neglect 
some privilege or duty. 

This proper fear will lead us to careful inspection of 
ourselves. We should ask ourselves, "What do I believe? 



Why do I believe it? We should go over the ground 
again. We should again go over in our minds the proofs 
of the correctness of our Faith. By so doing, the Lord 
will strengthen us in the Faith, He will strengthen our 
heart. If any hope in themselves, and lean upon their 
own strength mainly, it will be to their advantage that the 
Lord shall allow them to come to the point of discouragement, 
that they may become more timid, may lose all self-assurance, 
may realize their utter helplessness and weakness 
and their need of leaning wholly upon the Lord, of 
looking constantly to Him for guidance and support. As 
the Lord's children thus learn to wait upon Him, to them 
is fulfilled the promise, "They that wait upon the Lord 
shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with 
wings as eagles; they shall run and not be weary; they 
shall walk and not faint."— Isaiah 40:31. 



R5713 :page 191 

AN INTERESTING LETTER 
COLPORTEURING IN OFFICE BUILDINGS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

For some time I have been wanting to tell you about 
our wonderful privileges and opportunities in the Harvest; 
and today when I read your letter in the May 1 WATCH 
TOWER to the departing members of the Bethel Family— that 
some of them might enter the Colporteur service— I felt 
prompted to write, that these and others might be encouraged, 
and that especially now, in your travels, you might encourage 
the Colporteurs in their work. 

For the last year Sister and I have been making it a 
specialty to call on the business men in the large office-buildings; 
and have had very good success. We do not feel that 
this is due to any great ability on our own part, but that it is 
all by the Lord's grace and His "ever-present help." 

Many dear Colporteurs do not realize what a great privilege 
they are neglecting when they do not call upon the 
business men; or, after calling on several they fail to arouse 
interest and become discouraged, while if they would persevere 
they would find their efforts crowned with success, 
just as much or more than in the homes. 

We also find that delivering is so much easier among the 
business men, as we often get orders for several sets in one 
office, and sometimes for several hundred volumes in one 
building, all of which are quite sure to be delivered. 

Business men, on account of the present financial condition, 
are becoming more and more awake and are looking for 
an explanation; besides, hundreds of these men are reading 
the sermons, have absorbed a great deal of Present Truth, 
and are anxious to get the books. 

Many of us have been timid about entering the large office-buildings, 
fearing to meet these busy people. By letting them 



know that we will not be a nuisance to them, detaining them 
only a few moments, they usually grant us a little time, or 
tell us when they will be at leisure. It is best to see the 
Manager of each office before speaking to the employees. 

In all the cities there are thousands of stenographers, 
bookkeepers and professional people, who cannot be reached 
at their homes, and therefore have never come in contact 
with the STUDIES. Many of them are earnest Bible students, 
and we feel it a great privilege to meet these and bring them 
just the help they need and are often looking for. 

While at present sister and I principally are working in 
the cities, yet we have also had the same experience in the 
smaller places. Business men in the small towns are even 
more easily approached, and invariably want the whole set 
of STUDIES. 

We are still rejoicing in the Master's service, and received 
many rich blessings at the three-day Convention here. 
Yours in our Redeemer, 
FRIEDA SCHLATTER.-Kansas City, Mo. 



page 192 

International Bible Students Association Classes 

STUDIES AND LECTURES UNDER THE AUSPICES OF PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 193 
