An Everlasting Gift From the Creator
DO YOU not find it amazing that the factors that scientists believe are essential for life on any planet either appear or are directly implied in the first chapter of the Bible? What are these?
For life to thrive, there must be a large quantity of water, as mentioned at Genesis 1:2. The temperature must be right for water on the planet to remain in liquid form. This requires that the planet be the right distance from its sun. The Genesis account repeatedly draws attention to the sun and its effect on the earth.
To be habitable by humans, a planet needs an atmosphere with a particular mix of gases. This vital aspect is mentioned at Genesis 1:6-8. The growth of vegetation, described at Genesis 1:11, 12, contributes to the rich supply of oxygen available. A planet on which a wide variety of animal life can thrive requires continents of dry, productive land, as described at Genesis 1:9-12. Finally, for moderate weather, a planet must be tilted to the proper angle and be held in place​—in the case of earth, a function fulfilled in part by the gravitational pull of our moon. This satellite’s existence and some of its benefits are highlighted at Genesis 1:14, 16.
How was the ancient writer Moses, without the help of modern science, able to draw attention to the above factors? Was Moses simply ahead of his time in appreciating their importance? The explanation is that he was inspired by the Creator of the heavens and the earth. That is noteworthy in view of the scientific soundness of the Genesis account.
The Bible affirms that there is a purpose behind the wonders that we observe in the universe around us. “As regards the heavens, to Jehovah the heavens belong,” states Psalm 115:16, “but the earth he has given to the sons of men.” Another psalm states: “He has founded the earth upon its established places; it will not be made to totter to time indefinite, or forever.” (Psalm 104:5) If the universe and our beautiful planet are designed and produced by a Creator, surely it is not too much to believe that he also has the ability to maintain these. This means that you can confidently look forward to the fulfillment of the wonderful promise: “The righteous themselves will possess the earth, and they will reside forever upon it.” (Psalm 37:29) To be sure, God “did not create [the earth] simply for nothing” but “formed it even to be inhabited” forever by appreciative humans who acknowledge his doings.​—Isaiah 45:18.
According to the Scriptures, Jesus came to earth to teach us about God and His purpose to grant everlasting life to obedient mankind. (John 3:16) We are assured that soon God will “bring to ruin those ruining the earth,” whereas peace-loving humans from all nations who accept his provision for salvation will survive. (Revelation 7:9, 14; 11:18) How wonderful life will be as humans keep on discovering and enjoying the marvels of God’s creation forever!​—Ecclesiastes 3:11; Romans 8:21.
[Picture Credit Line on page 8]
NASA photo

