VOL. XIX. JULY 1, 1898. No. 13. 



CONTENTS. 



Views from the Watch Tower 195 

Mercy Rejoiceth Against Judgment 197 

The Royal Law 199 

This Law in Practical Operation 201 

The Royal Law During the 

Millennium 202 

Poem: I'll Do My Very Best 202 

Interesting Queries 203 

Christian Duty if Drafted, etc. 

"Jehovah, He is the God" 204 

A Discouraged Reformer 206 

Elijah's Lesson Symbolically Considered 207 

page 194 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 56-60 ARCH STREET, ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age or accident, or other 
adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if they 
send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting the 
paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list 
constantly. 



R2327 : page 195 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



AS THE war with Spain progresses, it becomes 

more and more evident that "The Great 

Republic" is very thoroughly hated by her sisters in 

the family of Christian Nations so called. Their hatred 

and ill-will are scarcely restrained from pronounced 

utterance by the fact that she is their best customer 

who for financial reasons must not be too grossly insulted. 

Great Britain alone manifests sympathy: and 



even she is frank enough to intimate that her love is 
selfish, because she fears a European coalition against 
her and desires a wealthy and influential partner. 
Even the other republics of the world— France, Mexico 
and all those of Central and South America are 
jealous of their big sister. 

The appeal to race prejudice and race pride has 
much to do with this condition of things and is most 
unwise. But we must remember that "the natural 
man" moves almost exclusively along grooves of pride 
and selfishness; he knows nothing of Love as a motive 
principle. And it is the same on both sides of the question: 
if one boasts of race superiority and valor, so 
does the other. And the more these selfish channels 
of thought are opened, the deeper the hatreds engendered 
and the more dangerous the possible results. 

Another factor never to be overlooked is Romanism. 
The revenues of the Roman Catholic Church in 
the Philippine Islands are estimated at $50,000,000 per 
annum (silver). It is the real government, the silent 
but potent partner of the Spanish Governor General 
and army. Other religious teachings are not tolerated, 
and the natives so far as possible are kept in ignorance. 
Altho the Spanish government decreed that the 
Spanish language should be taught in the Romanist 
schools supported by government bounty, the order 
has been generally evaded. Papacy knows well that 
general intelligence is a foe to its institutions. 

Of course, when the time comes for Spain to sue 
for peace, she will probably be instigated by the pope 
to relinquish Cuba and close the war on condition that 
the United States abandon all claim on the Philippines. 
It is doubtless to threaten a prolongation of the war 
there, and thus to make the United States the more 
willing to relinquish the islands, that the Cadiz squadron 
has sailed eastward. Moreover, it is realized that 
the soldiers carried by this fleet will be needed to put 
down the Philippine rebels. The latter are the more 
intelligent of the natives who are rebelling as much 
against the tyranny of Romanism as against the oppression 
and cruelty of Spain. It is our opinion 
that the Lord wills to break the power of Papacy there, 
and hence that he will not permit Spanish misrule to 
be continued. 

To what extent the present war may be a waking 
up of all the world to an era of war which will impoverish 
all nations, and sicken all their peoples and prepare 
the way for the universal anarchy with which 
this age shall end, we know not; but such an outcome 
will not surprise us. If so, it will seem like the time 
mentioned in Joel 3:9-14. See the conclusion of the 
S.S. Lesson on Elijah, page 192. 

Of one thing we may be sure: the affairs of this 
world while nominally left to the "gentiles" until the 
end of "Gentile Times,"* the end of their lease of 
power, are nevertheless subject to a divine surveillance, 



to the intent that naught shall be permitted that our 
God is not abundantly able to overrule for good. Divine 
providence has already been manifested on behalf 
of America and doubtless will continue to supervise 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., Chap. 13, and VOL. II.. 
Chap. 4. 

R2327 : page 196 

her course. Who that is God-fearing and possessed 
of a knowledge of history can doubt that this land was 
kept hidden until due time; that it was purposely made 
an asylum for liberty-loving people and for the oppressed 
of all nations? Who can doubt that its unparalleled 
history thus far has been a lesson to the whole 
world— "Liberty enlightening the world?" Who can 
doubt that thus the Almighty has been gradually forcing 
open the fetters of Church and State, of superstition 
and ignorance, and emancipating the peoples of 
Europe? 

It was the influence of liberty and its blessings in 
America that led to the French Revolution— the French 
people being too ignorant, and too much under the influence 
of Romanism, to be able to appreciate and use 
the boon of liberty wisely. The same object lesson 
(America) has had a great influence upon Great Britain 
and Germany and upon the peoples of other countries 
in proportion to their intelligence and freedom 
from papal bondage. 

As the reforms of Europe have been granted inch 
by inch by its monarchical aristocracy, under the glare 
of Liberty's torch (America), it is but natural that they 
very generally feel a hostility; "because the darkness 
hateth the light," as ever. There are exceptions to 
every rule, but generally speaking America is loved 
and appreciated only by the middle classes of Europe, 
and these chiefly in Protestant countries. 

Nor should it surprise us if God has still some 
further work for America to do in pulling down the 
strongholds of error and waking up the mighty men 
and men of war. To some extent the torch of liberty 
may be a torch of war and destruction. This may 
sound strange to those who mistakenly have supposed 
that God is to be credited with all the peace and 
arbitration movements and Satan to be credited with 
all the moves toward war and violence. 

It is necessary to our appreciation of transpiring 
events that we remember that God's dealings and commands 
are individual and not national since he abandoned 
fleshly Israel and removed the diadem— "until 
he come whose right it is." Meantime the nations 
are restrained in peace or let loose to vent their selfish 
passions in war as best harmonizes with the next step 



in the divine program. How aptly the poet expressed 
this, saying— 

"See the mystic Weaver sitting 
High in heaven— His loom below. 
Up and down the treadles go. 
Takes, for web, the world's dark ages, 
Takes, for woof, the kings and sages. 
Takes the nobles and their pages, 
Takes all stations and all stages. 
Thrones are bobbins in his shuttle. 
Armies make them scud and scuttle- 
Web into the woof must flow: 
Up and down the nations go ! 
At the Weaver's will they go ! 

"Calmly see the mystic Weaver 
Throw His shuttle to and fro; 
'Mid the noise and wild confusion, 
Well the Weaver seems to know 
What each motion, and commotion, 
What each fusion, and confusion, 
In the grand result will show! 

"Glorious wonder! What a weaving! 
To the dull, beyond believing." 

The present work is the selection of the Church, 
the royal priesthood, and incidentally the awakening 
and disciplining of the nations to prepare them for the 
Millennial reign of blessing and peace. Let us not 
forget, however, that God's people are all to be peaceable 
and to the extent of their opportunities 
peacemakers. 



A brother has recently called our attention to 
Isaiah 5:26-30; inquiring whether or not we see anything 
to indicate that this refers to the United States. 
After examining the passage it seems to us not a forced 
or unreasonable application. The prophecy seems to 
apply to the present time— the end of this age— and its 
fitness to this nation is worthy of consideration also: 
it will probably not require long to demonstrate 
this. The following is a preferred translation. 

"And he will lift up an ensign to the nations from 
afar, and will call for one of them from the end of the 
earth; and, behold, with speed, swiftly, it cometh. 

"There is none weary nor stumbling among its 
men; it slumbereth not, it sleepeth not; not loosened 
is the girdle of its loins, not broken is the latchet of 
its shoes; whose arrows are sharpened, and all whose 
bows are bent; its horses' hoofs are hard like flint, and 
its wheels like the whirlwind. 

"It hath a roar like the lioness, it roareth like the 



young lions; yea, it growleth, and layeth hold of the 
prey, and carrieth it safely off, with none to deliver. 

"And it will rage against them on that day like 
the raging of the sea: and if one look unto the earth, 
behold there is darkness, oppression, and the light is 
darkened in the heavens thereof."— Compare Leeser's 
Translation. 

When we remember the significance of sea and 
earth and heavens as symbols, it seems to add force to 
the above suggestion. The sea in symbol is anarchy: 
and while the United States is perhaps less anarchic 
than the old world, yet the freedom possessed here is 
in the estimation of many of the potentates of Europe 
"like the raging of the sea [anarchy]." The earth in 
symbol signifies society, the social structure. And surely, 
whoever looks at the social condition of Europe 

R2327 : page 197 

with open eyes sees little but superstition's darkness 
and oppression. Nor can we see grounds for hope for 
better conditions under the present order of things. The 
heavens are the nominal churches or religious powers, 
and by false teachings surely these have much to do 
with the trouble present and impending. 



R2328 : page 197 

MERCY REJOICETH AGAINST JUDGMENT. 



"He shall have judgment without mercy who hath shown 
no mercy. Mercy rejoiceth against judgment."— Jas. 2:13. 

THE word judgment here stands for sentence— 
the sentence of sin, death. It therefore represents 
justice, because in man's trial it was Justice which 
inflicted the sentence of death. Mercy is the fruit or 
result of love, and therefore represents love. Hence 
the case, Mercy against Judgment is equivalent to Love 
against Justice. The thought would be that divine 
Love has secured a triumph over divine Justice. 

At first thought there would seem to be an inconsistency 
in this view: for how could love triumph over 
justice, since the Scriptures, as well as reason, assure 
us that justice must be the very foundation of all divine 
government; and that to ignore it would mean the 
destruction of government and order,— anarchy, disorder. 
It is when we inquire of the Lord's Word, 
how his Love gains a victory over justice, that we gain 
an insight into the beautiful harmony and coordination 
of these divine attributes— Love and Justice. The 
Scriptures assure us that "God is Love," and that 



"Justice is the foundation of his throne," or government. 
(1 John 4:16; Psa. 89:14.) Since God himself 
is Love, he can do nothing that can be derogatory 
or opposed to love; and since his government is founded 
upon strictest justice he can do nothing that would 
not be in harmony therewith. His own character and 
law are the bulwarks on either side of the subject, each 
as high and as strong as the other. 

How then, can love and mercy gain a conquest and 
rejoice over justice and the sentence? The Apostle 
answers the question, assuring us that our justification 
from the sentence is by divine grace, "through the 
redemption that is in Christ: whom God sent forth to 
be a propitiation [satisfaction of justice] through faith 
in his blood... that he might be just, and [yet be] 
the Justifier of him which believeth in Jesus.— 
Rom. 3:24-26. 

Here then, is the triumph of love and mercy, not 
through a failure of justice, not through conquering 
it, but through a satisfaction of justice, its appeasement 
by the payment of a ransom price, a corresponding 
price— a man's life for a man's life: the man Christ 
Jesus for the man Adam and those who were involved 
in his disobedience and its sentence or curse. From 
this standpoint alone would it be possible for love and 
mercy to triumph over divine justice and its sentence; a 
triumph in which the justice of God can equally rejoice. 

The original trial of father Adam in the Garden 
of Eden was along the lines of strictest justice, and 
his sentence was without mercy: it was inflicted without 
the slightest deviation. Subsequently, when God 
introduced the Covenant of Law at Mount Sinai, 
with the nation of Israel, it also was along the lines 
of justice: it was an offer of eternal life to any Israelite 
who could and would live up to the divine law;— it 
was justice, without mercy. It had indeed an admixture 
of leniency as represented by the annual Atonement 
Day with its benefits extending to that nation 
for the ensuing year, but the sacrifices which were offered 
according to the Law, the Apostle assures us, 
"could never take away sin." It could cover the sin 
temporarily for the year, and furnish a new opportunity 
for a fresh start, but it could never cancel the 
sins past, nor atone for sins future; hence it was still 
a reign of Law, a reign of death, at the hands of Justice. 
Love did not and could not intervene to spare the sinner; 
the most it could do was to point forward, in 
promise and in type, to the coming Deliverer, who 
would satisfy the claims of justice, and set at liberty 
the prisoners of sin and death. God was Love before 
he sent his Son, just as truly as he is Love since he 
sent his Son; but God's Love was not manifested previously, 
as it was in that great act of love. "Herein 
was manifested the love of God, in that he gave his only 
begotten Son." The giving of his son to be our redemption 
price was in connection with the making of 



a New Covenant, a new agreement, a new compact, 
between God and those of his creatures fallen into sin 
who might desire to return to his favor. 

The New Covenant was an arrangement by which 
God's love might exercise mercy toward the sinner. 
The language of the New Covenant is apparently an 
abandonment of strict justice in the Lord's dealing with 
the sinner, and the adoption of a course of treatment 
which deviates to some extent from strict justice, 
and shows mercy to those who desire mercy, and desire 
to come back into harmony with God, and desire 
to attain again the perfection lost through sin. 
The language of the New Covenant is, "I will be 
merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and 
their iniquities will I remember no more."— Heb. 8:12. 

The Apostle assures us that this New Covenant 
could only go into force, could only become operative 

R2328 : page 198 

toward us, by virtue of the atoning sacrifice which 

the Father designed, and which the Lord Jesus joyfully 

and obediently fulfilled. He assures us, and so 

also does our Lord Jesus, that the death of Christ sealed 

or ratified or made binding and complete this New Covenant 

between God and man, of which Jesus is the 

Mediator. Thus our Lord himself, when speaking of 

his death, symbolized by the cup, said, "This is the 

blood of the New Covenant shed for many for [in order 

to] the remission of sins." Sins could not be remitted 

except as justice would first be met, and the 

one who met the claims of justice on behalf of the sinner 

would be the one who would have the right to 

remit the sinner's guilt, and thus to be the Mediator 

between Justice and the sinner. 

The Apostle Paul gives us the same view of the 
matter; saying, that "the blood [death, sacrifice] 
cleanseth us" and for this cause he is the Mediator of 
the New Covenant: that by means of death for the redemption 
of the transgressions that were under the first 
covenant, they which are called might receive the 
promise of eternal inheritance. (Heb. 9:14,15.) We 
see, then, that since Calvary, since the sealing of the 
New Covenant with the blood of the Mediator, since 
that New Covenant was thus ratified or made effective, 
the triumph of love and mercy over justice, and the 
sentence of death originally inflicted, has been a fact. 
And since the offence and the sentence were of one 
man, and rested upon the many through him, even 
upon all his posterity, so likewise the New Covenant 
is by the one man, Christ Jesus, and is applicable to 
not only the first offence committed in Eden, but applicable 
to all the "many offences" since committed 
because of weakness and depravity, introduced by the 
one transgression.— Rom. 5:12,15-21. 

But while the New Covenant is thus for Adam and 



all his posterity, nevertheless there are conditions attached 
to this Covenant, which limit its action. 

(1) Faith in it— and acceptance of its provisions 

or demands: and this implies a knowledge of the covenant 
conditions, for no man can either accept or reject 
that of which he has no knowledge, as the Apostle 
says, "How shall they believe on him of whom they 
have not heard?" 

(2) Obedience, as the result of faith, is required 
to the extent of ability— obedience to the law of the 
New Covenant. 

Hence, although the New Covenant is for the 
entire race, it is not as yet available to any but a small 
minority. Few have the knowledge of God and of his 
arrangement in Christ under this covenant, which 
would permit of faith in it. And of those who have 
received some knowledge of the great fact, and who 
have with more or less clearness exercised a faith in 
the atonement, comparatively few have taken the second 
step of obedience. Those who have taken the first step of 
faith are, on this account, reckoned as justified— to the 
intent that they may take the second step of full obedience 
to the requirements of the covenant. Those who 
have taken the second step have not lost the first step 
of justification, but have added thereto the step of 
sanctification,— consecration,— devotion. And only to 
the latter class belongs the full benefit of this covenant. 

These two steps, (1) Faith, and (2) Obedience, 
were illustrated in typical Israel, and in the institution 
of their typical covenants, at the hand of their 
typical mediator, and with the blood of their typical 
sacrifice for sins. The Lord made known to Israel 
his covenant, and they assented thereto, and said, 
"All these things will we do," accepting Moses also 
as their mediator. This was the first step, corresponding 
with us to the step of faith and justification through 
faith. Then Moses took the blood of the sacrifice of 
atonement,— the blood of their covenant, and sprinkled 
it upon the book; i.e., upon the tables of the law, as 
representing God and his Word, the law or basis of his 
covenant with them, which they were to observe and 
obey. Moreover, he sprinkled also all the people with 
that blood, saying, "This is the covenant which God 
hath enjoined upon you." This was not a meaningless 
performance. The moment the drop of blood 
touched the Israelite, it meant that the covenant was 
in operation, in full force and power, on him and toward 
him; that God was bound to him by the covenant, 
and he was bound to God by the covenant. So 
likewise in the antitype, after we have heard, known, 
and have exercised faith, then the Lord requires that 
if we are in harmony with him, and desire to enter into 
this new covenant, we shall take our position with those 
who receive the blood of sprinkling, that speaketh better 
things for us than any typical blood, and that by receiving 
this blood of sprinkling we shall not only be 



justified from our past sins, but thereby also we shall 
recognize ourselves as henceforth bounden, obligated, 
covenanted to the Lord, as his people.— 1 Pet. 1:2. 

Moreover, as Israel was bound by that covenant to 
the law of God, as promulgated by their mediator, 
Moses, so we spiritual Israelites, who have fully entered 
the New Covenant relationship, and who have had the 
seal of the New Covenant, the blood of Christ, put 

R2329 : page 198 

upon us, are thereby bound to all the terms and conditions 
of that new covenant,— to its obligations as well 
as to its blessings: and these obligations are expressed 
in the law of the New Covenant, promulgated by the 
mediator of the new covenant, namely the royal law 
of Love. 

There are many false apprehensions respecting 
the New Covenant: one is to the effect that the law of 

R2329 : page 199 

the old covenant is also the law of the New Covenant. 
But not so: as the New Covenant is higher than the 
Law Covenant, and as its mediator is higher than the 
mediator of the Law Covenant, so the law itself is higher 
still and grander still than the law of the Mosaic 
covenant. Altho the latter was holy and just and 
good (Rom. 7:12), the law of the New Covenant is 
sublime. The Apostle declares that the law of 
the New Covenant is in full harmony with the law of 
the old covenant, that it is really the same law, only 
that our Mediator has magnified it, and made it still 
more honorable, adorable. The law of the covenant 
which Moses mediated reads, "Thou shalt not" do 
thus and so; the law of the New Covenant is briefly 
comprehended in one word, Love; "Thou shalt love." 

O, how much difference there is between these two 
laws, notwithstanding all their many points of harmony. 
"Thou shalt not kill," "Thou shalt not steal," 
might be understood by some, perhaps, to leave room 
for a willingness or desire to steal, or a willingness or 
desire to murder, if the evil acts themselves were abstained 
from. But the one command, "Thou shalt 
love," not only leaves no room for stealing and murder, 
but leaves no room for any thought that would be 
akin to these evil deeds. More than this, it is not 
merely a law of negatives, commanding us to abstain 
from doing and from even thinking evil; but it goes 
much further in positively requiring of us to think 
good and do good— to fulfil "the royal law" "Thou 
shalt love the Lord thy God," and "Thou shalt love 
thy neighbor." 

Many who think that they have entered into the 
New Covenant relationship with the Lord are evidently 
mistaken. They have perhaps believed in Jesus, and 



in his sacrifice for sins, and have desired his blessing 
and liberty from the curse of death; but they have not 
recognized nor accepted the corresponding obligations 
on their part. They have not stood up before the Lord 
to swear allegiance to him and to the law of his covenant, 
and to be sealed with the blood which seals 
that covenant. They are deluding themselves in 
thinking they are under the terms of the New Covenant, 
when they are not— not having taken the necessary 
second step to make them beneficiaries under its 
arrangement. They have heard of "the royal law of 
love," they know of it as the Golden Rule of the New 
Covenant, yet they have never, by consecration, put 
themselves under that law. They have never recognized 
it as being the law over them, by which they 
are to be controlled, and by which eventually they are 
to be judged. It is a work of kindness to such to point 
out to them clearly and distinctly that they are deceiving 
their own selves, and that those who do not accept 
of and come under the royal law of the New Covenant 
have neither part nor lot in the blessings which flow 
from that covenant. 

It is time that all who profess faith and loyalty 
to the Lord and to the New Covenant should recognize 
themselves as Covenanters— those who have made a 
compact, a covenant, with the Lord through Christ 
Jesus, and who are bound by the law of that covenant. 
And if they have done this intelligently, it is high 
time that they should be measuring every act and word 
and thought of life by the Golden Rule of this Covenant, 
which our Lord Jesus expresses most succinctly, 
saying, "As ye would that men should do to you, do 
ye also to them likewise."— Luke 6:31. 

THE ROYAL LAW. 



Our Lord and the Apostles, in all their teaching 
and writing, inculcated this royal law of the New 
Covenant. It was along this line that our Lord said 
to the disciples, "Judge not [harshly, unmercifully, 
ungenerously,] that ye be not [so] judged; for with 
whatever measure of cold justice and mercilessness you 
measure others, the same shall be meted out to you. 
The Apostle James, in our text, repeats the same 
thought, saying, "He shall have judgment [just sentence] 
without mercy who hath showed no mercy." 
That is to say, if we have come under the blessed provisions 
of the New Covenant, it means not only that 
we have accepted of God's mercy through Christ in 
the forgiveness of our sins, but also that a condition 
upon which we receive divine mercy was that we ourselves 
would be governed by the same rule of love and 
mercy towards our fellow-creatures. If, therefore, we 
fail to follow the Golden Rule, we mark ourselves as 



rejectors of the covenant of grace, and as those who 
despise divine favor, and who trample upon and make 
light of the great sacrifice by which this favor of the 
New Covenant was made available to us. 

Such a course, persisted in intelligently and intentionally, 
would seem to result in the Second death; 
for, as the Apostle declares, if we show no mercy to 
others, if we attempt to mete out justice without mercy, 
the result to ourselves will be that we will be treated 
without mercy,— on lines of strictest justice. This 
would mean that we would be without any benefit in 
the New Covenant, and without any covering or protection 
in the Mediator, and would fall directly into 
the hands of Justice, without a covering for our blemishes. 
This is the condition of affairs which the Apostle 
Paul points out to us, in connection with which he 
says, "It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of 
the living God." It is a fearful thing for imperfect 
beings like ourselves to fall into the hands of strict 
justice and its judgment, and to obtain no mercy. 

This would mean nothing short of the Second 

R2329 : page 200 

Death, for as the Apostle illustrates, the one who despised 
the typical covenant and the law given by its 
mediator died without mercy: much more, might we 
suppose, that he who has accepted the terms of the 
New Covenant, and who has intelligently heard from 
its Mediator the law which must govern all who would 
be blessed by that covenant (the law of love), and who 
willingly and intentionally despises and rejects the 
claims of that law, is worthy of death. And this death, 
as the Apostle intimates, would be a greater, a sorer, 
punishment than the one inflicted for the violation of 
the typical covenant— it would be sorer or more disastrous, 
in that it would be the Second Death, the end 
of all hope; because those thus condemned had enjoyed 
the opportunities and privileges of the New Covenant, 
and had despised and rejected them. 

Nor should such radical treatment of transgressors 
against the conditions of the New Covenant surprise 
us: the same conditions will, we believe, obtain in the 
next age, in the Millennium. The world of mankind, 
when brought to a knowledge of divine grace, will be 
invited to fully subject themselves to all the terms and 
conditions of the law of love. Those who endeavor to 
make progress in this direction will have the blessing 
and the assistance of the great Mediator, while those 
who reject the principles of this law of love to God and 
love to man— "The law of the spirit of life in Christ 
Jesus," will be rejecting this law, be rejecting the life 
which is attached thereto. And such rejectors of the 
law of the New Covenant are to be esteemed as rejectors 
of all the grace "which first contrived the way to 
save rebellious man." Such rejectors will be despisers 



of God, who was the Author of this plan of salvation. 
They will be rejectors of the blood of Christ, which 
sealed the New Covenant. And figuratively speaking, 
they may be said to trample upon that grace of God 
and of our Lord Jesus Christ. Very properly, eternal 
life is not intended for such. It would not be a real 
blessing for such, and they in turn would be an injury 
and a curse to all those who shall come into full accord 
with the Lord and with the spirit of his law of love. 

Let us, then, who have heard of the grace of God 
in Christ, and who have accepted of that grace by entering 
into the obligations of the New Covenant— let us 
remember daily, hourly, to let this law of love rule in 
our hearts, and in all our conduct. Let us remember 
that it not only means supreme love to God, which 
places the will and Word of the Lord paramount not 
only to our own wills, but also to the wills of others, 
and thus makes us loyal in the highest sense of the 
word, and in every affair of life, to the King of kings 
and Lord of lords. Let us remember, secondly, that 
the law of love is to operate toward our fellow men, 
and to lead us to "do good unto all men as we have 
opportunity— especially to the household of faith." 
Let us remember that love not only would not kill the 
neighbor, nor steal from the neighbor, but that it 
would hinder us from speaking evil of the neighbor, 
from stabbing him with slander, and from stealing 
from him a good name, which is more to him than his 
purse. Let us remember that love would not only 
utterly repudiate and contradict and hinder such conduct, 
but that on the reverse, it would lead us to be 
kind, gentle, patient, forgiving, merciful, not only to 
them that love us, and who are gentle and kind to us, 
but also as our Master explained, to the unkind, to 
the unthankful, to enemies who injure us, and who say 
all manner of evil against us falsely. "Love suffereth 
long and is kind." 

Love and its consequence, mercy, take hold upon 
the heart, the sentiments, the affections of life, and 
should ultimately permeate every channel of life. Thus 
love, mercifulness, would extend not only to the household 
of faith and our own family households, and to 
our neighbors, but also to the dumb animals. The 
man who has accepted love (mercy) as the ruling and 
controlling principle of life, the law of the New Covenant, 
which is to control in every act and word and 
thought, will be loving (merciful) toward his horse, toward 
his dog, his chickens,— toward everything with 

R2330 : page 200 

which he has to do. And if love (mercy) would restrain 
him from whipping his horse unmercifully, and if it 
would lead him to provide amply for the sustenance 
and comfort of the dumb creatures under his care, will 
not the same spirit of love extend also along to higher 



lines of the family, and lead him to be thoughtful of 

the comfort and welfare of all the human beings under 

his care, in matters both spiritual and temporal? And 

if it would stay his hand from smiting his beast an unnecessary 

blow, would it not much more stay his or 

her tongue from smiting the hearts and feelings of 

humanity with whom he or she may come in contact, 

with needlessly sharp, cutting words, irony, sarcasm, 

etc.— or still worse, with the poisoned blade of slander 

and suspicion and evil suggestion and surmise? 

And all of this which applies to the beast, to the 
home circle and family, applies with equal or still more 
force to the family of God, the Church; hence the 
Apostle urges that evil speaking, bitterness, anger, 
wrath, malice, hatreds, strifes, envyings, which are 
all parts of the old nature, the nature of the world and 
of the devil, be put away. These are to be supplanted 
by the new spirit of Christ, in harmony with the law 
of the New Covenant,— Love— with its gentleness, 
meekness, patience, long-suffering, brotherly-kindness. 
"If these things be in you and abound they shall make 
you that you shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in 
the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. But he that 

R2330 : page 201 

lacketh these things is blind, and cannot see afar off, 
and hath forgotten that he was purged from his old sins. 
Wherefore, the rather, brethren, give diligence [to the 
cultivation of these graces] to make your calling and 
election sure; for if ye do these things ye shall never 
fall: for so an entrance shall be ministered unto you 
abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord 
and Savior Jesus Christ."— 2 Pet. 1:8-1 1. 

He who finds his heart not in harmony with this 
law of the New Covenant, love— mercy, kindness, 
gentleness, goodness— lacks the evidence of proof that 
he is in any sense of the word accepted as a son of 
God, and a joint heir with Christ. If he have not this 
spirit of love, he will find it impossible to go far in the 
footsteps of the Master, for the sacrifice of Christ was 
not vain-glorious, not for outward show, not for honor 
of men, but prompted by love— toward God and men. 
So likewise with us, if we have not love in our hearts 
for the brethren, and the love of gentleness and benevolence 
toward all men, and even toward the brute creation, 
we have not the spirit which will carry us through 
in making the sacrifices necessary under present conditions. 
It will only be a question of time with such 
when the power of pride or vain-glory, holding them 
in the way of sacrifice, will snap asunder, and selfishness 
take full control. He who would be faithful even 
unto death, walking in the footsteps of the Master, 
must receive of the Master's spirit of love, before he 
can thus follow him. As the Apostle declares, "He 
that saith, I love God, and hateth his brother, is a 



liar. He that loveth not his brother, whom he hath 
seen, how can he love God, whom he hath not seen?" 
Hence, the Scriptures place the love of the brethren as 
one of the evidences of our having been begotten of 
the spirit, and of our being in touch with the Master. 

THIS LAW IN PRACTICAL OPERATION. 



And love of the brethren does not mean merely 
love for a faction, or clique, or for some of the brethren 
who have natural qualities which we admire. It 
means love for all who have accepted the New Covenant 
and are seeking to walk by the Golden Rule of love. 
It means that if some have peculiarities of natural development 
and disposition, which are discordant to our 
ideas and sentiments, nevertheless, we will love and 
cherish them, and cheerfully serve them, because they 
are trusting in the Lord, and have been accepted of 
him, and have adopted the law of the New Covenant, 
the royal law of liberty and life, as their standard. 
We thenceforth know them not after the flesh, with 
its peculiarities and knots and twists: but after the new 
nature, as "new creatures." It means also that each 
of us in proportion as we discover our own natural 
crooks and twists, which are contrary to the law of love, 
will seek to get rid of these imperfections of the flesh as 
rapidly as possible, and to make them as little obtrusive 
and offensive to others as possible. 

From this standpoint love will not be forever noting 
the defects of the various members of the body of Christ, 
nor holding them up to ridicule and scorn of others; 
but each will be, so far as possible, fully as anxious to 
cover the defects of others as to cover his own defects; 
and to sympathize with others in their conflicts with 
their besetments, as he sympathizes with himself, and 
desires that the Lord shall sympathize with him, in his 
own conflict with his own imperfections. "If any man 
have not the spirit of Christ [the disposition of Christ, 
love] he is none of his."— Rom. 8:9. 

The object of the present call of the Church, in 
advance of the call of the world, to share in the benefits 
and privileges of this New Covenant, is to select 
in advance, not those that are perfect, not those who 
are the copies of God's dear Son, but those who desire 
and will seek to become copies of God's dear Son, 
"conformed to the image of his Son." That image is 
love itself, for as God is love, so Christ's character is 
love, the express image of the Father. This is the 
mold into which we are to be fashioned. But God 
will not impress us into this mold; he will not force 
upon us these lines of character: rather, the only influences 
which he exerts to this end are the "exceeding 
great and precious promises; that by these we 
might become partakers of the divine nature" and impress 



upon ourselves the divine character of love, and 
thus escape the corruption that is in the world through 
selfishness; or rather, we are to keep ourselves in the 
love of God while he causes the pressure of all things 
to deeply engrave it upon us.— Jude 21. 

The matter is left open to us; we can either avail 
ourselves of these promises and permit them to mold 
and fashion us according to the copy, little by little, 
daily and hourly, in thought, in word and in deed, or 
we can resist their proper influence, and we can hold 
the truth in unrighteousness. Those who take the 
latter course are purchasing for themselves thereby bitter 
disappointment; for such are not of the kind to 
whom the Lord will say, "Well done, good and faithful 
servant, thou hast been faithful over a few things, 
I will make thee ruler over many things." The degree 
of our devotion to the Lord, therefore, will be indicated 
in the degree of our love for him and his; and 
the degree of our love and devotion will be manifested 
by our activity in conquering self and its selfishness, 
in all its ramifications throughout the affairs of life, 
and bringing all our thoughts and talents, great or 
small, into active service, prompted by love to God and 
to his people. And such will appreciate the sentiments 
of the Apostle, when he said, "We [who have 

R2330 : page 202 

received of the begetting of the holy spirit of our 
Master, the spirit of love, and who have grown to some 
extent in the knowledge of him— we] ought also to lay 
down our lives for the brethren." 

THE ROYAL LAW DURING THE MILLENNIUM. 



These same principles will be applicable to some 
extent during the Millennial age: note some of the 
differences between then and now, in the operation of 
this New Covenant. 

First, the Mediator shall then draw or call all men 
to a knowledge of the grace of God bestowed upon 
them in the provisions of this New Covenant; whereas 
now all are not called, but only "Whomsoever the 
Lord your God shall call," for no man cometh unto 
the Son now, except the Father who sent the Son 
draw him. (Jno. 6:44.) Not many great, or wise, or 
learned, or rich are called. 

Second, the acceptance of the New Covenant then 
will be less a matter of faith and more a matter of 
knowledge, than now; because the Lord shall take 
away the vail of ignorance which now is spread over 
all the earth, and the blinded eyes shall see out of the 
obscurity. -Isa. 25:7; 29:18. 

Third, nevertheless it will be equally necessary 



that each one who would then avail himself of the 
blessed provisions of the New Covenant shall for himself 
enter into a positive covenant with the Mediator, 
that he will obey the law of the New Covenant, Love. 
Love is the voice or command of the great Teacher, 
who shall then stand up with authority, and cause 
that all the world of mankind shall hear this message. 
"It shall come to pass that whosoever will not hear 
[obey] that prophet shall be cut off from among his 
people." All who will not conform themselves to the 
law of love, the law of the Millennial Kingdom, shall 
be cut off in the Second Death. 

Fourth, but even in the Millennial age God will 
not compel mankind to be conformed to this law. He 
will compel them to bow to and acknowledge the rule 
of love, as it is written, "Every knee shall bow, and 
every tongue shall confess;" because, when the Kingdom 
is established, and righteousness is laid to the 
line, and justice to the plummet, every violation of the 
law of that Kingdom, the Golden Rule, will meet with 
swift punishment; to the intent that evil doers shall be 
afraid, and that the righteous shall flourish. But God 
will still not impress the law of love upon the hearts of 
any; he leaves that for each to do for himself, just as 
at the present time. Each then, as now, must "put 
away" from his heart selfishness and all of the concomitant 
evils resulting from sin. Each then, as now, 
must "cleanse himself from all filthiness of the flesh 
and spirit, perfecting holiness in the reverence of the 
Lord" (2 Cor. 7:1); because God seeketh not such as 
are merely forced into obedience,— he "seeketh such 
to worship him as worship him in spirit and in truth" 

R2331 : page 202 

—such as love the law of God with all their heart, and 
who are at warfare with selfishness and sin, especially 
in themselves. 

Hence we see that at the close of the Millennial 
age, after the full opportunity has been granted to the 
world to have two-fold experience— now, with sin and 
selfishness, and their misrule, and the evil results; and 
then, with righteousness and love, and their blessed 
rule of peace and joy— when all shall have had fullest 
opportunity to develop in their hearts the spirit of 
love, then will come a test, a trial, in the close of the 
Millennial age, which will prove and demonstrate those 
whose love and fidelity to the Lord are of the heart, 
versus those whose obedience has been because of expediency. 
This trial, we may suppose, will not be a 
trial to see whether or not they will commit some open 
and flagrant wrong, but rather like the trial of father 
Adam in his perfection, a trial along the lines of obedience 
and disobedience, and whether love has been 
permitted to rule and take full possession of the heart, 
with resultant faithfulness to God and every principle 



of righteousness which would trust the Lord and follow 
strictly in his way. 

The result will be that all of the world who then 
shall not have the spirit of love properly developed, 
will be cut off in the Second Death, as unfit for eternal 
life, or to go beyond the Millennium into the grand 
conditions;— respecting which God has promised us 
that there shall be no more dying, no more sighing, 
no more crying, no more pain, there; because all the 
former things shall have passed away— all the things 
of sin, and all who have sympathy or love for sin. 

The victory in this race is not because of willing, 
nor for perfect running, yet it is only to him that willeth 
and that so runneth— through Christ. Thus Mercy 
rejoiceth against Justice, yet he that shows no mercy 
and who thus shows himself lacking in love shall receive 
no mercy. He that dwelleth in love dwelleth in 
God, and for such are all the riches of divine mercy 
and grace. 



I'LL DO MY VERY BEST. 



I may perform no deed of great renown, 
No glorious acts to millions manifest; 

Yet in my little labors up and down 
I'll do my best. 

I may not paint a perfect masterpiece, 

Nor carve a statue by the world confessed 

A miracle of art; yet will not cease 
To do my best. 

My name is not upon the rolls of fame, 

'Tis on the page of common life impressed; 

But I'll keep marking, marking just the same, 
And do my very best. 

And if I see some fellow traveller rise 
Far, far above me, still with quiet breast 

I keep on climbing, climbing toward the skies, 
And do my very best. 

Mine may not be the beautiful and grand, 
But I must try to be so careful, lest 

It fail to be what's put into my hand— 

My very best. — H. Guy Carleton. 



R2331 : page 203 

INTERESTING QUERIES. 



WERE LINCOLN AND GRANT CHRISTIANS? 



Question. In the WATCH TOWER of June 15, p. 180, 
the intimation seems to be that Abraham Lincoln 
and Ulysses S. Grant were not Christians, but noble 
specimens of the natural man; and that their opportunities 
in the future may be much more favorable 
than those of some who, professing Christ in church 
membership, deny him openly and continually in their 
daily life; but, nevertheless, that such moral people 
are in no sense counted by the Lord as members of 
his elect Church. Have I understood you correctly? 

Answer. You have stated the matter very correctly. 
The Church is composed only of believers in 
the redemptive work of Christ Jesus, who, because of 
their faith, are reckoned as justified from all sin. 

Moreover, the believer must subsequently consecrate 
himself to the Lord a "living sacrifice," ere he 
is reckoned as a member of the body of Christ, which 
is the Church. And this implies not only belief with 
the heart, but also confession with the mouth, and in 
the general course of life a manifestation of having (in 
will at least) died to sin and self and become alive as 
a new creature to the Lord and his righteousness. 

We are well aware that the foregoing is very contrary 
to the general views of this subject, but the 
Scripturalness of our position cannot be successfully 
controverted. The popular, but very erroneous, idea 
of the name Christian was recently illustrated by the 
answer of a gentleman to the question whether or not 
he or any of his family were Christians. His answer 
was,— Well, I presume we are Christians, for we are 
not Jews, nor heathen. 

The trouble with Protestants in general is that 
they assume that the Scriptures teach that all who are 
not of the Church are damned to eternal woe, and they 
reason correctly that Lincoln and Grant were too good 
to be everlastingly tormented, and so, without the 
slightest warrant of Scripture and in opposition to it, 
they crowd into heaven, as members of the glorified 
Church, "all the ring-streaked and speckled" of Christendom, 
excluding only the absolutely black. 

And when we call their attention to the Scriptures 
which declare that the blessings of the Church's high 
calling are promised only to the sanctified in Christ 
Jesus, who strive to walk in the Master's footsteps of 
self sacrifice; and to the fact declared by the Apostle, 
that "without holiness no man shall see the Lord,— 
then they abandon the Scriptures, declaring that they 
prefer their own judgments. However, if the Scriptures 
be rejected at all they should be rejected in toto. 



But in that case to be consistent they would have to 
abandon all hope in a divine plan of salvation, for there 
is no other revelation of it: and such is the general 
trend. 

We most heartily agree that Lincoln and Grant 
were far too noble to be justly sentenced to everlasting 
torments: and we will go a step further, and assert 
that no man is or ever was bad enough to justly merit 
eternal torment. The Bible commends itself as vastly 
superior to the views and teachings of the heathen and 
of Christian sects, in that it does not teach so unjust 
and unreasonable a theory.* 

Much more consistent is the teaching of Roman 
Catholicism than that of Protestants on this subject. 
It puts all except the "saints" into Purgatory for purification 
and development. 

But the essence of consistency is found in the 
teachings of the Bible: that (1) the present age is 
merely "for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of 
service" in the age to follow this— the Millennium. 
(Eph. 4:12.) (2) That under that future ministry 
of the saints, for which they are now being perfected, 
"all the families of the earth shall be blessed," which 
will include the awakening of "them that sleep in the 
dust of the earth" (Dan. 12:2); for in that glorious 
day of blessing and restitution "all that are in the 
graves shall hear the voice of the Son of Man and come 
forth."-John 5:28; Acts 3:19-23. 

When the sleeping world comes forth from the 
grave it will be found that while all men inherit blemished 
characters, nevertheless, each has according to 
his knowledge and opportunities either builded and 
strengthened character or undermined and degraded 
the measure of character received from his parents. 
Among these will be noble characters, such as Lincoln, 
Grant, Plato, Socrates, Confucius and many others 
less notable. These will be recognized according to 
their true worth at a time when "every secret thing 
shall be revealed" whether it be good or bad. And 
amongst those who shall then come forth we are told 
there will be some exposed to "shame and lasting contempt.' 
(Dan. 2:2.) Oh, how much meanness and 
perfidy and hypocrisy and selfishness will then be exposed: 
and what shame will be connected with this 
exposure— and what contempt in their own eyes as 
well as in the eyes of each other. Yet all this will be 
a part of their "blessing," which, to those rightly 
exercised thereby, will work out reform and gradually 
lead, step by step, up to full restitution of all the glorious 
likeness of God bestowed upon father Adam and 
lost by disobedience. The shame and contempt will 



*See What Say the Scriptures About Hell? Postpaid 10c. 
Watch Tower office. 



R2331 : page 204 

continue so long as the shameful and contemptible conditions 

continue, and no longer. And all who refuse 

to go up on the highway of holiness then opened up to 

R2332 : page 204 

them "shall be destroyed from among the people"— 
"the Second Death."— Compare Isa. 35:8; 62:10; 
Acts 3:23; DAWN I., Chap. 11. 

WAS THE TEMPLE CLEANSED TWICE? 



Question. From the various accounts would it not 
appear that the Temple was cleansed twice? I see 
that DAWN and WATCH TOWER always refer to the 
matter as tho there had been but one cleansing.— See 
Mark 11:15; John 2:13-17; Matt. 21:12,13. 

Answer. Many take the view suggested— that 
there were two cleansings; but we do not share it. It 
will be noticed that Matthew, Mark and John each 
mention the matter only once; and each mention once 
our Lord's riding upon the ass in fulfilment of 
Zechariah's prophecy (9:9-12); but only one of them connects 
these two events— Matthew. Moreover, since all 
agree that the riding on the ass was in fulfilment, of 
Zechariah's prophecy, and that there our Lord assumed 
for the first time his title as King, it is but reasonable 
to suppose that the use of force in cleansing the temple 
followed and did not precede that assertion of regal 
authority. For the same reasons we accept that same 
day as the one on which our Lord wept over Jerusalem 
and said "Your house is left unto you desolate!" 
Note the Prophet's expression— "Even to-day do I declare 
I will render [the second half of thy] double unto 
thee;"— the day of the riding on the ass as King. 

The disconnection so noticeable in the gospels 
may be accounted for (1) By remembering that the 
Apostles were "unlearned men," not regularly educated 
historians, men who recorded the wonderful words 
and works of their wonderful Teacher, but apparently 
saw little necessity for order or sequence. (2) By 
assuming that in this matter our Lord designed the 
confusion of the record, that only the faith-full and 
zealous might, under the leading of the holy spirit be 
led to "rightly divide the Word of truth" and to get 
from it "meat in due season." 

CHRISTIAN DUTY IF DRAFTED. 



Question. There are possibilities of a still greater 
war and of a draft which might include some of us who 
understand our Lord's commands to forbid our engagement 
in carnal warfare. What then, would be our 
duty? 

Answer. "We know that all things shall work together 
for good to those who love God— to the called 
ones according to his purpose." If, therefore, we 
were drafted, and if the government refused to accept 
our conscientious scruples against warfare (as they 
have heretofore done with "Friends," called Quakers), 
we should request to be assigned to the hospital service 
or to the Commissary department or to some other non-combatant 
place of usefulness; and such requests would 
no doubt be granted. If not, and we ever got into 
battle, we might help to terrify the enemy, but need 
not shoot anybody. Meantime what an opportunity 
we might thus have for preaching "Jesus and the resurrection;" 
—for being "living epistles known and read 
by all" the camp;— examples of good soldiers of the 
Lord Jesus Christ, drilled and thoroughly equipped 
with the armor of God, loyal and courageous in the 
Christian warfare, against the world, the flesh, and 
the devil. 



R2332 : page 204 

"JEHOVAH, HE IS THE GOD." 

-JULY 17.-1 KINGS 18:30-40.- 

"And when all the people saw it they fell on their faces, 
and they said: Jehovah, he is the God."— 1 Kings 18:39. 

THE three and a half years of drouth no doubt had 
an humbling effect upon King Ahab, as well as 
upon the people of Israel. No doubt they began to 
wonder where the matter would end; and to recognize 
it as more than an accident— as a judgment. The 
question would be whether it was a judgment from 
Baal or a judgment from Jehovah; for the people, as 
a result of their extended acquaintance with idolatry 
had a comparatively weak faith respecting the unseen 
Jehovah, who permitted no image or likeness of himself 
to be made or to be worshiped. The Lord's time 
had come for awakening Israel, and starting a reformation 
movement amongst them, and Elijah, who had 
been sought by the King throughout the surrounding 
nations, was instructed to present himself before Ahab, 
with a promise that rain should follow; and was permitted 
to be the Lord's agent in drawing the attention 
of the people to the true God, who alone has power 
over the elements. 
Altho Ahab realized that the famine was a judgment 



of the Lord, nevertheless, after the custom of 

the natural man, he ignored personal responsibility, 

and affected to charge the evils to Elijah, saying to 

him, "Are thou he that troublest Israel?" It is always 

so with the faithful mouthpieces of the Lord. 

Since they cannot prophesy smooth things, but must 

present the truth in reproof of unrighteousness, therefore 

the world and the nominal Israelite hate them. 

R2332 : page 205 

They do not seem to realize that the difficulty lies in 
themselves, and their sins, and their separation from 
the Lord. But Elijah, humble yet unabashed, did not 
hesitate to tell the king the truth of the matter, assuring 
him that the trouble in Israel came from his own 
wrong course. 

The drouth had so humbled Ahab that he did not 
resent the Prophet's arraignment of his sin: perhaps 
also he hoped that through the prophet's favor the 
embargo of the drouth and famine might be lifted. 
At all events he very promptly complied with Elijah's 
request that the people of Israel be assembled at Mount 
Carmel, together with the priests of Baal. Accordingly 
there was a great concourse to the flat, table-top of 
Mount Carmel, where Elijah awaited them, the king 
also coming with them; but Queen Jezebel sullenly 
remained at the palace in the capital city of Samaria. 

Elijah, full of zeal for the Lord, and full of indignation 
against the idolatry, and probably counseled 
respecting his course by the Lord, had a plan prepared 
by which to demonstrate to Israel which was the true 
God and which the false one. In the presence of the 
people he made a proposition to the priests of Baal for 
a contest to prove the question. This proposition was 
so reasonable, and the interest and expectation of 
Israel so great, that the priests of Baal dare not refuse. 
They, four hundred and fifty in number, were to build 
an altar and to make a sacrifice thereon to their god, 
Baal, while Elijah would build an altar and offer 
a sacrifice thereon to Jehovah, and whichever god 
would answer by fire would thus be attested as the true 
God. If Baal were powerful enough to answer the 
prayers of his priests and to accept the offering of the 
altar, then the people might understand that it was 
because Baal was offended with them that they had 
experienced the drouth and the famine. But if Jehovah 
had the power, and would answer with fire, it 
would be proof to the people that the drouth and the 
famine were from him, and signs of his indignation 
because they had worshiped Baal. 

The proposition could not be rejected: the priests 
of Baal prepared their altar and their sacrifice, and had 
the advantage of the noon-day heat of a tropical sun, 
sufficient almost of itself to ignite the fat of the sacrifice. 
They desired and prayed that the test might be granted; 



they cut themselves with stones until the blood 
gushed out, claiming that it must be because some of 
them, as priests of Baal, had trespassed against him, 
that their prayers were not heard. They kept 
this up for hours, until near sunset— Elijah meantime, 
in the hearing of the people, pouring upon them 
the sharpest sarcasm— the sarcasm of truth, not of 
falsehood. He suggested that they pray louder, as 
peradventure their god might be a little deaf; he 
urged them to keep it up, peradventure Baal might be 
on a journey, or attending to other business, or asleep. 
Thus he was giving to Israel in general the most telling 
lesson possible, considering their lethargy on religious 
subjects. He was preparing them for the final 
demonstration which he was about to give, that Jehovah 
is the true God, the only God who had power to 
answer both by fire and by water. 

Mark how thorough the Prophet's faith in God, 
and how thoroughly he demonstrated that there could 
be no room for deception in connection with his offering. 
Twelve stone crocks of water were poured upon 
the sacrifice and the wood, and filled the trench around 
about it; the sun was losing its power, and the offering 
was thoroughly drenched, and all things were thus 
ready for a thorough test of Jehovah's power to send 
down fire. 

Elijah stated the matter to the people: "How 
long halt ye between two opinions? If Jehovah be God, 
follow him; but if Baal be God, then follow him." The 
test was to show which was the true God, and which 
was the false god, and incidentally which the true 
and which the false prophets. Then Elijah prayed a 
beautiful and proper prayer. He did not say, "O 
Lord, cause Israel all to know how great, I Elijah, am, 
as a prophet of the Lord," but "Hear me, O Lord, 
hear me, that this people may know that thou art Jehovah 
God, and that thou hast turned their heart back 
again [—recalling them again by their experiences and 
these signs to be thy people]." 

The answer by fire was prompt, and the effect upon 
the people great. They promptly acknowledged Jehovah, 
and slew the priests of Baal. Then, while Ahab 
and the people rejoiced in Elijah's promises that the 

R2333 : page 205 

long hoped for rain would come, and went to their 
homes to rejoice and feast, the prophet remained upon 
the mountain to pray for that which God had definitely 
promised. Once he prayed, and sent his servant a 
distance to look for indications, but no answer. Again 
he prayed, and sent his servant again, but no evidence 
of response. After having been used of the Lord so 
mightily, in the matter of the sacrifice, Elijah might 
have gotten to feel too much of his own importance, 
if his prayer for rain had been too promptly responded 



to. Opportunity was given for fear and doubt, that 
the Lord would fail to keep his engagement, respecting 
the rain. But knowing the sureness of the Lord's 
word, Elijah did not doubt; he prayed again and again, 
and sent his servant each time to see what evidences 
there were of the Lord's answers to the prayers, until 
finally, when he had prayed for the seventh time, and 
inquired for a sign, the young man returned, saying 
that he saw a small cloud about the size of a man's 
hand. Then Elijah ceased his prayer, and realized 

R2333 : page 206 

that the beginning of the fulfilment had come. 

There is a lesson in this also for the Lord's people 
of to-day, that, as our Lord said, "We ought to pray 
and not to faint," not to grow weary in looking for, 
asking for and expecting the spiritual blessings which 
the Lord has promised us. Many of the prayers which 
fail of fulfilment, fail because the petitioners ask amiss; 
for things which God has not promised. Others fail, 
because of lack of faith. The prayer of faith is that 
which is offered, "nothing doubting," and whose hope 
is based upon a definite promise of the Lord. For instance, 
to us as new creatures, the Lord has declared, 
"Your heavenly Father is more willing to give the 
holy spirit to them that ask him, than are earthly 
parents to give good gifts [of an earthly kind] to their 
children." He that seeketh the spirit of holiness, the 
showers of divine grace, findeth them. To him that 
knocketh, the stores of divine favor shall be opened. 



R2333 : page 206 

A DISCOURAGED REFORMER. 

--JULY 24.-1 KINGS 19:1-16.— 

"Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him."— Psa. 37:7. 

SUDDEN was the reformation which apparently 

in one day overthrew the religion of Baal, 

and destroyed his priests, and revived the religion of 

Jehovah, and brought his prophet Elijah most prominently 

before Israel. But the influence of the slavery 

to superstition could not be easily eradicated. Reformation 

was not accomplished, but merely commenced by 

the test which the Lord had given at the hands of 

Elijah, in accepting the sacrifice with fire, and subsequently 

sending the promised rain. The people were 

lacking in those qualities of liberty and nobility of 

mind which are essential to a quick and thorough reformation. 

They lacked the courage of their convictions, 

and consequently were easily brought under the 



influence of that wicked woman, Jezebel, whose evil 
spirit and self-will were courageous enough to combat 
anything, everything. 

Ahab, and all Israel, seemed to be thoroughly 
humbled and converted, but Jezebel, fearing not God 
and regarding not man, was furious when she learned 
that the priests of the religion which she had championed 
had been put to death. Ignoring the king and 
the people of Israel entirely, she constituted herself 
the executive, and sent word to Elijah that he might 
expect to die also, as the priests of Baal had died, 
within twenty-four hours. It is altogether probable 
that this was merely a threat, intended to drive Elijah 
out of the kingdom; so that she might the better overthrow 
the reform movement which he had so recently 
begun. Had she not become fearful that the killing 
of Elijah might have brought some disastrous result, 
either through an insurrection of the people or through 
a divine judgment, no doubt she would have ordered 
his assassination, instead of notifying him of what she 
would do twenty-four hours later. 

The notification had what we presume was the 
designed effect: Elijah, thoroughly frightened and 
discouraged, fled panic-stricken before a woman; whereas 
but a few days before he had courageously faced 
the king, and reproved him. Ah, who will say that a 
woman has no power in the world! And her power for 
evil is commensurate with her power for good. No 
one can read the history of the world without seeing 
that woman has played an important part in all the 
important acts of the world's great drama. Her influences 
have been potent, both for good and evil, truth 
and error, God and Satan. Let not the sisters despise 
their opportunities, but let them seek to use them ever 
and always on the side of the good, the true, the pure, 
the noble, the holy, and in harmony with the Lord's 
Word. 

Elijah fled to the kingdom of Judah. Utterly discouraged, 
he went alone into the wilderness, and prayed 
that he might die. How severe his disappointment 
was we may judge. There had been three and a 
half years of preparation for this reform movement, 
and it had been inaugurated under such favorable conditions, 
and at first with pronounced results; and now 
to have the entire matter fail was certainly very 
discouraging. 

But the Lord did not even chide the Prophet for 
his timidity, etc. "He knoweth our frame, he remembereth 
that we are dust;" he makes allowance for 
our unintentional imperfections. God realized, better 
than did the Prophet, the physical exhaustion which 
he had experienced in connection with the great work 
which he had done within the past few days. So now, 
instead of chiding him, he was permitted to take rest 
in sleep and was provided miraculously with nourishment, 
and then sleep again; and, his vitality replenished, 



he arose refreshed, and ate again, before commencing 

a long journey and a long fast, of forty 

days. 

The lesson here to us is God's care over those 
who are fully consecrated to him, and who seek to do 
his will. He cares for our bodily necessities as well as 
for our spiritual wants. "Your Father knoweth what 
things ye have need of." Another lesson is found in 
the character of the food which the Lord supplied to 
Elijah. It would have been just as easy for Omnipotence 

R2333 : page 207 

to have provided dainties and luxuries for 
the prophet, but instead the provision was very simple 
—bread and water. The bread is called a "cake," 
for the customary food of that country then was, and 
still is, bread made about a quarter inch thick, and 
somewhat in the form of a pancake, baked on heated 
pebbles. Our Lord's promise to us, as his faithful 
people, is that our bread and water shall be sure; we 
are not to ask for more than this; whatever is received 
more should be accepted with thanksgiving and to the 
Lord's glory. Elijah's food also was a symbol of the 
Church's spiritual food: water is a symbol of truth- 
water of life; the unleavened bread is a symbol of 
Christ, whom we appropriate to our needs, for our 
refreshment through all the journey of life. 

Having journeyed to Mount Horeb (that is, Mount 
Sinai) the Prophet seems to have been without any 
special aim or purpose before his mind, for he simply 
dwelt in a cave there. The Lord brings this fact that 
he had no definite purpose or aim in life, to the prophet's 
attention by the inquiry, "What doest thou here, 
Elijah?" 

Elijah told the Lord how discouraged he felt, and 
why,— that he had in his zeal for the Lord attempted 
to do all that he could, but that apparently everything 
was wrecked, and the people of Israel had lost their 
courage and their faith in the Lord, and that apparently 
nothing further could be done to help them. 
And the Lord proposed to give Elijah a little lesson on 
various methods of work— so he sent him out upon 
the mountain, and there exhibited his power to him in 
various forms: (1) "A great and strong wind rent the 
mountains and brake in pieces the rock before the 
Lord." Here was an illustration of power such as 
Elijah had probably never before seen— wind with a 
velocity to rend the rocks; yet notwithstanding all this 
power, this was not God; it was merely the power of 
God. (2) He showed him an earthquake— the power 
of God to lift and to shake the mountains; yet neither 
was this the Lord; but an exhibition of his power. 
(3) A wonderful display of celestial fire, lightning, was 
next presented; but this was merely another grand 
manifestation of omnipotence. (4) Finally, in a great 



stillness, he heard a small voice speaking to him. Ah, 
here he recognized God. It had an influence upon 
him that all the manifestations of power did not 
have. He wrapped his face in his mantle, and fled 
back to the cave. 

We are not informed what the voice said to Elijah, 
but we see that he learned the lesson designed, namely, 
that God has a way of appealing to the heart of 
man more powerfully than by the wonderful gymnastics 
and phenomena of nature. Perhaps the small voice 
told Elijah that he should have had greater faith in 
God, and should have remained at his post, notwithstanding 
the threat of Jezebel, and that the Lord could 
have delivered him from her power. However, the 
Lord spoke to him again, intimating that he was doing 

R2334 : page 207 

nothing, and not in a place to do anything— 

"What doest thou here?" Elijah made the same response 

as before, about his discouragement, but by 

this time he had learned lessons of the Lord's providential 

dealing, and was prepared for the mission given 

him. The commission indicated that there was to be 

a general change in the affairs of Israel— a new king 

instead of Ahab, and another prophet instead of Elijah. 

Hazael, who was anointed to be the new king over 

Syria was to be the divine agent in bringing the divine 

judgment upon Israel and its king, Ahab, thus compelling 

reform, and preparing for better conditions 

future. 

The Lord's inquiry of Elijah may be variously 
emphasized, and may be applied fitly to each one of the 
Lord's consecrated people. It may be profitable to us 
if each one will ask himself the question, What doest 
thou here? What are we doing for the Lord and for 
his cause? What are we trying to do? Are we fleeing 
from the threats of the Lord's enemies? Are we 
discouraged in his service? Having begun in the 
spirit, are we hoping, contrary to his Word, to find 
earthly blessings and victories? Has the courage 
which enabled us for a time to fight the good fight deserted 
us? After being courageous for the Lord and 
his truth and his people are we in danger of being put 
to flight by a woman or a man, or any other creature? 
Is the Lord's arm shortened that it cannot help us and 
deliver us? Shall we receive of his marks of kindness 
and provision for our necessities of spiritual food, yet 
doubt his care and ability to supervise our temporal 
interests, and our endeavors to render service to his 
cause. Let us gather a blessing of instruction from the 
experience of Elijah, as delineated in this lesson, lest 
we be weary and faint in our minds. Greater is he 
that is on our part than all they that be against us. 
He will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are 
able, but will with the temptation provide also a way 



of escape. His grace is sufficient for us. Nevertheless, 
for these things he will be inquired of by us, 
and he demands that we shall exercise faith in him 
corresponding to his mercies and manifold favors 
to us, for "without faith it is impossible to please 
God."-Heb. 11:6. 

ELIJAH'S LESSON SYMBOLICALLY CONSIDERED. 



Recognizing that Elijah was a typical character 
representative of Christ in the flesh (the complete 
Church, head and body), should lead us to scan every 

R2334 : page 208 

feature of his experience, to note, if possible, the correspondence 

to it in the experience of the Church. 

We have already pointed out that the discouragement 

of the Reformer and his flight represent the discouragement 

of many of God's people now, in view of the 

rising power of Papacy and the tendency of so-called 

Protestants to sympathy with Papal methods, and the 

general abandonment of faith in the "ransom for all" 

paid at Calvary. 

It seems, therefore, not unreasonable to suppose 
that the lesson given to Elijah, just examined, represents 
a lesson which God has for his people now— to 
keep us at work undiscouraged or to revive the fainting. 
The lesson we see is this. 

Protestants obtained from Papacy the false idea 
that the whole world must be converted during this 
age. Experience and statistics prove that this is an 
impossible task;— that the population increases at a 
ten-fold more rapid ratio than even nominal conversions 
to Protestantism. Dismay and discouragement 
are followed by perplexity. But now as "meat in due 
season" the Lord gives his people an inkling respecting 
his plan for man's salvation and it restores confidence 
and zeal on the part of his people. He shows 
them that his power will first be manifested and that 
afterward he will speak to the people by the still 
small voice of the spirit of the truth which shall be 
surely heard. 

The four exhibitions of the Lord, given to Elijah, 
represent, we believe, four manifestations, in which 
the Lord is about to reveal himself to mankind;— the 
first three of which will prepare men for the final one in 
which will come the desired blessing, to all the families 
of the earth. These are: 

(1) The mighty winds rending the very rocks. 
Blowing winds seem to be used in Scripture as a symbol 
for wars. And Revelation (7:1-3) teaches us 
that the wars, whose dark clouds have threatened the 
civilized world so ominously for the past thirty years, 



have been miraculously hindered to give opportunity 
for "sealing" the Lord's consecrated people in their 
foreheads (intellectually) with the present truth. We 
are therefore to expect that when these winds of war 
shall be let loose, it will mean a cataclysm of warfare 
which shall divide kingdoms (mountains)— prefigured 
by the mighty wind shown to Elijah, which rent the 
rock. But God's Kingdom will not follow the epoch 
of war: the world will not thus be made ready for the 
reign of Immanuel. No, a further lesson will be needed 
and will be given. It is represented in 

(2) An earthquake. Throughout the Scriptures 

an earthquake seems always to represent revolution, 
and it is not unreasonable to expect that an era of general 
warfare would so arouse the lower classes of Europe 
and so discontent them with their lot (and especially 
with the conditions which would follow such a war) 
that revolution would be the next thing in order. If 
so, the earthquake made known to God's people is the 
one referred to in Revelation 16: 18. But severe tho 
those revolutionary experiences will be to the world 
they are not sufficient to prepare men to hear the voice 
of God. It will require 

(3) The fire from heaven;— an epoch of divine 

judgments and chastisements upon a maddened but unconverted 

world wild in anarchy, as other Scriptures 

show us. The results of their wars and revolutions 

and anarchy— the failure of their schemes and the 

lessons of divine judgments will however, have an exhausting 

and humbling effect and prepare mankind 

for God's revelation of himself in 

(4) The still small voice. Yes, he who spoke to 

the winds and waves of the sea of Galilee will, in due 
time, "Speak peace to the peoples." He will speak 
with authority, commanding the observance of his long 
neglected law of Love. "And it shall come to pass 
that whosoever will not hear that Prophet shall be cut 
off from among his people."— Acts 3:23. 

Mark the harmony of Psalm 46 with these thoughts 
drawn from Elijah's lesson. After portraying in symbol 
the dashing of the kingdoms of this world, the 
shaking of society by revolution and the figurative 
melting of society under the fire of God's judgments, 
and after every hope of man in his own power is gone, 
the still small voice is heard, commanding,— "Be still 
and know that I am God! I will be exalted among the 
people, I will be exalted in the earth." 

The difficulty with mankind is, in great part, their 
ignorance of God. And they fail to know him, partly 
at least because of their high opinion of their own 
wisdom and ability to get along without God. They 
will soon learn to the contrary and will then be willing 
to hearken to divine wisdom, and say, "Come, let 
us go up to the mountain [kingdom] of the Lord's 
house. He shall teach us of his ways and we will 
walk in his paths."— Isa. 2:3; Micah 4:2. 



"All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth." 
-Psa. 25:10. 

The lesson to the Lord's people from these symbols 
is, that God has the power by which eventually 
he will "subdue all things unto himself," and bring 
order out of present confusion. We are to "wait patiently 
for him," and labor on diligently and fervently 
to the extent of our opportunities and abilities and to 
"hope to the end for the grace that shall be brought 
unto us at the revelation of our Lord and Savior, Jesus 
Christ" for "in due season we shall reap if we faint 
not."-Gal. 6:9. 



page 209 