A Letter From the Governing Body
AS WE stand on the threshold of the coming new system of things, it is urgent that we keep in expectation of Jehovah. (Zeph. 3:8) The prophet Daniel stated that “God . . . is a Revealer of secrets, and he has made known . . . what is to occur in the final part of the days.” (Dan. 2:28) What a privilege it is to be living at the close of that foretold period and to understand the divine secrets Jehovah is now making known!
Through “the faithful and discreet slave,” Jehovah has progressively revealed his purpose to gather an international “great crowd” of worshipers during these troublesome “last days.” (Matt. 24:45; Rev. 7:9; 2 Tim. 3:1) Isaiah 2:2, 3 describes this global movement as occurring “in the final part of the days.” Each year, this ingathering continues amid the turmoil and violence rampant in this world.
During the 2004 calendar year, we have been made more aware of the need to obey Jesus’ words: “Keep on the watch . . . Prove yourselves ready.” (Matt. 24:42, 44) Truly, what is happening on the world scene has tremendous meaning for Christians, who discern “the signs of the times” and respond accordingly. (Matt. 16:1-3) In fulfillment of his Word, Jehovah will continue to be with his theocratically organized people despite any opposition they may face.
In spite of efforts by some to hinder or stop the Kingdom proclamation, our brothers continue to speak the truth and to assemble together. (Acts 5:19, 20; Heb. 10:24, 25) In Russia during June 2004, a court of appeals in Moscow upheld a lower court ruling to ban the activities of Jehovah’s Witnesses and to liquidate their legal entity in that city. However, the brothers are not deterred; they know what God requires of them, and they obey him as Ruler rather than men. (Acts 5:29) We are confident that Jehovah will direct his servants in the face of adverse legal action.
In the Republic of Georgia during the past few years, brothers have experienced loss of property, suffered mob violence, and witnessed the burning of their literature. But no weapon formed against them has succeeded. (Isa. 54:17) During the 2004 service year, Jehovah’s Witnesses were again legally recognized in Georgia. Conventions were held without interference, and literature flows into the country. New peaks in publishers and Memorial attendance were reported.
In Armenia, Eritrea, Republic of Korea, Rwanda, and Turkmenistan, brothers have been imprisoned for their faith. Though mistreated, they know the Scriptural reason for their trials, which helps them to maintain integrity as they look to Jehovah for deliverance.​—1 Pet. 1:6; 2 Pet. 2:9.
As you read the Highlights of the Past Year and examine the 2004 Worldwide Report, you will rejoice over Jehovah’s goodness. (Ps. 31:19; 65:11) It is our hope that this Yearbook will encourage you to keep walking in a way that pleases God.​—1 Thess. 4:1.
Great efforts continue to be made to reach all sorts of people with the truth. For example, videos, DVDs, and other material in sign language and publications in Braille have been prepared to help the deaf and the blind spiritually. Many Kingdom publishers have learned languages spoken by immigrants residing in their congregation territory.
In addition, hundreds of isolated groups have been formed in hard-to-reach territories. One branch has over 300 isolated groups composed of more than 7,000 publishers. What a potential this represents for new congregations! Moreover, of the 16,760,607 at the Memorial this service year, upwards of 10 million were non-Witnesses. This is a strong indication of the ripe harvest yet to be reaped.
We give thanks to Jehovah for his rich blessing and the loving way in which he cares for us from day to day. (Prov. 10:22; Mal. 3:10; 1 Pet. 5:7) As we move ahead unitedly during this “final part of the days,” our confidence and trust is in Jehovah. No matter what problems we may face, let us take to heart our yeartext for 2005: “My help is from Jehovah.” (Ps. 121:2) Please be assured of our love and of our prayers in your behalf.
Your brothers,
Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses

