From Our Readers
Missing Children
Your issue on “My Child Is Missing!” (April 22, 1984) was great. I have four children of my own, and this article helped to make them even more fully aware of how and why they should be on guard of people, even those they know.
D. H., Washington
Flying Blind
As a pilot, I was interested in reading “Flying ‘Blind’​—How Do They Do It?” (March 22, 1984) This article was very well done in accurate terminology, while understandable to the nonpilot readers to whom it was obviously directed, except that the diagram on page 26 mislabeled the Glide-path and Localizer beams and transmitters. The Glide-path transmitter (labeled Localizer transmitter) and the Localizer transmitter (labeled Glide-path transmitter) are shown in good scale as to their longitudinal positions relative to the runway. However, the Glide-path transmitter is not located in the pavement on the runway center line as shown, but to one side. The Localizer transmitter, though, (which you have labeled Glide-path transmitter) must be on the runway center line to serve its purpose.
R. S., Maine
We acknowledge our errors, caused by relying on an incorrect published source. The Glide-path beam and Glide-path transmitter and Localizer beam and Localizer transmitter were cross-labeled. Further, the Glide-path transmitter should have been shown off to the side of the runway. The pilot from Maine is correct, and, no doubt, other pilots among our readers have also taken note of this error. Corrections have been sent for insertion in foreign-language editions. Thank you for calling this to our attention.​—ED.
Acid Rain
I was particularly interested in your article “Killer From the Sky!” (November 22, 1983) until I got to the last paragraph, which implied that the “Grand Creator” was going to clean up the “garbage dump” the human race is turning this once beautiful planet into. You don’t let the garbage stack up in your own homes waiting for your Grand Creator to carry it out for you​—why treat the outdoors any differently? Only by working “through us” can the Grand Creator of all life cleanse us of our own pollution. You do your readers and the planet we live on​—our very own “Mother Earth”—​a disservice by implying otherwise.
C. Z., Colorado
We fully agree that all of us, from large industrial concerns down to individuals, have the responsibility to keep our environment clean and to lessen pollution, which our article also made quite clear. But considering the woefully inadequate efforts being put forth to keep the environment clean and the little likelihood of earth-wide success in this regard from a human standpoint, it is really an encouragement to our readers to know that the all-powerful Creator will see to it that the earth is completely cleansed of polluters and will be populated by God-fearing people who will cooperate with the Creator in keeping the earth a beautiful paradise for all time in the future. Providing our readers with this information is a real service to them.​—ED.

