Your Friend the Dictionary
DO YOU have difficulty understanding some of the words you read? Have you had to apply in writing for a job and felt that the wording of your letter was inadequate and your spelling suspect? Would you like to express yourself more clearly and convincingly? In short, would you like to improve your vocabulary? If so, what you need is a good dictionary.
Before looking at the services a dictionary provides, let’s consider the kinds available. Basically, there are three: compact, historical and general purpose.
The compact, or pocket, dictionary being small is obviously limited in what it offers. At the other extreme is the historical, or exhaustive, dictionary. Its specialty is the history of words, where they come from and how and when they acquired their present meanings. It is more for the word specialist or writer. Probably the most practical dictionary for you is one that is a compromise​—the general-purpose type, variously called desk, concise, or collegiate. Here are just some of the features that make it so useful.
Definitions
Perhaps its most valuable aid is word definition. A word used out of place will raise eyebrows and cause embarrassment. But as a writer of proverbs said, “What a joy it is to find just the right word for the right occasion!” (Proverbs 15:23, Today’s English Version) So when you are not sure of the precise meaning, consult the dictionary before using that word. Many words have more than one meaning. For example, the word “discipline” can mean training, punishment, behavior according to established rules, control exercised within an organization, or it can refer to a branch of learning. With the dictionary you will be able to determine which meaning applies in the sentence before you.
Some dictionaries give specimen phrases to illustrate the typical use of a word. For example, one illustrates the uses of the word “control” with these phrases: control a country, control one’s emotions, control a fire, frontier control, control panel, under control, out of control.
Pronunciation
It is difficult for a dictionary to provide the pronunciation of a word with accuracy because this can vary from region to region. Who is to say which is right? The dictionary may give important variations, but usually it will give the pronunciation that is generally accepted.
As the letters of an alphabet cannot represent all the sounds used in spoken language​—there are at least 47 such sounds in English—​dictionary compilers have to devise ways of explaining how to pronounce words. Among the various systems is one that respells the words to match the sound as closely as possible and supplements this with diacritical (distinguishing) marks. Whatever system your dictionary uses to distinguish sounds, it will provide an explanatory table.
The dictionary will also show what syllables take the stress. By way of example, it will show that preferably one would say distribute, not distribute; formidable, not formidable; dispute, not dispute; comparable, not comparable.
Spelling
In English the pronunciation of a word is often no guide to its spelling. Thus, the verb “proceed” has two e’s, whereas the noun “procedure” has only one, even though the sound is unchanged. Also, the “i before e except after c” rule has its exceptions: “Siege” obeys the rule, “seize” does not. Do you write “guage” when you mean “gauge”? Confusing? Let your friend the dictionary help. If it is at your elbow, so that you can reach it without getting out of your chair, you are much more likely to use it.
Derivations
A fascinating feature of a dictionary is etymology, the roots, or origins, from which words are derived. Of what value is that knowledge, you may ask? Introducing its forebears brings a word to life. English is particularly rich in this respect, for it has borrowed from a multitude of languages, such as Latin, Greek and Anglo-Saxon. By using a dictionary you can become familiar with words or parts of words most frequently drawn from those languages. As you remember them, your vocabulary will grow.
Latin has made a great contribution to the English language. To take one example: We have many words arising from jacere, to throw. Consider the basic meaning of these verbs: project​—throw forward; inject​—throw in; eject​—throw out; subject​—throw under; reject​—throw back; deject​—throw down; object​—throw against; and interject​—throw between. So by knowing the root, jacere, and a few everyday prefixes, many words become instantly recognizable.
Many English words have come directly from Greek. Philanthropist​—from philos, friend, and anthropos, man—​a friend of mankind. Photograph​—from phos, light, and graphein, to write—​literally, to write with light. Cacophony​—from kakos, bad, and phōnē, sound—​harsh, discordant sound.
Thus, by becoming familiar with the derivations of words, it is possible to identify others. Having in mind the Greek words italicized above, can you work out the basic meanings of “phonograph” and “anthropology”? But watch for traps! Whereas ante means before, anti means against; hypo is under, hyper, over, to mention only two.
Restrictive Labels
Your dictionary also tells you of restrictions in the use of a word. If the word is marked “informal,” “colloquial” or “slang,” it should not be used in formal communication, unless deliberately used for special effect. Such words may be more acceptable in conversation or in a personal letter. Much would depend on the parties concerned. So these labels signal caution. For instance, in Britain the word “nick” is slang for prison and for stealing, in the United States for defrauding someone, and in Australia, followed by “off,” for a rapid departure. The dictionary warns that these uses are not for formal speech or writing.
A “derogatory” label warns that the word could offend. And words labeled “obscene” or “vulgar” should, of course, be avoided entirely.
The English language is constantly changing. This is apparent to readers of the Bible when they compare the King James Version, or Authorized Version, with a modern-language translation. The word “let,” for example, has a meaning today that is totally opposite to its meaning 350 years ago. (2 Thessalonians 2:7, 8) Take also the word “gay.” While it used to mean “merry,” “bright” and “lively,” it is almost exclusively used nowadays to refer to a homosexual. So it is good to have and consult an up-to-date dictionary for the current definition and pronunciation of words.
Rewards and Enjoyment
Finally, let us apply the above information and see how the dictionary helps with the word “propitiatory,” which appears in this text from the Bible: “Jesus Christ . . . is a propitiatory sacrifice for our sins.” (1 John 2:1, 2) We find that the word means to appease or make well disposed, to make atonement. The English word comes from the Latin propitiare, to render favorable. We learn also that it is pronounced with the stress on the second syllable and that the first “t” is pronounced “sh” as in ship. Quite a lot of information in one short entry!
It is not likely that you will remember all these things about every word you look up in the dictionary, nor should you try. Some words are not commonly used. But commit to memory those you feel you can and should use. Select choice words that will help you to communicate better, not the showy ones. As your vocabulary improves you will find that, though you will always need your friend the dictionary, you will become less dependent on it. Your reading will become even more enjoyable and your speech will markedly improve. How rewarding​—for as the Bible so rightly says: “Like apples of gold in a silver setting is a word that is aptly spoken”!​—Proverbs 25:11, The Jerusalem Bible.

