Questions From Readers
How is the death of God’s loyal ones “precious in the eyes of Jehovah”?
▪ An inspired psalmist sang: “Precious in the eyes of Jehovah is the death of his loyal ones.” (Ps. 116:15) The life of every true worshipper of Jehovah is very valuable to him. However, more than the death of an individual is meant by the words just quoted from Psalm 116.
When delivering a memorial talk for a Christian, it is not fitting to apply Psalm 116:15 to the deceased person, even though he died as a loyal servant of Jehovah. Why? Because the psalmist’s statement has a broader significance. It means that God counts the death of the entire group of his loyal ones too costly for him to let it take place.—See Psalm 72:14; 116:8.
Psalm 116:15 assures us that Jehovah will not allow his loyal servants as a group to be entirely removed from the earth. In fact, our modern-day history chronicles our endurance of severe trials and persecution, thus furnishing clear evidence that God will never permit us to be exterminated.
Because of his limitless power and unfailing purpose, Jehovah will not allow us to be swept out of existence as a group. If God were to permit that, it would seem that his enemies are more powerful than he is—an impossibility! Jehovah’s purpose that this globe be inhabited by people loyal to him would go unfulfilled—and there is no possibility of that. (Isa. 45:18; 55:10, 11) Why, the rendering of sacred service to Jehovah would cease on earth if no humans were left to worship him in the earthly courtyards of his great spiritual temple! There would be no foundation for the “new earth”—righteous human society living on our globe under the “new heaven.” (Rev. 21:1) Then, too, Christ’s Thousand Year Reign could not become a reality without any earthly subjects.—Rev. 20:4, 5.
God’s position and reputation would be called into question were he to allow his enemies to wipe out the entire group of his people on earth. Such a development would be a blot on Jehovah’s position as Universal Sovereign. Furthermore, because of his respect for himself and his holy name, Jehovah will not permit the death of his loyal ones as a group. And consider this: Since “there is no injustice” with God, he will never fail to preserve the group of humans who have been serving him loyally. (Deut. 32:4; Gen. 18:25) Moreover, permitting the extermination of his servants as a body would be contrary to God’s Word: “Jehovah will not desert his people for the sake of his great name.” (1 Sam. 12:22) Indeed, “Jehovah will not forsake his people, nor will he leave his own inheritance.”—Ps. 94:14.
How comforting it is to know that Jehovah’s people will never perish from the earth! By all means, then, let us ever prove loyal to God, trusting in his promise: “Any weapon whatever that will be formed against you will have no success, and any tongue at all that will rise up against you in the judgment you will condemn. This is the hereditary possession of the servants of Jehovah, and their righteousness is from me.”—Isa. 54:17.
[Blurb on page 22]
God will never permit his people to be exterminated

