A World Without Disease
“Malaria is smarter than anyone ever imagined,” says immunologist Dr. Dan Gordon. “We’re still trying to find an answer to it.”
“WE STILL don’t know enough about the metabolism of the [tuberculosis bacterium],” says Barry Bloom of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. “We don’t fully know how any drug works. We just don’t really know.”
“Knowledge doesn’t necessarily translate into behavior change,” laments a spokesman for the Centers for Disease Control, observing the failure of “safe sex” campaigns to curtail syphilis. As the above statements indicate, the battles against malaria, tuberculosis, and syphilis have been frustrating ones. Will the future bring improved remedies for these diseases?
Perhaps. But while man may conquer some ailments and make others easier to live with, there is a fundamental reason why he cannot entirely win the war against disease.
The Root of Disease
The battle against disease is much more than just a fight against parasites and germs. The Bible explains that disease is a consequence of sin inherited from our first human father. (Romans 5:12) Sin not only damaged man’s relationship with his Creator but also led to his deteriorating mentally, emotionally, and physically. Thus, instead of continuing in perfection on a paradise earth, humans became imperfect and deteriorated until death overtook them.​—Genesis 3:17-19.
Even with the best of medicine, man cannot reverse his sinful condition or its consequences. This dilemma leaves the human race “subjected to futility [“so limited,” Phillips].” (Romans 8:20) And this is true with regard to conquering disease. Lifesaving progress in the field of medicine is often neutralized by life-threatening breakdown of society.
“We find ourselves in a bind,” writes Jerold M. Lowenstein in Discover magazine. “The more success we have at fighting disease and extending human life, the greater looms the possibility of hastening our own extinction” because of overpopulation and the degradation of the environment.
The Real Cure
The real cure for disease rests not with man but with the Creator. That is why the psalmist declared: “Do not put your trust in nobles, nor in the son of earthling man, to whom no salvation belongs.” The Bible further says: “Happy is the one . . . whose hope is in Jehovah his God, the Maker of heaven and earth.” (Psalm 146:3, 5, 6) Only God has the power to eradicate sickness at its root. And according to the Bible, he purposes to do so. That time is nearing.
Jesus Christ foretold that “pestilences” would be one of many evidences that we are living in the conclusion of the present system of things and just before the coming in of a new world. He also predicted an increase of the very conditions that aggravate disease, such as war, famine, and lawlessness.​—Luke 21:11; Matthew 24:3, 7, 12; 2 Timothy 3:1-5, 13.
When he was on earth, Jesus miraculously healed sick people, thus beginning the fulfillment of the prophecy: “Our sicknesses were what he himself carried; and as for our pains, he bore them.” (Isaiah 53:4; Matthew 8:17) He thereby demonstrated on a small scale what God has purposed to accomplish soon on a worldwide scale. The Bible says regarding Jesus: “Then great crowds approached him, having along with them people that were lame, maimed, blind, dumb, and many otherwise, and they fairly threw them at his feet, and he cured them; so that the crowd felt amazement as they saw the dumb speaking and the lame walking and the blind seeing.”​—Matthew 15:30, 31.
The people who observed those miracles glorified God because they understood that it was he who had given Jesus the power to perform those miracles. The power Jesus had access to was the same power that was used in creating our awesome universe. It was God’s holy spirit, his active force.​—Genesis 1:1, 2; Revelation 4:11.
The prophet Isaiah wrote of a time when “no resident will say: ‘I am sick.’” (Isaiah 33:24) And Revelation 21:4, 5 declares: “‘[God] will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.’ And the One seated on the throne said: ‘Look! I am making all things new.’”
The Bible shows that we are living in a time of transition. (1 John 2:15-17) Soon this world, with its sickness, sorrow, crime, violence, and death, will be a thing of the past. God will remove it and all its calamities, paving the way for a new world here on earth, where “righteousness is to dwell.” (2 Peter 3:11-13) Jesus referred to that incoming new world as “Paradise,” since it will be like the original Paradise garden of Eden, only on an earth-wide scale.​—Luke 23:43; Genesis 2:7, 8.
Christians thus have hope, not for a mere temporary treatment, but for a permanent release from imperfection, disease, and death. They look forward to the complete fulfillment of God’s promise: “I am Jehovah who is healing you.” “I shall indeed turn malady away from your midst.”​—Exodus 15:26; 23:25.
[Pictures on page 9]
Jesus was empowered by God to raise the dead and heal the sick

