From Our Readers
Failed Romance  I am 17 years old and have found the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Cope With a Failed Romance?” (May 8, 1993) to be very helpful. I was always depressed about not being loved by someone. Now I am putting my mind on other things and am not worrying about getting married so soon.
S. M., Australia
I got involved with a boy who is not a Christian and found myself falling in love. I came to my senses and broke up with him, but I had suicidal feelings. I felt I couldn’t live without him and was depressed for weeks. The article helped me to think positively and to know that this painful period will soon pass.
A. H., United States
Recipes  Your article “New Zealand’s Fuzzy Little Fruit” (October 22, 1992) gave a recipe using orange liqueur as an ingredient. Your readers should be reminded that they should not drive immediately after eating anything containing alcohol.
J. S., United States
Certainly it would be appropriate to inform guests if a food item contains alcohol. The recipe in question called for a tablespoon of orange liqueur in a fruit salad serving up to six people​—which would not be an intoxicating dose. The danger of intoxication is even less in recipes that call for cooking the ingredients. Since alcohol has a low boiling point, most, if not all, will evaporate.​—ED.
Joshua’s Wish  Thank you for publishing the article “Joshua’s Wish.” (June 22, 1993) It was encouraging to me. If he could be that faithful with a deadly disease [leukemia], how easy it is for me to be faithful too! I am nine years old.
M. M., United States
I was deeply moved by “Joshua’s Wish.” His courage, faith, and love for Jehovah touched me very much.
K. M., United States
Modern-Day Martyrs  I have just finished reading the series of articles entitled “Victorious in the Face of Death.” (May 8, 1993) I am moved by the unjust atrocities suffered by our Christian brothers. As I reflect on their perseverance, my face is streaked with tears. What strikes me is their faith and loyalty even in the face of death. May Jehovah give us the strength and perseverance to continue being loyal, just as they were.
B. D., Italy
In my study of the Bible, when I first encountered the issue of keeping faith under trial, I could not accept that there are indeed instances in which we face severe tests of faith. But having read the touching experiences of Christians who kept their integrity in the face of death, I can’t hold back my tears. My deepest appreciation for this series of articles.
J. P., Philippines
Family Planning  Your series of articles “Family Planning​—A Global Issue” (February 22, 1993) said that when progestin-only inserts are used [as a method of birth control], there is a possibility of its being abortive. My doctor says this is not true.
M. D., United States
Researchers do not know for sure exactly how progestin-only implants prevent pregnancy. Some believe they do so by preventing ovulation. Others claim there is evidence that they sometimes work by preventing a fertilized egg from attaching to the womb​—hence, aborting the pregnancy. Since this method of birth control is not overtly abortive, Christian couples must decide for themselves whether they can conscientiously use it or not. (Galatians 6:5)​—ED.

