Bible Studies That Produce Disciples
1 “What prevents me from getting baptized?” asked the Ethiopian eunuch after Philip “declared to him the good news about Jesus.” (Acts 8:27-39) In the eunuch’s case, he already had a love for God’s inspired writings, and after receiving spiritual help from Philip, he was ready to become a disciple. But not all people are convinced that they need to examine the Scriptures for themselves.
2 Thankfully, Jehovah’s organization has provided the new brochure, A Book for All People, to encourage people to examine the Bible’s message for our day. The information in the brochure should be appealing to sincere people who may be educated but who know little about the Bible. This fine instrument is designed to move people to want to look into the Bible.
3 When starting a Bible study, it would be helpful to review the excellent suggestions published in the June 1996 Our Kingdom Ministry insert on how a productive study can be conducted in the Knowledge book. During the course of the study, consider the progress being made by the student so that you can determine which areas need further attention. Encourage the student to prepare his lessons in advance, looking up the scriptures. Comments made in his own words may reflect his heartfelt appreciation for the truth. Rapid progress is usually made by those who do additional reading of the Society’s publications and regularly attend congregation meetings. Encourage him to speak informally to others about what he is learning. Kindly show him what he needs to do to make spiritual progress. We should not conduct studies indefinitely with indecisive ones. Students ought to take the initiative to learn, take a firm stand for the truth, and advance toward dedication and baptism.
4 In some households, more than one study is being conducted, as different members of the family have separate studies. However, having a united family study may be preferable in most cases, since it would help draw the family together spiritually.
5 Jesus’ command is that we go make disciples. (Matt. 28:19) To do so, we must conduct Bible studies that help the students to progress to the point that they may ask, “What prevents me from getting baptized?”

