
Maintain Focus on Making Disciples




 1. What is needed in order for people to be saved?
1 The 2014 annual service report reflects the zeal of God’s people and their determination to preach the good news of the Kingdom. (Matt. 24:14) By means of the house-to-house work, special campaigns to distribute tracts and invitations, and our public witnessing initiatives, we are reaching more people with the Bible’s message than ever before. However, if individuals are to be saved, we must help them to become disciples of Jesus by studying the Bible with them.—1 Tim. 2:4.
 2. Asking ourselves what questions will help us to be Bible-study conscious?
2 Be Bible-Study Conscious: When a person shows interest, do you endeavor to obtain his contact information and then call back promptly with the goal of starting a Bible study? When was the last time that you tried demonstrating a Bible study on the initial call? When did you last offer a Bible study to those on your magazine route? Have you shown the videos Why Study the Bible? and What Happens at a Bible Study? to workmates, schoolmates, neighbors, relatives, and other acquaintances? When using a literature display, do you endeavor to inform those who take a study publication that it comes with a free Bible study?
 3. In order to teach the truth successfully, what is required?
3 Help From Jehovah and Jesus: By beginning his command to “make disciples” with the word “go,” Jesus indicated that we need to exert effort and show initiative. However, he did not leave us on our own but promised to be with us. (Matt. 28:19, 20) In addition, Jehovah has given us his holy spirit as well as the tools and the training that we need to teach people the truth. (Zech. 4:6; 2 Cor. 4:7) We can pray for “both the desire and the power” to share in this important work.—Phil. 2:13.
 4. Why should we maintain our focus on making disciples?
4 Preaching the good news brings us much happiness. However, our joy is increased when we teach a person the truth and help him to join us on “the road leading off into life.” (Matt. 7:14; 1 Thess. 2:19, 20) More important, by maintaining our focus on making disciples, we please Jehovah who “does not desire anyone to be destroyed but desires all to attain to repentance.”—2 Pet. 3:9.




