
Our Teaching Toolbox




 1. How are Christian evangelizers like craftsmen?
1 Craftsmen use a variety of tools. While some tools are occasionally needed for specialized tasks, other basic tools are used frequently. Experienced craftsmen always have these basic tools in their toolbox, and these are the ones that they are the most skillful at using. The Bible encourages each Christian to apply himself in the ministry and to be “a workman with nothing to be ashamed of.” (2 Tim. 2:15) What is the most important tool in our toolbox? It is God’s Word—the principal tool we use to “make disciples.” (Matt. 28:19, 20) Therefore, we should endeavor to become skillful at “handling the word of the truth aright.” However, there are other frequently used tools in our teaching toolbox that all Christians should learn to use skillfully to teach people the truth.—Prov. 22:29.
 2. What are our basic teaching tools?
2 Our Basic Teaching Tools: Besides the Bible, what other tools should we use? The primary tool we have for teaching Bible truths is What Does the Bible Really Teach? After completing a study of this book with a student, we use “Keep Yourselves in God’s Love” to teach him to apply Bible principles in everyday life. Therefore, we should become proficient in using these two publications. Certain brochures should also be included in our teaching toolbox. Good News From God! is one of our main tools for starting Bible studies. If our territory has people who have limited reading ability or those who speak a language for which we have few or no publications, then we could also use Listen to God or Listen to God and Live Forever. A basic teaching tool for directing students to the organization is Who Are Doing Jehovah’s Will Today? Videos that are helpful in making disciples, such as Why Study the Bible?, What Happens at a Kingdom Hall?, and Does God Have a Name?, are tools that we should also learn to use well.
 3. What will future issues of Our Kingdom Ministry help us to do?
3 Future issues of Our Kingdom Ministry will help us become skilled in using the handful of basic publications in our teaching toolbox. As we endeavor to use these tools adeptly, we will be heeding the inspired counsel: “Pay constant attention to yourself and to your teaching. Persevere in these things, for by doing this you will save both yourself and those who listen to you.”—1 Tim. 4:16.




