





2 | “Comfort From the Scriptures”

THE BIBLE SAYS: “All the things that were written beforehand were written for our instruction, so that through our endurance and through the comfort from the Scriptures we might have hope.”​—ROMANS 15:4.



What That Means

The Bible contains comforting thoughts that can give us the strength and endurance we need to cope with negative patterns of thinking. The Bible’s message also gives us hope that emotional pain will soon be a thing of the past.



How This Can Help

We all deal with feelings of distress at times; but those who suffer from depression or anxiety may struggle daily with relentlessly painful emotions. How can the Bible help?
  The Bible provides many positive thoughts that can replace negative ones. (Philippians 4:8) It can truly fill our mind with comforting and soothing thoughts that will help us control our emotions.​—Psalm 94:18, 19.

  The Bible can help us to counteract the thought that we are worthless.​—Luke 12:6, 7.

  Numerous Bible passages reassure us that we are not alone and that God, our Creator, completely understands our feelings.​—Psalm 34:18; 1 John 3:19, 20.

  The Bible promises that God will put an end to painful memories. (Isaiah 65:17; Revelation 21:4) When we are suffering from disturbing thoughts and emotions, we may find that this promise gives us the strength to go on.





How the Bible Is Helping Jessica
How Depression Affects Me





“When I was 25 years old, I had a nervous breakdown and was diagnosed with severe depression. I was tormented by flashbacks and intrusive memories. Doctors helped me understand that my depression was related to negative thinking patterns that were triggered by traumatic events in my life. In addition to appropriate medication, I needed therapy to help me identify and correct unhealthy thinking patterns.”
How the Bible Helps Me
“In the darkest moments of my depression, I experienced panic attacks, extreme anxiety, and sleeplessness. Often at night I would feel overwhelmed by disquieting thoughts that raced around in my head. As Psalm 94:19 explains, God can comfort and soothe us when we are overwhelmed by anxieties. So I kept my Bible and a notebook of encouraging scriptures near my bed. When I couldn’t fall asleep, I would read some Bible verses, thus allowing God’s thoughts to comfort me.
“The Bible encourages us to overturn thoughts that go contrary to what we know about God. In the past, I was convinced that I was worthless, unlovable, and useless. But I have learned that such beliefs are actually contrary to the Bible, which depicts God as a loving and compassionate Father who cares about us individually. I gradually took control of my thoughts rather than allow my thoughts to control me. I have learned to view myself as God views me. This was an important step in helping me break down the negative view I had of myself.
“I look forward to the time when all painful memories and unhealthy thinking patterns will disappear. Knowing that mental disorders will be a thing of the past gives me the strength to cope with my limitations now as well as a wonderful hope for the future when my battle against depression will finally be over.”


For More Help:
Read the article “Help From ‘the God of Comfort,’” in the July 2009 issue of Awake! on jw.org.
Listen to the audio recording of the book of Psalms on jw.org.


