





A Worldwide Mental Health Crisis

“I always have a measure of anxiety, even if I’m just sitting by myself in a room.”
“When I feel extraordinarily well, I become apprehensive. I instinctively know that what follows a ‘high’ is a plunge to a moody ‘low.’”
“I try to take it one day at a time, but sometimes several days attack me at once.”




Can you relate to those expressions from individuals who struggle with their mental health? Are you​—or is someone you care about—​facing a similar struggle?
Be assured that you are not alone. Many people today are affected by mental health issues, whether their own or those of their loved ones.
Without a doubt, we are living in “critical times hard to deal with” that are causing many forms of distress. (2 Timothy 3:1) One study calculated that, worldwide, about one in eight people struggles with a mental health disorder. In 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in an increase in anxiety and major depressive disorders of about 26 and 28 percent respectively.
Our mental health, however, is not defined by statistics. It is about how you and your loved ones feel and how you live your lives.



What is mental health?

Good mental health is a state of well-being where you feel good and can function well. You can cope with normal stresses, work productively, and feel satisfied with life.



A mental disorder . . .

  IS NOT the result of personal weakness.

  IS a medical condition that causes significant distress and disrupts a person’s thinking, emotional control, and behavior.

  Can often upset a person’s ability to relate to others and to handle the daily demands of life.

  Can affect people of any age, culture, race, tribe, religion, educational background, or income level.










Getting help for mental health problems

If you or a loved one experiences significantly noticeable changes in personality, disturbed sleeping or eating patterns, or prolonged distress, anxiety, or sadness, you may need professional help to identify and treat the root causes. But where can you go for help?
The wisest man who ever lived, Jesus Christ, stated: “Healthy people do not need a physician, but those who are ill do.” (Matthew 9:12) Those struggling with health challenges who receive appropriate medical therapy and medication can do much to minimize their symptoms and can be helped to live a productive and fulfilling life. It is wise for such ones not to delay treatment if the symptoms are serious or prolonged.a
Although the Bible is not a medical guidebook, what it contains can benefit our mental health. We warmly invite you to consider the following articles that discuss how the Bible can help us deal with mental health problems.



a The Watchtower does not endorse any particular approach. Each individual should carefully evaluate his or her options before making a personal decision.

