Cultivate Interest With a Magazine Route
 1. How can we use a magazine route to cultivate interest?
1 Many people whom we meet in the ministry welcome our visits and gladly accept our literature but hesitate to agree to a regular Bible study. One way to cultivate their interest is by means of a magazine route. When you place magazines, make a record of the person’s name and address, the date of the call, the issues that were accepted, and the scripture that was discussed, along with anything you noticed that might indicate the person’s interests. As each new issue of the magazines arrives, look for points that will appeal to those on your route, and feature them when you visit. (1 Cor. 9:19-23) In time, something they read in our journals may spark their interest and cause them to want to learn more.
 2. Why is it urgent for people to seek Jehovah now, and what more can we do to help them?
2 We recognize, though, that most people will not become servants of Jehovah simply by reading the magazines on their own. Since it is urgent for people to seek Jehovah now, what more can we do to help them? (Zeph. 2:2, 3; Rev. 14:6, 7) We can cultivate their interest by sharing a carefully selected scripture each time we deliver the magazines.
 3. (a) How can we prepare a series of one-scripture discussions? (b) What subjects are of greatest concern to people in your territory?
3 One-Scripture Discussions: Think about those on your magazine route, and prepare a series of one-scripture discussions for each one’s specific needs. (Phil. 2:4) For example, if someone has recently lost a loved one in death, you might use a number of return visits to discuss what the Bible says about the condition of the dead and the hope of the resurrection. Material in the Reasoning book under the principal subjects “Death” and “Resurrection” could be used to prepare these one-scripture discussions. Additional discussions on related subjects, such as how sickness, old age, and death will be completely eliminated, might naturally follow. The key is to find a subject that interests the person and progressively show him what the Bible says about it.
 4. Why is it important to impart understanding when we use the Scriptures, and how can we do so?
4 Impart Understanding: Although it is usually best to keep such discussions simple and brief, more is needed than just reading the selected scripture. Satan has blinded people’s minds to the good news. (2 Cor. 4:3, 4) Even those who are familiar with the Bible need help to understand it. (Acts 8:30, 31) Hence, take time to explain and illustrate the text, much as you would in a talk in the Theocratic Ministry School. (Acts 17:3) Make sure the person sees the practical value of God’s Word in his own life.
 5. How can a magazine-route call become a Bible study?
5 If the person enjoys what he is learning, gradually extend the discussions to include two or three Bible texts each visit. Look for an opportunity to introduce the Require brochure or the Knowledge book. In this way, a magazine-route call may eventually become a Bible study.

