Jehovah’s Day Is Near
1 Christians ardently desire the coming of Jehovah’s day, through which he will destroy the present system of things and usher in a new world of righteousness. (2 Pet. 3:12, 13, ftn.) Since we do not know exactly when that day will arrive, we must maintain our watchfulness and help others to do the same. (Ezek. 33:7-9; Matt. 24:42-44) Meditation on God’s prophetic Word will strengthen our conviction that “the great day of Jehovah is near.”​—Zeph. 1:14.
2 March of World Powers: As recorded at Revelation 17:9-11, the apostle John mentions “seven kings,” representing a succession of seven world powers. John also refers to “an eighth king,” which now represents the United Nations. Are we to expect other world powers to come on the scene? No, the prophecy states that this eighth king “goes off into destruction,” after which no further earthly kings are mentioned. Does this prophecy help you to see where we are in the stream of time?
3 Daniel 2:31-45 helps us to understand the coming of Jehovah’s day. In that prophecy, the enormous image seen by Nebuchadnezzar in a dream represents a succession of world powers. Each of these powers has already made its appearance. Where in the course of history do we find ourselves today? In the period symbolized by the feet of the image. The prophecy vividly describes what will occur next. Human rulership will be completely destroyed, making way for “a kingdom that will never be brought to ruin.” Can you see how this shows that Jehovah’s day is near?
4 Further Evidence: We are eyewitnesses of further evidence that Jehovah’s day is near. We see the fulfillment of what the apostle Paul foretold regarding the traits of people “in the last days.” (2 Tim. 3:1-5) And we are sharing in the global witness that must be given before the end comes. (Matt. 24:14) May our public ministry continue to reflect the urgency of the angelic proclamation: “Fear God and give him glory, because the hour of the judgment by him has arrived.”​—Rev. 14:6, 7.

