Make a Practical Family Schedule
1 In the Sermon on the Mount, Jesus urged his listeners: “Keep on, then, seeking first the kingdom and his righteousness.” (Matt. 6:33) A practical way to plan the activities of the family so that spiritual matters are given priority is to have a written schedule. Take a few minutes to make your own weekly family schedule, using the blank schedule on page 6 of this insert. As a family project, some may wish to make cutouts and attach them to the schedule. Others may prefer to write in the activities.
2 The sample schedule shown below may be helpful as you make your schedule. You will note that it includes just four basic activities: (1) attendance at congregation meetings, (2) family field service, (3) the family study, and (4) the consideration of the daily text. Including these on your schedule can help you to “make sure of the more important things.” (Phil. 1:10) Further suggestions on these four areas appear on pages 4-5.
3 Your family schedule need not be limited to just those four activities. If you prepare for certain meetings as a family, make a note of that on your schedule. If you read a portion of the Bible together after considering the daily text or do so at another time, indicate that. If you typically share in some form of family recreation, you may wish to include that on your schedule.
4 Adapt your family schedule to accommodate the needs and circumstances of all in the household. Periodically evaluate how it is working, and make adjustments as needed.
[Chart on page 3]
Sample Family Schedule
          Morning              Afternoon          Evening
Sun.      Daily Text
          Public Talk and
          Watchtower Study
Mon.      Daily Text                              Family Study
Tues.     Daily Text                              Congregation
                                                  Book Study
Wed.      Daily Text
Thurs.    Daily Text                              Theocratic
                                                  Ministry School
                                                  and Service
                                                  Meeting
Fri.      Daily Text
Sat.      Daily Text
          Family Field
          Service
          (Magazine Day)
[Chart on page 6]
Family Schedule
          Morning              Afternoon          Evening
Sun.
Mon.
Tues.
Wed.
Thurs.
Fri.
Sat.
..................................................................
Daily    Daily     Daily     Daily    Daily     Daily     DailyText     Text      Text      Text     Text      Text      Text
Public   Theo-     Congre-   Family   Family    Family    FamilyTalk     cratic    gation    Study    Field     Bible     Recre-and      Ministry  Book               Service   Reading   ationWatch-   School    Studytower    andStudy    Service         Meeting

