Part 9​—Conducting Progressive Bible Studies
Preparing Students to Witness Informally
1 When Andrew and Philip realized that Jesus was the promised Messiah, they could not hold back from telling others the thrilling news. (John 1:40-45) Likewise today, as Bible students begin to exercise faith in what they are learning, they are impelled to speak about it. (2 Cor. 4:13) How can we encourage them to witness informally and prepare them to do so effectively?
2 You might simply ask the student whether he has spoken to others about what he has learned from the Bible. Perhaps there are friends and family members whom he could invite to sit in on the study. Ask him if any of his workmates, schoolmates, or other acquaintances have expressed interest. In this way he can begin to give a witness. Help him appreciate the need to exercise discernment and to be respectful and kind when speaking with others about Jehovah God and his purposes.​—Col. 4:6; 2 Tim. 2:24, 25.
3 Sharing Their Beliefs: It is very important to train Bible students to use God’s Word when sharing their beliefs. At selected points during the study, ask the student: “How would you use the Bible to explain this truth to your family?” or “What Bible text would you use to prove this to a friend?” Note how he responds, and show him how to base his teaching on the Scriptures. (2 Tim. 2:15) By so doing, you will be preparing the student to witness both informally and, when he qualifies, in the organized preaching work with the congregation.
4 It is wise to prepare Bible students to face opposition. (Matt. 10:36; Luke 8:13; 2 Tim. 3:12) When others raise questions or make comments about Jehovah’s Witnesses, this may open the way for students to give a witness. The brochure Jehovah’s Witnesses​—Who Are They? What Do They Believe? can equip them to be “ready to make a defense.” (1 Pet. 3:15) It provides accurate information that new ones can use to help well-meaning friends and family members understand our Bible-based beliefs and activities.

