Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting May 9
Song 217
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Use the suggestions on page 8 (if appropriate for your territory) to demonstrate how to offer the May 15 Watchtower and the May 22 Awake! Other realistic presentations may be used. In one of the presentations, demonstrate offering the magazines informally on public transportation.
15 min: Use God’s Word to Reach the Heart. A talk based on the February 1, 2005, Watchtower, pages 28-31. Analyze how Jesus used the Scriptures to help Peter. Discuss how we can follow Jesus’ example when there is a need to adjust the thinking and feelings of our children, our Bible students, and even ourselves.
20 min: “Make a Practical Family Schedule.” In an introductory talk of less than two minutes, highlight the value of a written schedule and discuss how to fill out the blank schedule on page 6. Follow with a question-and-answer discussion of the article “Family Schedule​—Congregation Meetings.” Invite audience to comment on how they keep other activities from interfering with congregation meetings. Additional aspects of the family schedule will be considered in the following weeks.
Song 176 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting May 16
Song 201
10 min: Local announcements. Remind all that the schedule and questions for the book study consideration of Keep on the Watch! can be found in the April 2005 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 6.
15 min: “Family Schedule​—Family Field Service.”a Invite audience to comment on the benefits of regularly working together in the ministry as a family.
20 min: “Conducting Progressive Bible Studies​—Part 9.”b When discussing paragraph 2, highlight one or two points from the December 2004 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 8. Include a brief demonstration of a Bible study. After having completed lesson 2 in the Require brochure, the study conductor asks the student: “How would you explain to a friend what God’s name is?” The student explains how he would use Psalm 83:18, after which the study conductor commends him.
Song 134 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting May 23
Song 194
12 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Using the suggestions on page 8 (if appropriate for your territory), demonstrate how to present the June 1 Watchtower and the June 8 Awake! Other realistic presentations may be used.
18 min: “Jehovah’s Day Is Near.”c When preparing this part, consult the Daniel’s Prophecy book, page 59, paragraph 28.
15 min: “Family Schedule​—The Family Study.”d Arrange in advance for one or two to comment on how they schedule their family study and what effort is needed to hold it regularly.
Song 152 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting May 30
Song 190
10 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for May. Mention literature offer for June. Demonstrate how to present the offer, using one or two of the suggested presentations in the January 2005 Our Kingdom Ministry insert (if appropriate for your territory). Other practical presentations can be used.
20 min: “Family Schedule​—The Daily Text.”e Invite audience to comment on how their family benefits from considering the daily text together and what schedule they have found practical for doing so.
15 min: Relate or reenact field service experiences that were enjoyed during March, April, and May. Arrange in advance for one or two to comment on the effort they put forth to increase their share in the ministry during the Memorial season and the blessings they enjoyed as a result.
Song 115 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 6
Song 155
10 min: Local announcements.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: “Cultivate Interest With a Magazine Route.”f When discussing paragraph 3, draw attention to the Reasoning book, pages 227-32. This material could be used to prepare a series of one-scripture discussions on what God’s Kingdom will accomplish. Include a demonstration of how a publisher might have a one-scripture discussion with a person on his magazine route. Publisher should briefly discuss and illustrate the application of the scripture to help the householder understand it correctly and see its value in his life.
Song 107 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

