Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
As we carry on our sacred service here, we are encouraged to hear good news from visitors who come our way. Recently we rejoiced to hear a report from Brother Harold King from Hong Kong. For many years most of the missionaries serving there found little response, but in the last two years things have changed. Many younger people from fifteen to twenty years of age are accepting the truth and taking their stand on the side of God’s kingdom. In one rural area some interested youths had been studying and had even participated in field service, but they had not yet been immersed. All nine wanted to share in temporary pioneer service, so a special baptism was arranged for the group, and immediately following immersion they went into the temporary pioneer service.
Recently at the assemblies there have been, on an average, forty newly dedicated persons immersed in Hong Kong. Because of crowded living conditions it is often a problem to conduct studies with the interested ones, for others in the family oppose. Therefore studies are sometimes conducted in the open or in parks or in homes of other interested persons. Also Kingdom Halls are well used, with small groups having studies or going over secondary articles in the magazines. Or one who knows English explains what newer books not yet available in Chinese have to tell. There are now nine congregations in Hong Kong. The number of publishers in Hong Kong increased from 278 in 1973 to 548 this past service year; 1,358 attended the Memorial. In April there were 158 temporary pioneers. Congregation publishers averaged 16.9 hours in field service and placed, on an average, 23.6 magazines. All this activity surely means that there will be more theocratic increase in Hong Kong.
In Idaho where failure of the Teton River dam caused a flood disaster, twelve families among the brothers lost homes and all belongings. None of the publishers lost their lives. Quickly brothers from surrounding areas provided relief. Publishers who were not affected opened their homes to accommodate families who lost everything. Food, clothing and household supplies were donated in abundance. Relief funds were sent from Brooklyn. Brothers are getting some aid from government assistance programs. Kingdom Halls were not destroyed in the flood. It is encouraging to see how loving brothers help one another in times of need.—Acts 11:29, 30.
All of us continue to show interest in others by using our many opportunities to speak of the good news and comfort those who have cause to mourn. Surely the new service year will prove to be a productive one with much praise to the name of Jehovah.
Your brothers,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

