Continue to Proclaim the Good News
1 How did you learn the truth? Was it through your parents, other relatives, fellow workers or someone who called at your door? Whatever the case may be, are you not grateful that someone took an interest in you, helping you to learn who Jehovah God is and how to imitate him? That knowledge has opened up to you the opportunity to gain everlasting life.—John 17:3.
2 When we recognize the value of knowing Jehovah God and Jesus Christ, we are moved to do what we can to aid those who show interest to learn more about the Bible. (1 Tim. 2:3, 4; Matt. 7:12) The new service year will offer many opportunities for assisting people to become disciples of Jesus Christ.
NOT TOO DIFFICULT
3 Do you feel that it is somewhat difficult to help interested persons? Is this because you need experience? Well, all of us need to continue learning about the Bible. And, individually, we may have limitations. Some find it difficult to express themselves. Others may feel that they do not have enough knowledge. However, we are not called upon to proclaim what we do not know. Jesus instructed his disciples to tell what they did know about the Kingdom. (Matt. 10:7) And all of us know at least something about that subject.
4 Our success in the field service is not determined by the quantity of literature we place. Our desire is to give a witness about the Kingdom and to reach hearts with the truth. So when completing a period of field activity, we might ask ourselves, With how many people did I speak about the Kingdom today?
5 As pointed out in the February 1976 issue of Our Kingdom Service, there are various ways to start conversations with people about the truth. Questions are very effective. Then, too, being a good listener will help us to know the thinking of the person with whom we are speaking. This will make it easier to present the truth in a way that may capture his interest. It is good to keep in mind that our purpose in talking to people is to win hearts, not arguments.
6 Prayer is also essential in connection with our preaching work. While sharing in the field activity, is it not fitting to request Jehovah’s assistance? Yes, we need His spirit. (1 John 5:14) That spirit helped those serving in the first century and it is still available to aid all of us today.—Acts 1:8.
7 Moreover, having a positive attitude in your house-to-house work will be beneficial. Approach the homes in a friendly manner and be cheerful in your greeting. This would harmonize with Jesus Christ’s instructions to his apostles when sending them out to preach. (Matt. 10:12, 13) True, some may not appreciate what you say. But this is no reason to be upset or to feel that you are not qualified. The Scriptures make it clear that not all will respond favorably.—Matt. 10:14, 34-36.
8 How happy we can be that Jehovah God has granted us the opportunity to help others to gain salvation! This is a grand demonstration of his love and patience toward mankind. (2 Pet. 3:9) So may we make good use of our time in continuing to share with our fellowmen the good news of salvation.—2 Cor. 6:2.

