Prepare to Make Return Visits
1 We have good reason to want to help others to gain an accurate knowledge of God’s Word. This requires calling back on any who manifest some interest in the Kingdom message, whether they accept literature or not. Is this something difficult that only a few in the congregation can do? No.
2 Making return visits is really very simple. It may be just a matter of inviting an interested person to the public meeting. Or, you might share with him a point from a magazine article that you enjoyed and offer him the latest issues. Then, again, you could read just one scripture and make a brief comment about it. Doing any of these things is all that is needed to make a return visit that should be reported to the congregation.
3 But what can you do to prepare for making productive return visits? First you need to know where the interested person lives. So preparation starts on the initial call when you write down the address. Perhaps you will need to remind yourself of keeping a record, for many have not as yet cultivated this good habit. Then, too, a good practice is to double-check that you do have the correct information. Other things might also be noted—the person’s name, what you talked about, what seemed to interest him, the time he would most likely be at home, what literature, if any, was placed, and the like.
4 Then, perhaps the day before you decide to make certain return visits, why not get out your records? Take a few minutes to think about the people to whom you spoke about the Kingdom. What do you want to accomplish? Perhaps it is just a matter of sharing a Scriptural thought to build up the person’s confidence in the Bible. It may be that you could start a Bible study with him. Or, if he is not ready for that but enjoys reading the publications, you may wish to leave him the latest copies of the magazines.
5 It may take repeated calls before you gain a person’s confidence. Each time you may be able to say little, perhaps sharing only one scripture with him. Nevertheless, you are accomplishing something very vital. The individual is getting better acquainted with you and you are giving a witness. In time, your warm and friendly manner, or the impact of a particular scripture, may lead to the starting of a Bible study.
6 There is no rule as to how you should go about making a return visit. The main thing to keep in mind is that you want to help people to learn more from the Bible and to be spiritually encouraged. The apostle Paul set a fine example in wanting to return to build up disciples, even in places where he had suffered persecution. (Acts 14:19-22) Do you have like concern for interested persons? You can rest assured that Jehovah will bless your efforts to make return visits.

