Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 29
20 min: Song 18. Field overseer considers with audience what constitutes a return visit. See Organization book, pages 126,127. Informs congregation how many Bible studies apart from family studies were conducted during the year and how many were baptized and started in the field service. Discusses God’s compassion for people. (Jonah 3:10; 4:11) Encourages audience to imitate God, thinking in terms of helping people when sharing in field service. Announcements on field service arrangements.
20 min: Highlighting the value of using the Bible with the offer for the month. Ask audience why we leave literature with people. Emphasize that the basis for our preaching is the Bible. Publications help householder appreciate value of the Scriptures and how they benefit him and his family. Then ask audience what chapter in the Truth book might be featured after Scriptural discussion and what texts could be read. (Have prepared comments.) After two or three answers proceed with the following demonstration: An experienced publisher, after greeting the householder, asks: “Have you ever asked yourself, Why does God permit so much suffering?” After householder’s reply, publisher reads 2 Peter 3:8, 9 and directs his attention to Truth book (Chapter 8) for further information.
Then discuss with audience how the same presentation can be used with the Evolution book and the Peace and Security book (Chapter 5).
Conclude with another demonstration, using the same scripture but featuring the Peace and Security book. Householder refuses literature offer. Ask audience why we should make a note of this call. Inform congregation that this month the service meetings will discuss the return visit activity and how we can share in it. Meetings will show that everyone can share and that it is not too difficult. Encourage audience to think about people whom they might call on to stimulate further interest in the Kingdom message and, with them in mind, to take note of what is said on the service meeting programs.
20 min: “Continue to Proclaim the Good News.” Question-and-answer discussion. Read paragraphs and consider the scriptures. Conclude the discussion of article in a warm, appealing manner, all local announcements having been cared for earlier. Song 25.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 5
25 min: Song 58 and local announcements. “Doing Work with a Good Conscience Before God and Men” (Insert). Elder discusses with audience material down to subheading “Seeking Balance in Our View of Employment.” Base questions on the scriptures used, having selected texts read by audience. Read all the paragraphs under the heading “The Major Questions,” doing so before discussing each paragraph.
 8 min: Joys of Making Return Visits. Emphasize importance of disciple-making and interview two publishers who might relate personal experiences on joys of helping people to learn the truth.
12 min: “Prepare to Make Return Visits.” Couple approach Bible study overseer, asking about how they can prepare for return visits. They feel that it is hard. Elder highlights simplicity and joy of the work.
15 min: Discuss purpose of our field service. (Matt. 28:19, 20; 2 Cor. 2:17–3:3; explain meaning of texts and tie in with need to make return visits.) Highlight Paul’s concern about spiritual state of fellowmen. (Rom. 9:1-3; 10:1) If he was so interested in those who even persecuted him, should we not rightly reflect deep concern for persons showing some interest? Involve audience in thinking about people whose interest they might stimulate in truth—neighbors, fellow workers, teachers, schoolmates, someone contacted in field. Make it clear that all have return visits that could be made. (Organization, page 126) Song 52.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 12
15 min: Song 68 and local announcements. Talk on Study 18 of the School Guidebook, paragraphs 8-10. Show audience that there is no need to fear objections people present in the field service. Highlight how God’s spirit helps us.
10 min: “Presenting the Good News—When People Are Not at Home.” The one handling this part will go right into a question-and-answer discussion.
20 min: Things that could be done toward making return visits. Consider with a prepared panel the following questions: (1) Why should we keep a house-to-house record? (2) Why is it good to make a return visit as soon as possible? (3) What advantage is there if we can greet the householder by name? (4) How might we make the purpose of our call clear to the householder? (5) What factors might determine the length of our discussion with the householder? (6) If we have an opportunity to talk with him, why might it be good to encourage him to use his own Bible? (7) Why is it best to keep the conversation simple? (John 16:12) In answering questions, prepared publishers might illustrate with personal experiences.
15 min: “Buying Out the Opportune Time.” Talk based on Organization book, page 110 paragraph 3 to page 112 paragraph 2. Encourage giving good support for afternoon activity when circuit overseer serves with congregation, as this time is set aside for Bible studies and return visits. Mention benefits of working with circuit overseer and his wife. Ask how many have talked about Kingdom with someone or placed magazines. Then encourage all to follow suggestions made this month in following through with return visits. Song 117.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 19
13 min: Song 118 and local announcements. Imitating Our Happy God. Lively discussion among several publishers based on Branch Letter and their own experiences in serving Jehovah; also Theocratic News.
 2 min: Accounts report.
30 min: “Doing Work with a Good Conscience Before God and Men” (Insert). Elder discusses material from “Seeking Balance in Our View of Employment” down to “If He Has Doubts.” At outset, prepared publishers can briefly state employment problems that come up locally and are mentioned in the insert. To the extent that time allows, read previously selected paragraphs before asking questions. Base questions on scriptures and aid all to make the correct application.
15 min: “Help Others to Make Return Visits”; also Question Box. Question-and-answer discussion. Warm conclusion encouraging all to make at least one return visit this week. Song 103.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 26
25 min: Song 81 and announcements. Elder handles. Doing Work with a Good Conscience Before God and Men. Finish insert, starting from “If He Has Doubts.” Questions and answers on section “If He Has Doubts,” and have this portion of the insert read. Remainder of insert discussed by two or three elders, emphasizing their own responsibility in the matter.
15 min: Based on his report for the service year, presiding overseer can share with congregation what was accomplished, concentrating on positive aspects; include encouragement to continue having full share in field service in harmony with Jehovah’s desire that people attain to repentance.—2 Pet. 3:9, 10.
20 min: This portion of the meeting can be used to consider what needs attention locally. Song 65.

