They Found a Solution
UNDER inspiration the psalmist David declared: “Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity!”​—Ps. 133:1, Authorized Version.
Today many churches are undergoing a crisis. Not only the Catholic church, but Protestant churches as well are feeling the forces of disunity working within them. Daily, it becomes ever clearer that unity of belief is vital, essential, if there is to be unity of action. And there must be genuine love of God, love of truth, and love of neighbor for people to enjoy the goodness and the pleasantness of ‘dwelling together in unity.’ No matter how well concealed under a cloak of religious piety, no matter how smoothly carried out, such things as dishonesty, immorality, subtle slander, acts of favoritism, pride​—these inevitably produce friction and disunity.
Many sincere Baptists desire, even long for, the full unity the Bible describes. You may be one who does. Back in the first century, during Jesus’ earthly ministry and in apostolic times, there were people who hungered for real knowledge of the truth and the unity that such clear understanding brings. The fact that the Pharisees and Sadducees and others misrepresented Jesus and his apostles, causing them to be viewed as a ‘sect that everywhere is spoken against,’ did not deter these persons. (Acts 28:22) They investigated.
People today, Baptists included, are investigating. Sometimes they do it in the face of pressure from relatives and friends, despite warnings from clergymen. Rather than blindly accept the word of others, they have insisted on letting the Scriptures be their guide as to finding true religion. (Acts 17:11) In their search, they have investigated the work and publications of the Christian group known as Jehovah’s witnesses. What did they find?
WHAT SEARCHING BAPTISTS FOUND AMONG JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES
A mother from Charleston, South Carolina, relates the following: “I had asked our Baptist minister to help us find someone in the church to aid me and my children to learn the Bible. Our minister’s answer was: ‘I don’t have anyone in the church who is qualified to teach you.’ He did not offer to do so. Later I went to several churches in Charleston, South Carolina, for two or three Sundays each, trying to find where people really studied the Bible. After several months, one of Jehovah’s witnesses came to my home. I let her read from the Bible and comment on the Scriptures. She said that she would like to come back. So, I told her, please do.
“When the lady came back the next week, she showed me so many nice things from the Bible. She read to me from her Bible, which I thought ‘they’ must have printed up just for themselves. As soon as she was out of the house, I looked up what she had read in my King James Version. Well, there it was! When she came back each week, she would help me learn more and answer any questions I had about the Bible. Within a month, I was going to the Kingdom Hall and learning even more. I could see these people really lived the Bible and enjoyed it. Soon my children and I were doing the same.”
A man in Macon, Georgia, relates: “My wife told me that a Witness was coming to teach us the Bible. Since I had been a deacon in the Baptist church, I told her to tell him to come on and I would teach him the Bible. When the Witness brought up the subject of the ‘new earth,’ I went to my preacher to ask him about it. He said that it was a mystery; all we had to do was believe in the Lord Jesus Christ and be saved. He also told me not to get mixed up with those people because I would be disliked. I began to think about the scripture at Matthew 24:9 [‘ye shall be hated of all nations for my name’s sake’] and decided that maybe this was the religion that was right. Everything else they told me had been in harmony with the Bible.”
From Athens, Georgia, come these comments: “As a sincere Baptist preacher, I thought Jehovah’s witnesses were wrong. I ordered them out of my home, destroyed their literature, and even stopped my mother-in-law from studying with them. Later I began to think that it was my Christian duty to show these people that they were wrong. I accepted a Bible study to show them that they were wrong and that I was right. I was amazed to see that they could back up everything they said from the Bible, and I was hardly using the Bible. I told myself that Jehovah’s witnesses really knew the Bible, but they were still wrong.
“I agreed to go to one of their meetings and there I interrupted by asking a question. It surprised me to see the loving-kindness that was shown me in the way the question was answered. This proved to me that Jehovah’s witnesses are concerned about people. From that time on, I have continued to study with Jehovah’s witnesses, and have realized that no other religious organization is teaching the Bible the way Jehovah’s witnesses are.”
Recalling her experience, a former Baptist lady residing in the vicinity of Columbia, South Carolina, observes: “I can remember the first meeting I attended and how the love of these Christian witnesses radiated throughout the congregation. After the meeting they would stand around and discuss what we had just heard and other Bible truths. I started attending five Bible studies a week and found more and more joy as I learned about my Creator.
“For the first time in my life I have peace of mind and a close relationship with my Creator. I know to whom I’m praying now, and I have learned of his wonderful promises to those who love righteousness.”
AN INVITATION TO YOU
Why not examine the evidence for yourself? Without any cost or obligation to you, Jehovah’s witnesses in your area will be happy to give of their time to study the Bible with you in the privacy of your home. You will be able to consider such questions as: Why do we grow old and die? Where are the dead? How can we be sure which religion God approves? Why do so many prayers go unanswered? What must we do to be heard by God? Are present world conditions a fulfillment of Bible prophecy? What do they mean? Why has God permitted wickedness until our day?
Could you presently answer these questions to the satisfaction of yourself and others, using your own copy of the Bible? Availing yourself of the free home Bible study arrangement offered by Jehovah’s witnesses, you can soon enjoy the ability to answer these and many other questions.
We invite you to accept the offer made by Jehovah’s witnesses the next time they call on you. Or, if you wish, write to the publishers of this magazine and arrangements will be made for someone to visit you. Prove to your own satisfaction whether Jehovah’s witnesses know the Bible, live in harmony with it and are united in teaching Biblical truth. Heed the words of the apostle Paul to the Thessalonians: “Prove all things; hold fast that which is good.”​—1 Thess. 5:21, AV.

