“Build Up Your Household”
1 Without question, in every culture around the world, family life is disintegrating. Satan’s world wallows in deceit and immorality. (1 John 5:19) This underscores the urgency for us to ‘build up our household’ and to teach others how they can do the same for theirs.​—Prov. 24:3, 27.
2 Bible Principles Are a Safeguard: The secret of true family happiness is found in the application of Bible principles. These powerful truths benefit every member of the household in all aspects of life. The family that applies them will be happy and will enjoy godly peace.​—Compare Isaiah 32:17, 18.
3 The principles that can help us build up our household are outlined in compact form in the new book, The Secret of Family Happiness. Each chapter concludes with a helpful teaching box that emphasizes principles that family members need to remember. Most of these boxes begin with the question, “How can these Bible principles help . . . ?” This draws attention to God’s thoughts so that we get his thinking on the subject under discussion.​—Isa. 48:17.
4 Become familiar with the book. Learn to locate the principles that can be of assistance when various problems arise. The book discusses such matters as these: what one should look for when considering a prospective marriage mate (chapter 2), what vital keys unlock the door to lasting marital happiness (chapter 3), how parents can raise their teenagers to be responsible, God-fearing adults (chapter 6), how to protect the family from destructive influences (chapter 8), principles to help single-parent families succeed (chapter 9), spiritual help for families troubled by alcoholism and violence (chapter 12), what to do when marriage ties are at the breaking point (chapter 13), what can be done to honor elderly parents (chapter 15), and how to secure a lasting future for one’s family (chapter 16).
5 Make Full Use of the New Book: If you have not already done so, why not study the Family Happiness book together as a family? Also, whenever your family is confronted with new problems or challenges, review the chapters in the book that deal with these, and prayerfully consider how to apply the counsel. Additionally, during March, be generous in scheduling time for the field ministry so that you can endeavor to place The Secret of Family Happiness in the hands of as many people as possible.
6 Families that practice godly devotion will be spiritually strengthened and united and will be well prepared to cope with the attacks of Satan. (1 Tim. 4:7, 8; 1 Pet. 5:8, 9) How thankful we are that we have divine instruction from the Originator of the family!

