“Show Yourselves Thankful”
1 Most of us were trained in childhood to say “please” and “thank you” when someone showed us courtesy or kindness. Paul admonishes us always to ‘show ourselves thankful,’ and we should especially be grateful to Jehovah. (Col. 3:15, 16) But how can we express thankfulness to our Grand Creator? And what special reasons do we have to be thankful to him?
2 The apostle Paul wrote: “Thanks to God, for he gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ!” (1 Cor. 15:57) At Memorial time each year, we are reminded of the boundless love both God and Christ showed in providing the ransom that gives us the hope of eternal life. (John 3:16) Since almost all of us have lost loved ones in death, how thankful we are for Jesus’ promise of the resurrection! Our hearts overflow with gratitude when we contemplate the prospect of surviving the end of this system without ever dying at all. (John 11:25, 26) It is difficult to find words to express thanks for all the marvelous blessings we will yet experience at Jehovah’s hand in the coming earthly Paradise. (Rev. 21:4) What better reasons could anyone have to ‘show himself thankful’ to God?
3 How to Express Thanks to God: It is always appropriate to express our thanks in prayer to Jehovah for his goodness. (Ps. 136:1-3) We are moved, also, to demonstrate our thanks to him in other positive ways. For example, we will certainly be in attendance on Sunday, March 23, for the Memorial of Christ’s death. To help meet the material needs of the local congregation and of the worldwide work, we gladly ‘honor Jehovah with our valuable things.’ (Prov. 3:9) We fully support the elders and cooperate with them, thus showing our gratitude to Jehovah for the help he provides through them. (1 Thess. 5:12, 13) Every day, we strive to maintain upright conduct that glorifies God’s name. (1 Pet. 2:12) Jehovah is pleased with all these evidences of our gratitude.​—1 Thess. 5:18.
4 Our Finest Expression of Thanks: Having a whole-souled share in the Kingdom-preaching work, honoring Jehovah’s name, expressing gratitude in prayer, and loyally defending the truth are among the finest expressions of heartfelt thanks that we can make to our Creator for all that he has done in our behalf. Jehovah delights to see us render him acts of sacred service in support of his will “that all sorts of men should be saved.” (1 Tim. 2:3, 4) That is why so many publishers who can arrange for it are answering the call that appeared in February’s Our Kingdom Ministry to enroll as auxiliary pioneers during one or more of the months of March, April, and May. Putting forth an extra effort in the ministry is a fine way to ‘show ourselves thankful’ to God. Will you be able to join the ranks of the pioneers in April? in May?
5 We have been given a sure hope of living forever. When we see it come to pass, we will have further bountiful reasons every day to continue giving joyful thanks to Jehovah.​—Ps. 79:13.

