From Our Readers
Disabled Preacher  I couldn’t stop the tears from falling when I read the account of Konstantin Morozov in the article “A Bright Outlook Despite Infirmities.” (February 22, 2000) I am a single mother with two children to raise. It is not easy, and sometimes it seems that my problems will never end. But still, they are nothing compared to what Konstantin has to cope with!
I., Russia
I am a full-time evangelizer. I suffer from retinal degeneration and find it very difficult to read. I always was a voracious reader, and occasionally I get frustrated and depressed. When I think of Konstantin, I feel that I should never complain. He overcame mountainlike obstacles and serves as a full-time evangelizer. What strength Jehovah provides!
W. W., India
At age 16, I became paralyzed from the waist down. Like Konstantin, I experience difficulties daily. The article showed, however, that a disabled person can have a place in society and a share in worshiping God. Even though my hearing is not very good and I do not see very well, I often preach alone on the street while sitting on a stool with my back to a wall. I congratulate Konstantin for his zeal and devotion.
D. F., Côte d’Ivoire
Modern Slavery  In the touching series “Modern Slavery—Its End Is Near!” (March 8, 2000), the statement is made: “No one can be a true Christian and share in the inhumane exploitation and oppression of any of his fellow humans.” How far must a Christian go in order to avoid contributing to this heinous practice? In the Western world, it is nearly impossible to find products that are not made under questionable circumstances.
K. H., United States
The article was discussing the direct exploitation of people by manufacturers and others. We did not mean to imply that a Christian is obliged to devote a great deal of time to researching the background of every product he or she purchases. But when it is known that something is the product of slave labor, a Christian has to make a personal decision as to whether or not to purchase it. In this, as in all matters, a Christian wants to hold a good conscience before God. (1 Peter 3:16)—ED.
I am a 16-year-old girl, and I was moved by your article. I know some young girls who are suffering from modern slavery. They work very hard in families who have taken them in. But they don’t receive any education—or affection. I was greatly relieved to read in the Bible that Jehovah will release oppressed ones soon.
A. O., Burkina Faso
Faith  Today I read the article “The Bible’s Viewpoint: True Faith—What Is It?” (March 8, 2000) It showed logically that true faith is not credulity. Many magazines are full of advertising and have few informative or upbuilding articles. We should never take for granted what you publish for us.
E. S., Italy
Noah Video  I just had to express my appreciation for the article “Noah—He Walked With God—How the Video Was Made.” (March 8, 2000) Our two-and-a-half-year-old son has been watching the video since before he could walk. He watches it over and over again and wants me to rewind certain parts so that he can view them again. How wonderful it is to have tools that instill love of Jehovah in our children!
M.V.G., United States

