Ask for Help
1 The inspired words “hard to deal with” aptly describe our critical times. (2 Tim. 3:1) Hence, what can you do when you encounter difficult spiritual challenges that you may feel ill-equipped to face?
2 Are you willing to talk to a spiritually mature member of the congregation? Some might hesitate to do so because of being embarrassed, not wanting to impose, or doubting that anyone can really help. Granted, we should strive to care for our personal responsibilities the best we can, but we should always feel free to seek help in matters involving our spiritual well-being.​—Gal. 6:2, 5.
3 Where to Begin: You may want to approach your book study conductor and ask if you can work with him in field service. This will give you an opportunity to tell him about your desire to grow spiritually. If he is a ministerial servant, let him know of your need for spiritual help and he will ask the elders to assist you. Or you may approach any of the elders about matters of concern to you.
4 What kind of help do you need? Has something dampened your zeal? Are you a single parent trying to keep your children close to the congregation? Are you an elderly person who needs assistance? Or is some problem discouraging you? Dealing with our critical times may be hard​—but not impossible. Help is available.
5 How Older Men Help: The elders genuinely care. They will listen to your concerns. If other publishers are confronted with similar obstacles, the elders will take this into account as they shepherd and teach the congregation. As “examples to the flock,” they remain ready to work alongside you with joy. (1 Pet. 5:3) Listening to these experienced brothers as they reason on Bible principles can improve your ministry and assist you in your personal life.​—2 Tim. 3:16, 17.
6 Jesus has bestowed on us many “gifts consisting of men.” (Eph. 4:8, ftn.) This means that the elders are at your service. They are available to help you. They, in effect, “belong to you.” (1 Cor. 3:21-23) So rather than holding back, speak up. Ask for the help you need.

