Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting March 13
Song 118
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
15 min: “We Preach Good News.” Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion. Give examples of positive Scriptural points that can be drawn from the Knowledge book when offering it in the ministry.
20 min: “Can We Make April 2000 Our Best Month Ever?” (Paragraphs 1-11) Questions and answers. Mention the peak number of auxiliary pioneers in the congregation’s recent history. Have some who are among that number tell of the personal benefits they derive from increasing their share in the ministry. Encourage the congregation to work toward a new peak in auxiliary pioneers during April. Review qualifications outlined in the Our Ministry book, pages 113-14. Publishers wishing to auxiliary pioneer may obtain an application after the meeting.
Song 187 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 20
Song 21
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
15 min: “What Can I Do?” A book study conductor discusses article with one or two ministerial servants. Because of various limitations, some publishers may feel that they are able to contribute little toward the activity of the congregation. Review some of the many ways all of us can make a valuable contribution toward strengthening the congregation and advancing the Kingdom work. Conclude by showing how each one can “Share in a Final Report.”​—See Our Ministry, pages 108-10.
20 min: “Can We Make April 2000 Our Best Month Ever?” (Paragraphs 12-18) Questions and answers. Include a brief demonstration of how to invite a personal acquaintance to the Memorial. Review April on the 2000 Calendar, and outline the meetings for service that are planned locally. Remind each one to make a practical schedule for sharing as much as possible in the ministry during the month, thus aiming for 100 percent participation by the congregation. Encourage all who can to auxiliary pioneer and to obtain an application after the meeting.
Song 65 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting March 27
Song 119
10 min: Local announcements. Remind all to turn in field service reports for March. Announce the names of those who will be auxiliary pioneering in April. Explain that it is not too late to submit an application. Outline entire schedule of meetings for field service planned for the month. Encourage everyone to share in the ministry this weekend, getting April off to a good start. Remind brothers that daylight saving time begins this weekend. This may help auxiliary pioneers in reaching their goals. We will offer individual copies of The Watchtower and Awake! during the month. Highlight one article and appropriate talking point that could be used effectively in presentations of each of the current issues. Everyone should have a copy of the Require brochure and endeavor to use it to start Bible studies with interested people.
13 min: “Ask for Help.” Talk and audience discussion by an elder. Explain how all of us are in need of some type of assistance periodically. Of course, each one should carry his own load. (Gal. 6:5) However, when we are unable to cope, we should not hesitate to seek help from a spiritually mature member of the congregation. Invite audience to relate experiences showing how kindly assistance given by others encouraged them.
10 min: Local needs.
12 min: Review 2000 Yearbook. Audience discussion and review of highlights of the “1999 Grand Totals,” on page 31. Also discuss “A Letter From the Governing Body,” on pages 3-5. Ask for comments from some as to how they will follow through on the encouragement given.
Song 195 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 3
Song 72
10 min: Local announcements and field service experiences. Use selected recent experiences from local territory that will encourage others to participate.
17 min: “Studying Daniel’s Prophecy.” Questions and answers. Briefly comment on how we stand to benefit from studying the Bible book of Daniel. (See chapter 1, paragraphs 15-17, in the Daniel’s Prophecy book.) Encourage all to attend the Congregation Book Study regularly.
18 min: Should I Report Serious Wrongdoing? An earnest talk by an elder, directed toward young people. Many problems have developed in modern society that have had a detrimental effect on young people: decaying moral standards, increasing violence, addiction to drugs, and lack of respect for authority. Some teenagers live a double life, hiding their misconduct. This poses a real threat to the spiritual well-being of the whole congregation. Some commit serious wrongdoing and want to keep it secret. If you learn that a brother or a sister in the congregation has done something that is a serious violation of God’s law, what should you do? Consider the principle set out at Leviticus 5:1. (See the August 15, 1997, Watchtower, pages 27-30.) Refer to Young People Ask book, pages 68-9, and explain what a person should do in such a case.
Song 68 and concluding prayer.

