Studying Daniel’s Prophecy
1 Beginning the week of April 17, we will study Pay Attention to Daniel’s Prophecy! in the Congregation Book Study. Many have already read this fascinating book, but now we have the opportunity to enjoy the benefits that come from a group discussion of the material. All publishers, interested ones, and children are invited, yes, encouraged, to be present each week for this in-depth study of the Bible book of Daniel.​—Deut. 31:12, 13.
2 Study Schedule and Instructions: The complete study schedule for the Daniel’s Prophecy book is set out in this issue of Our Kingdom Ministry. Be sure to keep a copy with your study book. The schedule shows the chapter and paragraphs from the book as well as the verses from Daniel that will be discussed in each week’s session. The footnotes explain how and when some of the material in the book will be considered. At the conclusion of each weekly study, the conductor is encouraged to review with the group the specific verses from Daniel that are listed on the schedule for that week. As time permits, the verses may be read and commented on. Some verses will overlap from one week to another because of an ongoing consideration of their application.
3 Prepare for a Thorough Study: An effort has been made to allow sufficient time each week for an unhurried discussion of the assigned material. Four lessons are rather short. Hence, at the end of the study for the week of June 5, the conductor may include a review of Daniel 2:1-40. For the week of June 26, he may review Daniel 3:1-30. The week of September 4 should include a thorough discussion of the illustrations and scriptures on page 139. The chart on pages 188 and 189 should be discussed at the study for the week of October 2.
4 Prepare well for the study each week, and enjoy participating in it. Appreciate your privilege of associating with Jehovah’s visible organization and benefiting from the insight and understanding provided by his faithful anointed ones. (Dan. 12:3, 4) Kindly encourage others to attend the book study regularly. May all of us pay attention to God’s prophetic word as revealed in the awe-inspiring book of Daniel.​—Heb. 10:23-25; 2 Pet. 1:19.

