‘What Can I Do?’
1 ‘What can I do?’ No doubt, that question was on the minds of the members of the small Bible study group organized by Charles Taze Russell in the 1870’s. As they progressed in their understanding of God’s will, those early Bible students must have wondered what they could do to help others learn about God’s purpose. To reach out to the entire world with the Bible knowledge that they were gaining was certainly a monumental task.
2 Happily for us, they met that challenge. How? Each individual did his seemingly insignificant part, so that today, Jehovah’s Witnesses have become known worldwide​—an organization of nearly six million Kingdom proclaimers serving in some 90,000 congregations in 234 lands and islands of the sea!​—Isa. 60:22.
3 Offer Your Full Support: It is vital for each one of us to have some share in the tremendous work Jesus foretold would be done in these last days. (Mark 13:10) Certainly this work cannot be left solely to the limited number of elders; nor does the preaching activity fall only on the shoulders of the pioneers. In reality, every dedicated Christian has an important role to play. All of us can participate in some form of preaching activity. (1 Tim. 1:12) To whatever extent we do this, we benefit ourselves and others.​—1 Tim. 4:16.
4 Each one can also offer full support to our Christian brotherhood in other significant ways. We can support the congregation meetings by attending regularly and by participating enthusiastically. (Ps. 122:1, 8, 9) We can do our part to keep the congregation morally clean. We can provide financial support for the worldwide work, according to our means. We can share in cleaning the Kingdom Hall. Everyone can promote a warm spirit of love and unity in the congregation by assisting new ones, young ones, and older ones alike.​—Col. 3:12, 14.
5 So you might ask, ‘What can I do?’ Although your individual efforts might seem small, by doing your part, you contribute to a strong, active, and healthy congregation. Thus all of us have a vital share in honoring Jehovah’s name!

