The Hanbok—Korea’s National Costume
By Awake! writer in the Republic of Korea
TO Koreans, clothes are more than a covering for the body. An example of this is the traditional Korean costume called the hanbok.
A Unique Design
The hanbok is composed of a bolero-style blouse and a long skirt, uniquely proportioned.a In some cases, the skirt is four times longer than the blouse. As a result, even a short woman looks taller in it.
The hanbok has subtle curves and simple lines. The sleeves of the blouse open up like wings, while the skirt flares out from the bosom and flows elegantly to the floor. Accentuating the breastline is an unusual type of bow, with its two ends trailing out from the knot and down the front of the blouse, nearly reaching the ankles. Many hanboks also have beautiful geometric and floral designs embroidered around the cuffs and the neckline of the blouse as well as on the skirt. Yes, the hanbok’s proportions, lines, and colors all combine to make it elegant indeed.
A Versatile Costume
The beauty of the hanbok is enhanced by its practical design. Since the hanbok is generally made of natural fibers, it can easily be worn year-round. For instance, a hanbok that is made of plant fibers such as ramie or hemp has good ventilation, which helps keep the wearer cool during summer, even though the hanbok covers most of the body. Other types of material help to conserve body heat, making them more suitable for winter.
The hanbok is also comfortable. This feature has little to do with fashion but stems from a practical need that existed centuries ago when horses were used extensively in the area. The magazine Culture & I says: “The clothing was developed to adapt to the cold climate and to hunting and nomadic activities.” Hence, Korean horse riders avoided any clothing that restricted their freedom of movement. Yes, Koreans who enjoy wearing the hanbok today owe a debt of gratitude to their ancestors for the physical comfort that it affords!
Another interesting feature of the hanbok is the age-old tradition of using colors for symbolic purposes. In times past, the Korean ruling class often wore colors that were flattering, while the peasants dressed mostly in white. Also, an unmarried woman could be identified by wearing a combination of yellow and red. After marriage, the color of her hanbok reflected her husband’s social status. At a wedding nowadays, the bride’s mother is supposed to wear a pink garment, while the groom’s mother usually dresses in blue. This practice certainly makes it easy to identify them.
The Hanbok Today
Following the Korean War (1950-53), a modernization campaign was undertaken. As a result, by the 1970’s the hanbok went out of fashion and was replaced by Western-style dress. Thus, what was once an everyday casual outfit was relegated to the closet, coming out only for weddings, holidays, and other special occasions.
In more recent times, however, the hanbok has been making a comeback. In 1996, for instance, an effort was made to repopularize the style when the first Saturday of every month was declared to be “the day to wear hanbok.” Clothing manufacturers introduced new hanboks especially designed to appeal to youths. Evidently there is something emotionally satisfying about returning to one’s roots, for the modern hanbok has met with great success. In an era when many of the latest styles emphasize sensuality, the hanbok is a refreshing example of beautiful and modest dress.—1 Timothy 2:9.
[Footnote]
While there are both men’s and women’s styles of the hanbok, our discussion focuses on women’s.

