R5821 : page 1 

VOL. XXXVII. JANUARY 1 NO. I 
A. D. 1916-A.M. 6044 

CONTENTS 

Views from The Watch Tower ... 3 

Jehovah Chastening the World . . 3 

Jehovah's Act— His Strange Act . . 4 

Glorious Opportunities at Hand . . 4 

Smiting of Jordan by Elijah ... 4 

"Strong in Faith" 5 

Militarism and Navalism— How Long? . 5 

The Jews as War Sufferers ... 6 
A Token of My Covenant (Poem) ... 7 
1 9 1 5— Foreign Branch Reports ... 8 
He Ascended, Leading Captives ... 1 1 

Wrong Views of the Kingdom ... 11 

An Error— Christ's Kingdom Future. . 12 
The Spirit at Pentecost 13 

Meaning of Pentecostal Blessing . .13 

Gifts and Fruits of Spirit ... 14 
St. Peter's Pentecostal Sermon ... 14 

Divine Favor About to Return to Israel 1 5 

The Curse to be Rolled Away ... 15 

R5822 : page 2 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as FolIows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



THE EUREKA DRAMA VERY SUCCESSFUL 

The dear friends who are reporting on the EUREKA DRAMA 
are sending in excellent reports. The public are very appreciative 
of the DRAMA and many cards are being handed in. 
We regret, however, that we hear from only a small proportion 
of the DRAMAS that are in your hands. We hope that 
none of you are allowing this talent in your possession to lie 
idle. The winter season is a very favorable time, especially 
in country districts; and school boards will, doubtless, be very 
glad to cooperate by furnishing schoolhouses. Court-houses 
are also desirable. In many places where the law does not 
permit the showing of the moving pictures on Sundays, Picture 
Theatres are obtainable for the Free DRAMA at practically 
the cost of light and janitorage. 

In corresponding with us respecting DRAMA, please indicate 
on envelope, EUREKA DRAMA, or PHOTO-DRAMA. 



BROTHER RUSSELL AT THE TEMPLE 

Answering many inquiries, we announce that Brother Russell 
endeavors to serve at the New York City Temple on the 
first Sunday of each month. In the forenoon of such days 
there is a baptism service, with every provision for those finding 
it convenient to be immersed at that time. A Congregational 
Meeting for the consideration of the activities of 
the Church is appointed for the Saturday evening preceding 
the first Sunday of each month. This meeting is appointed 
for the Temple, W. 63d St., New York. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR FEBRUARY 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
February follow: (1) 1 14; (2) 221; (3) 4; (4) 300; (5) 67; 
(6) 91; (7) 324; (8) 155; (9) 95; (10) 12; (11) 27; (12) 273; 
(13) 50; (14) 32; (15) 145; (16) 240; (17) 307; (18) 258; (19) 
18; (20) 194; (21) 281; (22) 296; (23) 7; (24) 44; (25) 130; 
(26) 176; (27) 108; (28) 170; (29) 3. 



STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 



THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE 
KEYS." PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION. 



SERIES I., "The Plan of the Ages." gives an outline of the Divine 
Plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 



384 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. 1 l/2d.) 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage 
included. 

(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's Second Coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. 1 l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter on the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. 1 l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Battle of Armageddon," shows that the dissolution of 
the present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas 
offered are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these 
events the fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great 
prophecy of Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 688 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6 l/2d.) 

SERIES V., "The Atonement Between God and Man," treats an 
all-important subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of Divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 640 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6 l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week 
("Genesis 1 and 2"), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 750 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6 l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (2s. 6d.) 

Also published in foreign languages as follows: German and Swedish, 
six vols.; Dano-Norwegian, five vols.; Greek, four vols.; Finnish, 
three vols.; French, two vols.; Hollandish, Spanish, Italian, Hungarian, 
Polish, Arabic, Roumanian, Chinese, Japanese, one vol. each; bound in 
cloth, uniform with English edition, prices the same. 

For the Blind in American Braille, English Braille and New York Point. 



R5823 : page 3 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

NATURALLY enough, one influence of the 
great European war is to turn the minds of 
some toward religion and the consideration 
of a future life. The fact that sons, 
brothers and husbands are in danger or 
wounded or dead or prisoners in a foreign 



land— all of them beyond human protection 
—naturally turns the minds of many toward 
the Almighty Creator. Hence reports from 
the warring nations indicate an increase of 
religious sentiment— larger church attendance, more 
people praying, etc. 

To the extent that such religious activities are inspired 
merely by fear and helplessness, they of course amount 
to very little, for the public, mistaught, know not that 
there is no access to the Divine ear, no authority for 
prayer, no ground for claiming protection for loved ones, 
except through the great Advocate whom God has appointed. 
Neither do they understand that He is not the 
world's Advocate, but merely the Church's; and that no 
one is a member of the Church who has not, through 
knowledge of the Lord, through repentance, made a full 
consecration of himself to do the Lord's will. Hence, 
those not Scripturally informed— and they include the 
vast majority of all denominations of Christians— cry 
aloud to the Lord in their troubles; but in the absence 
of trouble or danger are worshipers at the shrines of 
pleasure, of wealth, of selfishness, of lust, or of appetite. 

We cannot hope that this class will receive any permanent 
benefit at the present time— any more than would 
the heathen. It will be a little later on in this great 
Trouble, in the revolution and anarchy which the Lord 
indicates will follow each other, that they will begin 
really to wake up and to realize that unless those days 
be shortened, no flesh would survive. ("Matthew 24:22".) 
Then they will begin to seek the Lord, not merely in a 
form of godliness, but with truly broken hearts. 

JEHOVAH CHASTENING THE WORLD 

The Lord's provision will then opportunely come to 
them. The Redeemer, through whose blood of the New 
Covenant there is to be a full atonement made, will then 
take to Himself His great power and reign as the Mediator 
of that New Covenant; and the glorious Millennium 
will be fully established. Under its beneficent arrangement 
the darkness of the present civilization and the 
gross darkness of the heathen will disappear before the 
rising Sun of Righteousness with healing in His beams. 

Then the Lord, who is now speaking to them in His 
anger, chastening in His sore displeasure, and revealing 
Himself in the flaming fire of the near future, will be 
ready to speak to their chastened hearts words of comfort, 
of mercy, which because of ignorance and superstition 
and misconception they are not able and willing 
to receive now. The Lord will turn unto His people the 
pure Message, that they may all call upon the name of 
the Lord to serve Him with one consent. ("Zephaniah 3:9".) 
Thus "the light of the knowledge of the glory of 
God will fill the whole earth"— ocean deep! ("Habakkuk 2: 14".) 
As a result of the heart-breaking experiences, 
followed by the greater knowledge, all knees will be 



bowing and all tongues will be confessing to the glory of 
God. And those refusing to come into harmony with 
that supreme and glorious Reign of Righteousness, we 
are told, will be sure to be destroyed from amongst the 
people.— v Acts 3:23". 

There is, however, another class of religious people, 
who undoubtedly are being influenced much more deeply, 
intelligently and profitably— true Christians, who in the 
past have been lulled to sleep, or who as babes in Christ 
have not been thoroughly nourished with the Word of 
Truth. These are now having their senses exercised as 
never before, and every day are getting more awake and 
inquiring what these things mean— things so different 
from what they have been taught and what they had expected. 
Already they are asking, "Where is the hope 
we had of the conversion of the heathen to the glorious 
standards of our Christianity?" They are inquiring, 
"Has there not been some mistake made when we called 
these kingdoms of Europe kingdoms of God and kingdoms 
of Christ— Christendom?" They are awakening to 
the fact that we have long been under a great delusion— 
that these kingdoms are merely kingdoms of this world; 
that the Prince of this world is still the ruler; that Messiah, 
the Prince of Light, is only now, and through this 
great tribulation, taking to Himself His great power to 
begin His Reign of Righteousness. 

It requires a little time for all this to germinate in the 
hearts of those who have been so seriously misinformed 
by the ministers and teachers whom they trusted. At 
first apathy, a feeling of doubt on every subject, comes 
into the minds of these people, but as they go to the Lord 
in prayer from earnest, consecrated hearts they are 
guided, enlightened. They find indeed that the faith they 
built was largely "wood, hay and stubble" material- 
human traditions, theories and creeds. The burning, or 
destruction, of these leaves them, however, that much 
better prepared for the erection of a better faith-structure 
of the gold, silver and precious stones of Divine promises. 

R5823 : page 4 

The burning of their "wood, hay and stubble" 
structure of errors, having been built upon "the Rock 
Christ Jesus," themselves "shall be saved so as by fire."— 
" 1 Corinthians 3:15\ 

JEHOVAH'S ACT-HIS STRANGE ACT 

Note the difference between this class and the one 
first mentioned, who have never really been consecrated 
to the Lord, but who are merely nominal Christians, children 
of error and typical "tares." The burning of their 
false faith will leave them nothing; for they never were 
properly on "the Rock Christ Jesus." It will reduce them 
merely to the level of the world, of which they have 
always been a part; but, misled by wrong teachings, they 



thought themselves Christians. And by many they were 
mistaken for Christians, even as tares may be mistaken 
for true wheat. 

It is this extraordinary effect of this Day of Wrath 
upon the world in general, and especially upon professed 
Christians, which the Lord evidently refers to through 
the Prophet Isaiah: "The Lord. ..shall be wroth, 
bring to pass His act. His strange act." ("Isaiah 28:21\) 
It will surely be a strange procedure on God's part, as 
viewed by those not taught of the Lord, when they shall 
see all the religious systems of the present time go down 
and the world heading straight for chaos. 

The cry of the people at that time will much resemble 
the cry of the Apostles, when on the Lake of Galilee 
the great storm arose. They came to Jesus in the hinder 
part of the boat, apparently asleep, crying, "Master, 
Master, carest Thou not that we perish?" Immediately, 
when they have learned their dependence upon the Lord— 
which many do not now very fully appreciate— immediately 
when they cry to the Lord from the depth of their 
hearts in astonishment and fear. He will be ready to 
answer them graciously and to deliver them. 

Man's extremity will be God's opportunity! As Jesus 
arose. He rebuked the winds and the waves; and immediately 
there was a great calm on the Lake of Galilee. So 
in the midst of the awful trouble and human perplexity— 

R5824 : page 4 

"men's hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after 

the things coming"— Messiah's Kingdom, "the desire of 

all nations," will take control of the situation; and immediately 

the storm of human passion and anarchy will 

cease. Then men will "beat their swords into plowshares, 

and their spears into pruning-hooks; nation shall 

not lift up sword against nation; neither shall they learn 

war any more."— "Isaiah 2:4"; "Micah 4:3\ 

GLORIOUS OPPORTUNITIES AT HAND 

Manifestly now, and increasingly so as the days go 
by, the minds of thinking people will be opening to a 
realization of the Truth. Now, as never before, they will 
need the Lord's saints to point them in the right direction 
—to bring the Scriptures to their attention and the 
various helps for Bible study which the Lord has been 
graciously providing, and which are already in the hands 
of many. As society and religious systems will be reeling 
as a drunken man, as the Bible explains, these undeveloped 
saints of God will need the very help we by God's 
grace are enabled to render them. Surely there never 
was so favorable a time as the present for rendering 
assistance to this class! More and more, as these find 
that they have been misled by the shepherds of the nominal 
systems, they will be as sheep without a shepherd. 

To those who have the knowledge of God, of His 



Word, of His Plan, the present and the near future offer 
certainly the most wonderful opportunities of which we 
could conceive. Whoever loves the Lord will love the 
brethren. Whoever would serve the Lord will be intent 
upon serving the brethren; and the more their need, the 
better the opportunity; and the greater our zeal, the 
greater the results for others, and the greater the blessing 
for ourselves. "He that reapeth receiveth wages, and 
gathereth fruit unto life eternal."— 'John 4:36\ 

It will be seen from this that, so far from thinking 
our work ended, we have wonderful expectations in respect 
to the year 1916. 

SMITING OF JORDAN BY ELIJAH 

We have already called attention, in STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES, Vol. II., to the fact that Elijah, the Prophet, 
typified The Christ— Jesus the Head and the Church His 
Body— in their fleshly experiences; and that the taking 
up of Elijah into heaven, typically represents the final 
passing of the Church from the earthly conditions to the 
Heavenly. We have seen, too, that when Elijah's time 
for translation came, he was sent from Gilgal to Bethel, 
from Bethel to Jericho and from Jericho to Jordan; and 
that these different points were measurably disappointing; 
yet that Elijah and Elisha were not discouraged, but 
went on— Jordan representing the end of the Times of 
the Gentiles, 1915. As Jordan was the last point to 
which Elijah was directed, so 1915 is the last point to 
which the Church has been directed. As Elijah went on, 
not knowing any further place, so the true Church is 
going on without any definite time-point before it. 

Soon the chariot of fire will separate the Elijah class 
from the Elisha class. The fiery chariot seems to mean 
severe trials or persecutions. A little later, the Elijah 
class will be taken up in the whirlwind. Elsewhere in the 
Bible a whirlwind is apparently used to symbolize the 
great time of anarchy. The lesson possibly is that the 
Lord's faithful of the Elijah class will be amongst the 
first in civilized lands to suffer some kind of violence 
through lawlessness and anarchy. 

We know not how soon this culmination may come, 
nor need we be concerned, since it is our Lord who is 
at the helm, and since we are expecting that He will 
require each one to be "faithful unto death." The thing 
which especially concerns us now is another part of the 
type: When Elijah and Elisha reached the bank of 
Jordan, Elijah took his mantle and, folding it together, 
smote the waters of the river; and they divided, and 
the two crossed dry-shod. What does this mean? What 
experiences are typified thereby? Apparently it refers 
to something in the immediate future— something which 
seemingly should be beginning at once. 

We may not be too sure of what is meant by this 
feature of the type. We are to remember, on the contrary, 
that Bible prophecies are rarely understood much 



in advance of their fulfilment. This was so at the Lord's 
First Advent. Prophecies were fulfilling on every hand, 
yet the disciples did not perceive them until later— as our 
Lord's death and resurrection. After His resurrection, 
He explained to His disciples many of the things; and 
we read that "then He opened their understanding, that 
they might understand the Scriptures." ('Luke 24:45 s .) 
It may be so here. We may witness a fulfilment of this 
feature, and not discern its application until completed. 
Our conjecture respecting the meaning of this picture 
is this: Elijah's mantle represented Divine Power operating 
through him; and similarly God's Power operating 
through His Elect now. In Bible symbology, water stands 
for Truth and also for people; and we see no reason to 
object to its standing for both of these in this picture— 
a division of the people through the proper and right 
dividing of the Truth. Jordan also signifies trial, test or 

R5824 : page 5 

judgment. Taking these three things in combination, we 
have a forceful figure. If the interpretation proves to 
be a correct one, it will mean something like this: that 
God somehow will exercise through His enlightened 
people a power which will have an effect of causing a 
division amongst the people in respect to the Truth, and 
which will be a test upon them in this dividing. 

Not knowing what will be the opportunities, nor what 
the method of exercising those opportunities, we must 
wait for the Lord and the leadings of His providences. 
But meantime, surely it is for the Elijah class to be thoroughly 
alert and actively interested, ready, watching, 
waiting for the Master's guidance! 

With these things before us, we urge all the Lord's 
consecrated people who have a knowledge of these things 
to "Gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and hope 
to the end for the grace that is to be brought unto you 
at the revelation of Jesus Christ." ( s l Peter 1:13 s .) We 
urge them not to become entangled in worldly matters, 
but to keep themselves in the love of God and in the service 
of God, the Truth, the brethren. 

We remember that after our Lord's crucifixion, many 
of His disciples were inclined to go back into the fishing 
business— a very natural course. We remember how the 
Lord gave them evidences, however, that His blessings 
could be with them, and they could continue to be 
"fishers of men"; and that all success depended upon 
Him; and that without Him they could do nothing. This 
lesson was deeply impressed upon those who first started 
in the fishing business. They toiled all night, but caught 
nothing, and in the morning saw Jesus on the shore with 
fish already cooked. Apparently they never forgot that 
lesson.— 'John 21:l-10 s . 

Deeply interested in all of the Lord's dear brethren, 
we have felt a sort of solicitude for them as we have 
noticed how some who have been zealous for the 



Colporteur work under much less favorable conditions 
than the present and the future are going into worldly 
business. We have probably one hundred less Colporteurs 
today than we had a year ago, although the financial 
conditions everywhere show that rather we should 
have twice as many Colporteurs today. It is not for us 
to complain— we are not complaining. We are merely 
calling attention in this general way, rather than in a 
private or personal way, to the fact that the love of some 
may be growing cool, and that they may thus endanger 
their gaining "a full reward." 

We may not know what power the Lord may put into 
our hands for causing a great division of the people in 
respect to the Truth. It may be a financial power, that 
was represented by Elijah's mantle in this case, or it 
may be something else. We are waiting to see. Meanwhile 
we are endeavoring to keep all the branches in all 
lines of the work well in hand, so as to be ready to smite 
when the opportune moment shall come. We trust that 
this is the spirit of all the Lord's dear people who are 
awaiting the Kingdom— a spirit of alertness, a spirit of 
zeal, and of energy, and of a sound mind— counting the 
things of this present time as "not worthy to be compared 
with the glory that shall be revealed in us."— 'Acts 20:24"; 
"Philippians 3:8"; "Romans 8:18". 

One of our arrangements for the near future is to set 
aside some of the Pilgrim brethren who have special ability 
for addressing the public, that they may give their 
time constantly in this direction, or to whatever extent 
the Lord may open the way— going from place to place 
in longer journeys to serve those classes which will indicate 
to THE WATCH TOWER Office their ability and desire 
to have public meetings in some of the best Auditoriums 
in each case. This will not interfere with other 
classes and their being served by other brethren— some 
of those brethren who have no special talent for public 
speaking, but who have exceptional ability for semi-public 
meetings and for parlor meetings, where they would be 
addressing chiefly the Household of Faith, versed in 
Present Truth. 

We remind all who have opportunity, or who can 
make opportunity for engaging in the Colporteur work, 
that there are millions of homes still not supplied with the 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES and many more millions 
which have not been blessed with the CREATION SCENARIO 
and the DAILY HEAVENLY MANNA. Here are fields of 
usefulness which must be gone over surely before we may 
hope to be taken in the whirlwind. Let us be alive to our 
privileges, our opportunities, that there may be no faintheartedness, 
but a zeal for God and His Message and for 
the brethren who need our help— yea, and for some who 
have a hearing ear and some who have been coming rapidly 
into the Truth within the last few months. With 
these things in mind, we have selected as our year's text 
for 1916 the following: 



R5825 : page 5 

"STRONG IN FAITH"- ROMANS 4:20" 

We have provided these in a cheap form that all who 
desire may have them. We can send two of the cards 
for five cents, postpaid, or any larger number at a proportionate 
rate. 

MILITARISM AND NAVALISM-HOW LONG? 

We own to a trepidation when writing on this subject. 
Our friends on both sides of the conflict, naturally 
enough, feel touchy. We have had three letters from 
Germans, claiming that we are prejudiced and do not 
give them justice. We have had four letters from our 
British friends, making similar complaint. We believe, 
however, that the majority of our friends on both sides 
do understand us; and we assume that the seven letters 
came from persons comparatively new in the Truth. 
Those familiar with our position need not to be told that 
we have no sympathy whatever with the German invasion 
of Belgian territory, even though they claim that Belgium 
was under-handedly associated with the Allies. We have 
no sympathy with acts of violence and murder in Belgium 
or elsewhere. We have no sympathy with the destruction 
of non-combatants and commercial vessels by 
submarines, even though the vessels did carry munitions 
of war. We have no sympathy with the dropping of 
bombs from the sky, either in London or Paris or in 
German and Austrian cities. We have no sympathy with 
the war at all. 

However, on the other hand, regarding the nations 
as not Christian, we are not surprised that they should 
be engaged in an immoral warfare. We are not surprised 
that under stress of apparent necessity for victory, all 
the nations engaged in this war are trampling upon the 
laws of nations, to which they all agreed. We can no 
more excuse the British, French, Russians and Italians 
for such violation of the rights of others than we can 
excuse the Germans, Austrians, Hungarians, Bulgars and 
Turks. We see wrongs perpetrated in every direction; 
Divine Laws entirely set aside by these so-called Christian 
nations— Christendom. 

Surely it is not in vain that the Scriptures say, "If 
thine enemy hunger, feed him"! ("Romans 12:20".) And 
when professed British Christians break and violate the 
Master's instructions, and try to starve the professed 

R5825 : page 6 

German Christians, we are not surprised that the latter 
retaliate in every way that they can— whether by Zeppelin 
raids or submarine raids or otherwise. These nations, 
from our viewpoint being unchristian nations, could have 
no higher motto than is expressed in the sentiment, "Necessity 



knows no law." The Germans decided that if 

the British starved their wives and babies and aged non-combatants, 

they would be right to retaliate by destroying 

everything British that they could reach, including non-combatant 

passengers on steamers. 

We see that it would have been wiser for the British 
to have kept the law of nations, and to have held to the 
instruction of Jesus; and yet, realizing that we are still 
under the dominion of the Prince of this world, Satan, 
and that he. as the god of this world, is still working in 
the hearts of the children of disobedience, nothing that 
they could do would much surprise us. Do we not know 
from the Scriptures that the heart of man is exceedingly 
sinful; that his anger, malice, hatred, envy, strife, bitterness, 
are works of the flesh and of the Devil; and that 
these are being manifest on every hand, notwithstanding 
the number of churches, preachers, etc.? 

St. Peter wrote of the followers of Jesus— the consecrated 
Church: "Ye are a Royal Priesthood, a holy nation, 
a peculiar people [a people for a purpose, Diaglott], 
that ye should show forth the praises of Him who has 
called you out of darkness into His marvelous light." 
(M Peter 2:9\) This New Nation— God's nation— is in 
the world, but not of it. Its members cannot be loyal to 
the prince of this world, and to the Prince of Glory, both. 
They must choose between the two. This will make them 
"peculiar" in the eyes of the majority of people, who do 
not understand the matter, but who believe the kingdoms 
of this world to be kingdoms of Christ— even though they 
be perplexed as to why one kingdom of Christ should 
seek to blow the other off the land and off the sea. 

All of the nations realize that they are impoverishing 
themselves of their best blood and virility and of their 
wealth— placing the grievous burden of debt upon generations 
yet unborn— unless their debts should be repudiated, 
which would mean revolution and anarchy, such as 
the Bible seems to foretell. No wonder there is a movement 
for peace in all these countries. It is a sad spectacle. 
How strange it must appear to them as well as to 
ourselves! The greatest nations are bleeding to death, 
severely wounded. More than twenty millions of men are 
now under arms and expense and are non-producers, 
besides the terrible loss already sustained through the 
wounds and death of nine millions. 

But will the nations be wise enough even now to turn 
from war? Their admirable courage and their inestimable 
pride seem to answer. Nay! And this seems to be in full 
accord with Bible prophecy. As we have pointed out for 
twenty-five years past, the war is to continue until more 
and more will be involved, and all the participants be 
weakened and made ready for the great earthquake of 
social revolution and the fire of anarchy which will follow 
that with horrible desolation. Verily, the Scriptures 
correctly declare, "Pride goeth before destruction, and a 
haughty spirit before a fall." ('Proverbs 16:18".) From 
history we may judge that the world aforetime was no 



less viciously intentioned, but that God's providence interfered, 
as though He said, "Thus far shalt thou come, but 
no further." ( v Job 38:1 P.) Now, however, we have 
apparently reached the time when the Lord is saying, 
"Let loose the winds of strife!" These winds are blowing 
more and more, and eventually are to become a great 
whirlwind of trouble, as pictured in the Scriptures. 

The possibilities of conflict are extending over to 
Persia, and thence down toward India. While all the 
nations will be glad to have peace, each is afraid to 
show a white feather for fear of the loss of prestige. The 
Spirit of the Lord is not anywhere manifest, nor should 
we expect it, for the time has come for all to realize that 
these great nations are not Christian nations, but merely 
kingdoms of this world and under the Prince of this 
world, who now "worketh in the hearts of the children 
of disobedience" to anger, wrath, hatred, envy, strife, 
bitterness. The primary element of the Lord's Spirit is 
humility: "Humble yourselves under the mighty hand of 
God, that He may exalt you in due time." (" 1 Peter 5:6\) 
This spirit the world does not recognize as its standard; 
and hence we do not see the Spirit of Christ, explained 
by the Apostle— "meekness, gentleness, patience, long 
suffering, brotherly-kindness, love."— 'Galatians 5:22, 23\ 

Indeed, we entreat all the Lord's dear people to remember 
that there are but the two great Masters; and 
that we have enlisted on the side of our God and His 
Christ, and are to prove loyal to these in the midst of a 
crooked and perverse people, blinded by the god of this 
world and filled with his spirit of pride, boastfulness, 
animosity, hatred and strife. It should be our desire to 
be neutral as between these contending factions of 
Satan's empire. We love them all; we wish for them all 
great blessings. We have a Message of hope for all who 
have ears to hear that eventually their extremity will be 
God's opportunity; and that Messiah's Kingdom will roll 
away the curse, and instead roll on to mankind the blessings 
of the Kingdom of God's dear Son. 

Let us never forget our neutrality. Let us be just 
toward all, kind, generous. Let us avoid as far as possible 
any discussion of these matters with those who would 
not be able to understand and appreciate our position. 
Otherwise, we would be doing what the Master admonished 
us not to do, when He said, "Cast not your pearls 
before swine; lest they trample them under foot and turn 
again and rend you." ("Matthew 7:6\) Our worldly neighbors 
have not the viewpoint that we possess, and cannot 
understand our arguments or reasons. In due time they 
will understand. Now the Lord's consecrated people 
should be unobtrusive, not strife-breeders, not partisans, 
not bigoted, but wonderfully sympathetic toward all, 
realizing the true situation, as others are not able to do. 

As the facts gradually leak out, it is noticeable that 
none of the nations at war possess all the virtues and 
none of them possess all the vices. As between the opposing 
forces in this great war, the dishonors are probably 



not unequally matched. While everybody noted the great 
injustice done to the Belgians in the German invasion, 
the very ones who were loudest in rebuking that injustice 
have been guilty of a similar invasion of a weak state— 
the invasion of Greece by the British and French, who 
crossed her territory to assist the Servians. And whatever 
may have been the atrocities of the Turks against 
the Armenians, whom the Turks claim were arming and 
entrenching against them, nothing could have exceeded 
the bestial ferocity of the Russians against the Jews, who, 
so far as we know, were seeking to be neutral. 

THE JEWS AS WAR SUFFERERS 

While people of all nations are suffering directly or 
indirectly from the present great war, the poor Jew seems 
to get the worst of it everywhere. He is to be found in 
all the different armies— sometimes as a volunteer, sometimes 
as a conscript. It appears that in Galicia, where 
the Jews are very numerous and where they are very 
thoroughly hated by the Russians and Cossacks, they 

R5825 : page 7 

have suffered tremendously— and are still suffering. The 
fortunes of war swept them from one side and then 
from the other— back and forth. Surely these poor people, 
of all the people of earth, will soon begin to pray, "Thy 
Kingdom come; Thy will be done on earth as in Heaven"! 

R5826 : page 7 

We give below an extract from the Maccabean, a 
Jewish journal published in New York City. It gives a 
little glimpse of the sufferings of the war-swept region— 
a glimpse which should horrify the most hardened. 
Surely the Lord is preparing the world to acclaim Messiah's 
Kingdom "the desire of all nations"! OHaggai 2:T .) 
The excerpt which follows gives the testimony of 
one of the distressed, a Rumanian Jew of Bukowina: 

"'Day before yesterday, early in the morning, the 
Cossacks fired my house until it burned like tinder. When 
they came to us into the mountains as victors, the sacking 
of houses was common enough. They simply took whatever 
they could lay hands on. But we didn't drain the 
full measure of evil until they returned beaten and in 
retreat. It was then that they overran us in hordes, drunk 
with rage. They demanded provender in a hurry, hay 
and oats for their horses, and food for themselves. First 
came the order to fire the house of the town judge. Then 
they dragged the Jewish inn-keeper into the street to 
dispatch him. One of the horsemen speared him with 
his lance, another finished him by shooting him through 
the head. Then the villagers came in a mass and begged 
to have their houses protected against looting. They 
were speared by the soldiers and knocked down. It was 



terrible. And with the inn-keeper slain, brandy was flowing 

freely from casks in an ownerless inn. The soldiers 

drank themselves into a state of furious madness, and 

then went into the houses to gratify their bestial lusts. 

To me they came as they did to the others— I don't know 

to how many houses in all. They outraged my wife in 

plain view of the children, and violated my little girl. 

They bound me with ropes and threw me under a bench, 

so that I might witness my shame without power of interfering; 

that I might be poisoned and not die; that I might 

live the most miserable of mankind. At last they fired 

our house. The women ran about distracted, wherever 

their feet would carry them. And when the conflagration 

ceased, when we saw our life's work laid in ashes, we 

went through a snowstorm into the wide world.'" 

"Multiply this experience with ten thousand, and 
scatter these ten thousand instances of Cossack rule over 
the whole of Galicia and Bukowina, and you will have 
a picture— a very imperfect one— of what these two 
provinces, and particularly its Jewish population, had to 
suffer under the sway of the Russian invasion. 

"In Jablowitza, Bukowina, a house was fired by the 
soldiers who strictly prohibited any salvage. Not to 
freeze to death during a cold night, the unfortunate 
owner, a Jew, took two blankets from out of the burning 
house. He was crucified by the soldiers, and a guard 
posted below the crucifix until he expired. In Fuczka 
several Jews were hanged, one of them because he 
wanted to save his wife from violation. In Storozynetz, 
south of Czernowitz, Isaak Fellermayer, a Jew, was 
dragged out of bed in the dead of night, by four soldiers, 
who, without stating any reasons, attempted to hang him. 
The rope broke and the soldiers cut his throat, gouged 
out his eyes, and threw the naked corpse into the snow. 

"The Russians in Galicia reintroduced into modern 
warfare the Tartar bestiality of using helpless human 
beings as a cover in marching against the enemy. To 
be sure, these human beings were Jews. Not prisoners, 
mind you, but non-combatants, not men only, but old men, 
young men, women and children of both sexes. It was 
at Nadworna where the unnamable, the indescribable 
portent took place. The Russians huddled together one 
thousand five hundred Jewish families— octogenarians, 
old women, young matrons with infants at their breasts, 
school children, pell-mell, some seven thousand souls in 
all, and drove them as a human cover against the Austrian 
battlefront, marching right in the track of their 
victims. There are no words in any language emphatic 
enough to characterize such an exploit. 

"Try and depict, if you can, the situation— strive to 
bring the unthinkable close to your imagination! Fifteen 
hundred families, seven thousand heads, none of them 
able to bear arms, all the capable having been mobilized 
long ago, a huge swarm of the old, the sick, of women 
and children. These Jews, incapable of bearing arms, 
had been tortured for months by all the miseries of war; 



they had suffered hunger and cold, the Russians had 
looted their dwellings, burned their houses, destroyed 
their property; they had robbed, scourged and tormented 
them. And now they were lashed to the shambles like 
oxen— forward! pashol! They are fired at from the rear 
with revolvers and machine-guns, their backs are 
scourged with the knout, their loins are pierced with 
Cossack lances and their skulls battered by the butts of 
Cossack carbines, and thus they are driven against three 
hundred volcanoes, roaring and belching fire all along 
the Austrian front. The Austrians hear the tremendous 
outcry of the victims, the groaning of the mutilated and 
the dying, but they cannot help their misery; they must 
keep on firing ceaselessly, for behind this human holocaust 
the enemy is crouching for a spring; if they cease 
firing, the Russians will be upon them and the battle 
lost. And in this manner seven thousand souls, men, 
women and children, are slaughtered on the battle-line 
between two contending armed forces, unarmed themselves 
and perishing without a fighting chance in a Tartar 
welter of execution en masse." 



"A TOKEN OF MY COVENANT" 

What shall I render unto Thee? 
What praise sufficient could there be 
For all Thy benefits toward me, 
O Thou Most High? 

I'll drink Salvation's cup today 
Which Thou hast poured. Be Thou my stay! 
Assist me as Thy saint to pay 
My Vows to Thee. 

Remembering Thy Heavenly call, 
I'll strive to be sincere to all. 
I pray for grace lest I should fall 

From simple Truth. 

In thought, in word, in all my ways 
Thy holy standard I would raise. 
Nor please, nor honor self, but praise 
My Worthy King. 

Today in matters small or great, 
I'll serve with faithfulness and wait 
For further joys. Oh, blessed state. 
Thus serving Thee! 

I'll strive to "choose things that excel;" 
All anxious care I'll seek to quell. 
And all discouragements repel. 
And be content. 



I'll neither murmur nor repine! 
I'll trust my heart to care Divine 
To make of it a sacred shrine 
Where Thou canst dwell. 

VIRGINIA NOBLE STEPHENSON. 



R5826 : page 8 

1915-FOREIGN BRANCH REPORTS-1915 

REPORT OF BRITISH BRANCH 

Dear Brother Russell:— 

It is our pleasure and privilege to send you another 
Annual Report of the British Harvest work. We are 
very thankful to the Lord for the continued opportunities 
of service during a time of uncertainty and of the world's 
strife. The accompanying figures show that the war has 
not shut the work down, though it has interfered with 
its progress. On a broad summary it may be said that 
our output of books and tracts for the year is about two-thirds 
of that of last year, and not much less than that 
of the year 1913. During the current year we have circulated 
in Britain 90,700 of the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
and 64,300 books and booklets (SCENARIOS, 
MANNAS, and the pamphlets, TABERNACLE SHADOWS, 
Hell, etc.). The free distribution of Volunteer matter, 
free SCENARIOS and B. S. M. amounts to nearly eleven 
million copies. 

COLPORTEUR WORK STIMULATED BY DRAMA 

The Colporteur work has been greatly aided by the 
PHOTO-DRAMA. Indeed had it not been for the DRAMA 
the output of books would, to all appearances, have been 
very much less. The regular Colporteur work lost some 
of its most successful workers soon after the outbreak of 
the war, when the first pinch of money was felt. We 
cannot but feel sorry for this, for the country recovered 
from its panic when the demand for war material began 
to be felt, and since then there has been plenty of money 
in circulation, and the people are perishing for need of 
the Truth. We still think there is plenty of room for 
good Colporteurs, and it is still true that ground already 
gone over can again be canvassed to advantage. 

The Volunteer work has gone on well. Of the various 
issues provided for this privilege of service, the friends 
have distributed about seven and a half million copies. 
There is, however, a drop in the numbers of B. S. M.; 
for the Class-extension work was almost discontinued 
after the war began and after the advent of the DRAMA. 
There are some indications of the work reviving. 

There have been 207 exhibitions of the PHOTO-DRAMA, 
and the recorded attendance is 593,659, and there have 



been signed cards at the Finales to the number of 26,860. 

The number of Associated Bible Classes has greatly 
increased during the year and appreciation of the Truth 
is being maintained in them. The younger brethren show 
keen interest in the glorious Hope and are making advancement 
in knowledge and piety, whilst those more 
advanced are remaining steadfast in the faith and are 
rejoicing continually. All the classes are receiving Pilgrim 
visits as regularly as the circumstances permit. 

Many newspapers continue to publish the sermons, 
and the message continues to do a good work, as is 
seen by many evidences. 

The office work continues brisk, as the above figures 
will show. The letters in and out for the year total 
53,995. There are prospects of work for some time to 
come before us, and we continue to serve and wait. 

Ever praying the Lord's blessing for yourself, we are, 
dear brother. 

Your servants in the Lord, 

MANAGERS OF BRITISH BRANCH. 



BRITISH BRANCH ACTIVITIES FOR 1915 SUMMARIZED 

Volumes of SCRIPTURE STUDIES 98,410 

MANNAS, SCENARIOS, etc 64,305 

Free literature, B. S. M., etc 10,784,87 1 

Letters received and sent out 53,995 



REPORT OF AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH 

Dear Brother Russell:— 

It is with gladness that we can again report a year of 
progress; in fact, it is the best year yet, and much better 
than could have been expected in many ways. The circumstances 
of the year have, of course, been exceptional 
all over the world; but besides the dislocation of trade 
and unusual conditions through the war. there was the 

R5827 : page 8 

severe drought to contend with. Thousands of cattle and 
sheep were lost, or sold to be slaughtered and put in the 
refrigerators; thus the price of meat was kept up. Expensive 
horses were simply given away to save them 
from starvation. Foodstuffs for cattle brought enormous 
prices, and of course provisions went to great prices; for 
instance, butter reached 60 cents a pound. There was 
lack of employment, and hard times seemed upon us. The 
war, however, has kept certain trades busy, such as clothing, 
munitions, etc. At the same time the war has taken 
many men out of the country; their wives and dependents 
being provided for, so much distress has been averted. 
Counteracting the scarcity of money and uncertainty of 



things, the Colporteurs have found that these strenuous 
times (this terrible war and universal trouble which so 
clearly mark the ending of the "Present Evil World" and 
the inauguration of "the World to come wherein dwelleth 
Righteousness") have made people begin to consider and 
inquire as to the Divine Purpose. Had not some of our 
best Colporteurs been taken from their work to help the 
PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION for a time, many more volumes 
would have been placed. 

ALWAYS OPPORTUNITIES IF WE WATCH 

We still have a noble band of Colporteurs, and the 
work goes well, even over ground which had been covered 
several times before. While some have seemed to slacken 
in their zeal, as though they had made up their minds 
that the work ought to stop now, because they had expected 
it would, others take the wiser view, namely, that 
it will be time to stop when we cannot go on. No doubt 
the Lord can and will stop the work in His own due time; 
but even if the general Harvest work should stop, it 
would seem that the Lord will never leave His people 
with nothing to do. Surely there will always be some opportunities 
of service if we watch for them! When the 
Harvest ends, it will soon be time to "turn the pure 
language [message] to the people," whoever may be here 
to do it.— "Zephaniah 3:9". 

"So on we go not knowing. 

We would not if we might; 
We'd rather walk in the dark with God, 

Than go alone in the light." 

PHOTO-DRAMA: In Australia there have been about 
286 exhibitions, with a total attendance of about 295,000. 
In New Zealand 63 exhibitions with attendance of about 
50,100. In Fiji, 25 with an attendance of 6,800. 

These figures may seem small to you as compared 
with the U.S.A. and England, but our conditions are so 
different. Our territory is larger than the U. S. A., and 
yet the population of Australia is only about five millions, 
a little more than the population of Greater New York. 

The one DRAMA operating in Australia has traveled 
some 5,000 miles to visit from Queensland to West 
Australia. Good work has been done, and while it is surprising 
how many can see it without seeming lasting 
good, yet there are some in every State now rejoicing in 
the Truth and giving evidences of thorough consecration 
as a result of this work. 

The friends everywhere have contributed to this feature 
of the work generously, and what is included in the 
statement does not take into account several hundred 

R5827 : page 9 

pounds which have been spent in this connection by the 



Classes. The Perth Class ultimately paid all the expenses 
of producing the DRAMA for West Australia; the Adelaide 
friends did the same for South Australia, and New 
Zealand practically did the same for that country. The 
other classes also did remarkably well according to ability. 

PATIENTLY WAITING FOR THE LORD 

Notwithstanding all the extra expense of the DRAMA, 
the contributions to the general Tract Fund and Good 
Hopes have been maintained; thus you will be pleased to 
see how much in earnest the Australasian brethren are. 

There has been considerable growth in grace as well 
as in numbers. While possibly one or two here or there 
may seem to have slackened in interest, because they expected 
to have been with the Lord by this time, it is 
beautiful to see in others the opposite effect, the mellowing 
of character, the submission to and patient waiting 
for the Lord, willing to serve Him either here or there, 
this or the other side of the veil, simply biding His time. 

There has been more than usual response to the general 
distribution of the papers, throughout the year, but 
if as you intimate, we are to make this Branch self-supporting 
in future, we may have to curtail our expense 
in this direction. However, it is good to realize that the 
Lord is overruling the work, and is able to provide what 
is necessary to the accomplishment of His will, and we 
desire to do no more than pleases Him. 

We desire a continuation of your prayers and the 
prayers of all the Lord's people, that we may have wisdom 
and Divine guidance as we seek to continue the work 
to the Lord's glory and to the assistance of the Body 
waiting for the Deliverance.— "Romans 8:23". 

With Christian love to yourself and all coworkers. 

Yours in the Service of Christ. 

AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH. 

P. S.-WATCH TOWER subscribers number 1,150. B.S.M. 
subscribers number 1,350. 

Many of the latter subscribe for hundreds and some 
for thousands of copies monthly. 

PHOTO-DRAMA is now having a splendid run at Sydney. 

SUMMARY OF AUSTRALASIAN WORK 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES (cloth) 37,419 

(paper) 3,026 

Booklets 3,517 



Total 43,962 

PEOPLE'S PULPIT (B. S. M.), free 1,192,930 

WATCH TOWER 6,411 



Total 1,199,341 

Letters received 4,388 

Letters sent out 5,315 



EXPENDITURES 

Deficiency to Brooklyn to October, 1914..oe 1482: 1 1: 2 

Cost of Free Literature 337: 2: 1 1 

Postage on same 39:12: 9 

Freight, postage, etc 70:18: 1 

General Expense: Gas, Rent, etc 43:15: 

Pilgrim and extension work 92: 9: 4 

PHOTO-DRAMA Operations 876: 3: 7 

«2942:12:10 

RECEIPTS 

Donations received: 

Tract Fund ce560: 3: 2 

Special for PHOTO-DRAMA 422:15: 5 

Deficit due to Brooklyn 1959: 14: 3 

ce2942:12:10 
SWEDISH BRANCH REPORT 

Dear Brother Russell:— 

As the season for our yearly balancing of accounts 
has come round again, and we— contrary to earlier expectations 
of many in our ranks— still are human beings, 
and still, while in this "weak" condition, have the blessed 
privilege to partake in the service of the Truth and in 
the wonderful joys and sufferings connected with that 
service, I have herewith the great pleasure of sending 
you some statements from the work accomplished through 
the Society's Swedish branch during the last year. 

Looking around us in this part today, we cannot but 
feel very, very humble and thankful indeed, seeing how 
merciful and good the dear Heavenly Father has been 
toward His people in this country, amongst whom we 
have the greatly appreciated privilege to serve as a representative 
of yourself— His chosen and faithful servant. 

The fact is, that in spite of the many hindrances and 
difficulties (financially and otherwise) directly and indirectly 
caused by the present European war, the Lord has 
held the "doors" of opportunity wide open for us during 
the whole year, and never in the past did so many of the 
Swedish people in one year have the true explanation of 
God's Word set before their minds. We have also in 
this year witnessed very encouraging proofs that this 
labor has not been done "in vain." A good number of 
the Lord's people in "Babylon," as well as some out of it 
all over the country, have got their eyes of understanding 
opened to see the wonderful Plan of God. Nearly a 
hundred of these have already symbolized their full consecration 
to the Lord and to obedience to His holy will. 

One of the primary means to accomplish these results 
was your wonderful PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION, which 



has been publicly presented in from one to five places at 

the same time on 279 days out of the 365 of the year, 

with a total attendance of more than 400,000. Although 

our economic circumstances caused the stopping of the 

DRAMA a few weeks ago, we have still a good hope, 

D.V., to be enabled to start this branch again very soon. 

The dear Colporteurs have also, by their energetic and 

faithful labor of love for the Truth, succeeded to such 

an extent that we have circulated 8,157 more cloth-bound 

copies of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES than we did during 

the previous year. One single Colporteur sister— physically 

not very strong— has sold 5,962 copies of the STUDIES 

this year. During the last three years and three months 

this same sister has sold 18,662 copies. 

The free Tract distribution, the Newspaper work and 
the regular Pilgrim service have also been carried on 

R5828 : page 9 

with the usual success. Six Swedish brethren have taken 
part in the Pilgrim service, and their work has been 
highly appreciated among the friends everywhere. The 
same can be said also respecting our Conventions, quite 
a number of which have been held in different parts of 
the country. Although a considerable decrease in the 
number of foreign subscriptions on the Swedish WATCH 
TOWER has taken place in the year, still the total number 
of its subscribers has not decreased in the least, but 
exceeds all previous figures. 

Our office work has grown immensely. As the book 
stock here was nearly exhausted just after October, 1914, 
we have during this year republished all six volumes of 
the STUDIES (in seven editions, or 73,500 copies), the 
MANNA book (4,000 copies), the DRAMA textbook (two 
editions, 13,000 copies), the free SCENARIOS (four editions, 
248,000 copies), pamphlets, etc. The correspondence 
has also grown to a considerable degree. The following 
figures will show you as to the exactness of these things. 

R5828 : page 10 

Respecting the future of our work, the outlook is (as 
we have chronologically passed our last Scriptural "landmark," 
and are surrounded by the roaring of the towering 
waves in the eddy of which present governments and 
institutions, already shaking and trembling, will soon be 
overthrown) more hidden than at earlier times, and our 
prospects are correspondingly in a still fuller degree built 
wholly and only on faith. Yet, we are of good courage, 
knowing that the Lord Himself shall never leave nor 
forsake any of those who are truly His, but shall overrule 
and make all things serve their highest and eternal 
interests, according to His own wisdom and love. Today 
the Truth friends in Sweden are not less (but probably 
more) determined than ever by the Lord's grace to remain 
faithful toward Him and His Cause, and to use all opportunities 



still remaining to proclaim His glorious Truth, 
until the final end, that we also, with yourself and all of 
His faithful followers, "in due time," may hear His 
blessed "Well done, good and faithful servants." 

We are continually more grateful than words can tell 
you, our beloved Brother Russell, for all the blessings 
and helps we have received through your faithful and 
important ministries in the Lord. You have indeed a 
large room in our hearts, and you are always with thankfulness 
and joy included in our prayers before the Throne 
of Heavenly Grace. 

Humbly but heartily conveying to you the warmest 
Christian love and greetings from all the Swedish 
brethren, I am 

Your brother and fellow-servant in the Lord, 
AUG. LUNDBORG. 

SUMMARY OF THE SWEDISH WORK 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, circulated at 

cost 41,280 

DRAMA SCENARIOS 1 1,993 

Various other books and booklets, MANNA, 

TABERNACLE SHADOWS, etc 7, 134 



Total 60,407 

EKO FRAN TALARSTOLEN (BIBLE STUDENTS 

MONTHLY), issued free 370,560 

Other free tracts and copies of the Swedish 

WATCH TOWER 69,286 

DRAMA SCENARIOS in Paper form, free 295,600 



Total 735,446 

Amounting in tract pages to 18,309,024 



Subscribers to the Swedish WATCH TOWER 2,363 

Sets of the SWEDISH TOWER, cloth bound 

and unbound 480 

Subscribers to EKO FRAN TALARSTOLEN 262 

Regular subscriptions for the Sermons in 

Swedish Newspapers 1,208 

Meetings held under the auspices of the 

Society 1,557 

Public PHOTO-DRAMA presentations 1,256 

Miles traveled in preaching tours 177,399 

Letters and cards sent out 10,104 

Letters and cards received 8,434 

Total number of various sendings out from 

the office 62,608 

EXPENDITURES 

Pilgrims, Conventions and 

other meetings Kr. 9,942.58 = $ 2,687.18 

Translations, printing, binding, 

paper, etc 51,835.43= 14,009.58 



Freight and postage 5,632.71= 1,522.35 

Helps to poor Colporteurs... 2,246.82= 607.25 

The newspaper service 1,444.30= 390.35 

Office expenses, rent, light, 

heat, etc 7,121.32= 1,924.68 

The PHOTO-DRAMA service 49,457.12= 13,366.79 



Total Kr. 127,680.28 =$34,508.18 

RECEIPTS 

Voluntary donations to 

Tract Fund Kr. 26,413.03 =$ 7,138.65 

Voluntary donations to 

DRAMA service 12,653.64= 3,419.90 

Swedish WATCH TOWER 

subscriptions 5,960.98= 1,611.08 

Sold books, pamphlets, etc.. 50,524.08 = 13,655.16 

Total Kr. 95,551.73 =$25,824.79 

Deficit 32,128.55= 8,683.39 

Kr. 127,680.28 =$34,508.18 



REPORT FROM FRANCE AND SWITZERLAND 

The Society's representative in its Geneva Office 
writes as follows: 

Dear Brother Russell:— It is with great joy and 
heartfelt gratitude toward our God and Father and toward 
our Savior Jesus Christ that I forward to you the yearly 
Report of the French work. We have learned in Christ's 
School to love our brethren. Our great wish is to progress 
in this line and, above all, to love the one whom our 
Savior has chosen as our Pastor to give us "meat in due 
season." We have at heart the French work, which we 
both cherish. It is, therefore, with special gratitude that 
we are able to thank our God, who has deigned to allow 
us to glorify His holy name amongst His French children, 
and to gather by means of the sharp sickle of Truth all 
those who are desirous of making a Covenant of Sacrifice. 
("Psalm 50:5\) This last year shows an increase in 
every branch, especially as regards public lectures, the 
total attendance being 30,795. Below find a statement of 
the Society's work during the past fiscal year: 

Letters and cards received 2,320 

Letters and cards sent out 1,397 

Volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES sold.... 854 

Various booklets sold 5,200 

Bibles and Concordances sold 102 

Free literature (B. S. M.) distributed 83,000 

Public meetings held 209 

Numbers in attendance 30,795 



Expenditures for public meetings 2,81 1 Frs. 

Total cash receipts 16,303.76 " 

Total expenditure 16,237 " 



Balance cash on hand 66.76 Frs. 



REPORT FROM BIBLE STUDENTS, HUNGARY 

Beloved Brother Russell:— 

I am very glad to write you, by the grace of the Lord, 
regarding the spreading of literature and books this year 
(1915), and of the many joys and blessings which God 
has bestowed on us in all the trials and testings of the 
past: 

SUMMARY 

Books circulated 1,650 

Booklets 600 

WATCH TOWERS 6,000 

BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLY, etc 40,000 

The issuance of Vol. II.-THE TIME IS AT HAND 
(Hungarian)— is in progress. 

Incoming letters, 957; outgoing, 725. 

207 have made a covenant with our Lord. 

Public meetings held 90 

Parlor meetings 4,700 

Meetings in the country 30 

A good number of Rumanian publications were 
circulated. 

We have received the books sent, and are very 
thankful. 

With great love, hope and faithfulness. 

Your colaborer and brother, 

CHARLESZ SZABO 

R5828 : page 1 1 

JAMAICA MISSION REPORT 

Number Pilgrims at work 5 

Places visited (no classes) 7 

Public meetings held 17 

Total attendance 777 

Number semi-private meetings 300 

Total attendance 2,944 

Number parlor meetings 104 

Total attendance 810 

Number of miles traveled 3,471 

Volumes of STUDIES IN SCRIPTURES sold... 500 
Free matter-BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLY 60,000 

R5829 : page 1 1 



WORK FOR THE BLIND 

GOULD FREE LIBRARY FOR THE BLIND, S. BOSTON, MASS. 
(WATCH TOWER Supervision.) 

Chapters of SCRIPTURE STUDIES loaned out. 1 0,654 
WATCH TOWERS, Pamphlets, and BIBLE 

STUDENTS MONTHLY 3,174 

Weekly Sermons 2,581 

Letters received 1,484 

Letters sent out 2, 176 

Sermons mailed to England 3,833 

Expenses $1,073.90 



R5829 : page 1 1 

HE ASCENDED, LEADING CAPTIVES 

—JANUARY 2.- ACTS 1:1-14\— 

FIVE SPECIAL POINTS OF THIS STUDY: (1) THE NUMBER 

OF APOSTLES LIMITED TO TWELVE; (2) THE IMPORTANCE OF 

THE KINGDOM TO COME; (3) IT WAS NOT THEN DUE 

TIME TO EXPLAIN THE TIME OF THE KINGDOM'S ESTABLISHMENT; 

(4) BEFORE THE KINGDOM WOULD COME 

THE DISCIPLES WOULD HAVE A GREAT WORK TO DO IN 

PROCLAIMING IT THROUGHOUT THE EARTH; (5) AS 

THE LORD'S ASCENSION WAS KNOWN TO FEW AND WAS WITHOUT 

COMMOTION, SO HIS SECOND COMING WOULD IN 

LIKE MANNER BE KNOWN TO FEW AND BE AS A THIEF. 

"When He ascended on High, He led a multitude of 
captives, and gave gifts unto men."— 'Ephesians 4:8\ 

OUR lesson is from the pen of St. Luke, as indicated 
by the first verse. ("Luke 1:3\) 
There are five special features to the Study. 
First is the declaration that the Apostles 
were only those whom Jesus had especially 
selected to that office— St. Paul, by Divine 
arrangement, subsequently taking the place 
of Judas. This is in contradiction to the 
claim of the Bishops of England and of 
Rome that they are Apostolic Bishops, with 
apostolic powers, but it is in full agreement with the Master's 
statement that all others claiming to be apostles are 
"liars."— v Revelation 2:2\ 

The second point of the lesson is that Jesus, before 
leaving His Apostles, instructed them concerning the 
Kingdom of God. This is in full accord with all the records 
of His previous teachings. Nearly all of His teachings 
were in respect to this wonderful Kingdom of God 



which will be established when He will come in power 
and great glory, and of which His invited disciples and 
followers are to be members— sharing His glory and His 
Throne, as His joint-heirs. 

The third point we notice especially is referred to in 
"Verses 6 and 7". The Apostles inquired respecting the 
Kingdom and the time for its blessing of Israel; but Jesus 
informed them that it was not for them to know the times 
and seasons respecting the Kingdom ("Acts 1:7")— that the 
matter was entirely in the Father's hands. The fourth 
point of our Study centers in "Verse 8", where the Lord 
declares that prior to the establishment of His Kingdom 
His Church would witness to it throughout the earth- 
after receiving the blessing at Pentecost. The fifth point 
of special notice centers in "Verse 1 1", in the statement of 
the angels, "This same Jesus. ..shall so come in like 
manner as ye have seen Him go into Heaven." 

WRONG VIEWS OF THE KINGDOM 

Peculiar and conflicting views respecting the Kingdom 
of God, the Kingdom of Messiah, are held by Protestants. 
Much more logical, but equally unscriptural, is the view 
held by Roman Catholics. The confusion of Protestants 
is lamentable. Some hold that somehow the Kingdom of 
God began at Pentecost; others hold that somehow it began 
when Jerusalem was destroyed; and yet all of them 
realize that the promises made by Jesus respecting His 
Second Advent must still be future. 

Roman Catholics hold that they set up the Kingdom of 
God about the year 800 A.D.; first, by dividing between 
clergy and laity, and exalting the clergy to be a special 
class; then, the Roman Church having great power, and 
the kings of earth being comparatively weak. Papacy established 
a spiritual rule over the kings and princes of 
the earth in the name of Christ— the Popes being recognized 
as Christ's vicegerants, as reigning instead of 
Christ, as His substitutes. 

The kings and princes of earth were informed that 
they might continue to rule the people if they would be 
obedient to the Papacy; that in that event they would be 
kingdoms of God; but that if they should fail to be 
obedient to Papacy, the latter would inform the people 
that such kings were no longer to be recognized, but were 
disowned by God's spiritual Kingdom, and would appoint 
other kings and other princes in their stead. The rulers 
of Europe readily assented to this partnership, by which 
the people would recognize them as having Divine authorization 
to rule. Matters have progressed in this way 
for eleven hundred years. Austria and Hungary still fully 
assent to the Divine power in Papacy— though others of 
the kingdoms of Europe have more or less broken the pact. 

Great Britain was one of the first to break with 
Papacy, under the leadership of King Henry VIII. He 
had a dispute with the Pope, and forthwith proceeded to 
organize the British people as another kingdom of God 



and the Church of England as a separate spiritual kingdom 
from Papacy; and the king himself and his successors 
became the heads of both the Church and the state. 
Lutheranism made similar progress in Scandinavia and 
amongst the German States. These acknowledged Lutheranism; 
and Lutheranism in turn acknowledged them as 
kingdoms of God. Thus today the kingdoms of this 
world are still kingdoms of God on the authority originally 
from Papacy and subsequently through Protestants. 

AN ERROR-CHRIST'S KINGDOM FUTURE 

All intelligent people. Catholics and Protestants, now 
perceive that a serious mistake was made— that the kingdoms 
of this world never were kingdoms of Christ, and 
that the name Christendom has been misapplied to them. 
That name signifies Christ's Kingdom; and it is very inappropriate 
to apply it to the warring nations of Europe, 
now seeking to blow each other off the face of the land 
and off the face of the sea. Moreover, the Apostle declares 
that "if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he 
is none of His," and tells us that the Spirit of Christ is 
manifest in meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, 
brotherly kindness, love.— 'Romans 8:9"; "Galatians 5:22,23'. 

We are sure that in all those warring nations there are 

R5829 : page 12 

saintly people who manifest the Spirit of Christ; but we 
are equally sure that the warring kingdoms themselves do 
not manifest this spirit, and are "none of His." On the 
contrary, they manifest what the Apostle styles, works of 
the flesh and of the Devil— anger, malice, hatred, envy, 
strife, bitterness. Bible students are convinced that the 
great war now started in Europe is the beginning of that 
great trouble which the Bible calls "Armageddon," and 
which the Bible declares will prepare mankind and usher 
them into the Kingdom of God's dear Son, which will be 
"the desire of all nations" ("Haggai 2:7"), and through 
which a Reign of Righteousness will be established 
throughout the whole earth. 

Jesus did not pretend to tell His people how long or 
how short the time would be before the establishment of 
His Kingdom. He declared the matter fully in the Divine 
care and not proper to be revealed to God's people then. 
But elsewhere He did tell them of certain indications that 
would be given them at the proper time, by which they 
would know, and be enabled to lift up their heads and rejoice. 
realizing that their deliverance was drawing nigh. 

Similarly we are not to understand that the Apostles 
expected Christ's Kingdom in their day, before their 
death. On the contrary, we remember that St. Paul, 
while foretelling his own death, declared that some of the 
Lord's people would not sleep in death, but would be alive 
at the Second Coming of Christ and be "changed in a 
moment, in the twinkling of an eye." ("1 Corinthians 15:51,52".) 



Similarly St. Peter, without attempting to 
tell of the times and seasons, declared that he put his 
message into writing and committed it to holy men for the 
benefit of the Church after his death.— ~ 2 Peter 1:15". 
Our Lord's words in Verse 8, to the effect that His 
followers would give a witness throughout the entire 
world, was a further demonstration that the Kingdom 
would not come in a few days or a few years, but would 
be long enough away to give opportunity for a full testimony 
of the Lord's favor to all people, nations, kindreds 
and tongues. And so it has been. 

"THIS SAME JESUS SHALL SO COME" 

Bible students are coming to notice the exact wording 
of the Scriptures more carefully than formerly. The 
statement that Jesus would so come again in like manner 
as they saw Him go into Heaven, has been generally 
taken to mean that Jesus would come a fleshly or human 
being. This would be a contradiction of the statement 
that He was put to death in flesh, but quickened, made 
alive, resurrected, in spirit. (" 1 Peter 3:18".) It would 
also contradict the Master's words that He was about to 
ascend up where He was before— to the spirit plane, or 
condition. It would also contradict His declaration, "Yet 

R5830 : page 12 

a little while, and the world seeth Me no more; but ye 
shall see Me."— "John 14:19". 

In a word, the entire tenor of Scripture is to the effect 
that when Jesus left the Heavenly glory and was made 
flesh, it was not the Divine intention that He should remain 
a fleshly being forever, but quite to the contrary— 
that He took this earthly condition for the suffering of 
death and would not need it afterward. Adam was a 
fleshly, human being; and, in order to be the Redeemer of 
Adam and his race, Jesus needed to be a perfect human 
being— "holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners." 
("Hebrews 7:26".) But there could be no reason why He 
must continue to be a fleshly being and out of touch with 
all the Heavenly conditions. 

When we remember that the perfect Adam was a little 
lower than the angels, we must see that the perfect man 
Jesus was also a little lower than the angels. But that He 
did not keep this lower condition is fully asserted by St. 
Paul, who, after telling about His faithfulness even unto 
death, declares, "Wherefore God hath highly exalted 
Him, and hath given Him a name above every name." 
("Philippians 2:9, 10".) The exalted Jesus is a spirit 
Being of the very highest order— "of the Divine nature" 
—who sat down at the Father's right hand, on the Father's 
Throne, waiting for the time when He would take His 
own Throne, establish the Millennial Kingdom and associate 
the Church with Him in His Throne as His Bride. 
"To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with Me in 



My Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down 
with My Father in His Throne."— "Revelation 3:21\ 

During the forty days after His resurrection, Jesus 
appeared and disappeared some ten or eleven times, mostly 
for a few moments each. Our lesson tells us that during 
these visits to His faithful He gave them instructions. He 
did not appear to them as a spirit being to strike them 
down with the glory of His presence, shining above the 
brightness of the sun, as He subsequently appeared to 
Saul of Tarsus. ("Acts 26:13".) On the contrary, He appeared 
as a man, sometimes in one form and sometimes in 
another form— as a gardener, as a traveler, etc. On two 
occasions He appeared in bodies similar to the one in 
which He had been crucified, showing the spear marks 
and the nail prints. These bodies were materialized in 
the upper room when the doors were shut; and of course 
clothing was materialized at the same time, for He was 
not naked. 

These manifestations of Jesus were for the purpose of 
demonstrating unquestionably to His disciples the fact 
that He was no longer dead. His appearance in different 
bodies was to prove that none of these bodies was His real 
spiritual body, but merely a manifestation. The Bible tells 
us of previous manifestations of the same kind when our 
Lord was a spirit being, before He became a man. Away 
back in Abraham's time, the Lord with two angels materialized 
and talked with Abraham and ate with him. 
("Genesis 18".) When Jesus arose from the dead, quickened 
in spirit. He had gotten back again to where He was 
before. The description of the resurrection change of 
the Church fits equally well to the Lord. He was sown 
in death— "in weakness, raised in power; sown in dishonor 
[a companion of thieves], raised in glory; sown an 
animal body, raised a spiritual body."—" 1 Cor. 15:42-44". 

"COME IN LIKE MANNER" 

It should be carefully noted that the angels did not 
say, "come in like form." The Lord departed from them 
in some kind of fleshly body, or form, which would enable 
them to see Him ascending into the clouds as they could 
not see His spirit body. The manner of Jesus' going did 
not appertain to His form. Our Lord's manner of going 
was quiet, secret, unknown to the world, known only to 
His disciples, without noise, without ostentation, without 
trumpets or bugles. He will so come in like manner- 
unknown to the world. He will be present as a thief in 
the night; and none will then know of His presence, except 
His disciples. 

How contrary all this is to what we once supposed, 
when we thought of our Savior as forever degraded to 
human conditions, which at their best are a little lower 
than the angelic! How sadly we misunderstood the matter 
when we used to sing: 

"Five bleeding wounds He bears. 



Received on Calvary; 
They pour effectual prayers. 
They strongly plead for me!" 

When we thus sang, we evidently did not understand the 

R5830 : page 13 

methods of the Lord's intercession for His saints any 
more than we understood His glorification as a spirit 
being, "far above angels." 

Now we understand that the seventh trumpet, with 
which He comes, is not a literal trumpet, but a symbolical 
one; and that like the preceding six, it makes 
no noise upon the air. Now we see that the world will not 
be conscious of the Master's Second Advent during the 
thief stage, nor until the Great Time of Trouble, when He 
shall be revealed in flaming fire, taking vengeance. 
("2 Thessalonians 1:9'.) What the world will then see will 
be the trouble; and gradually they will come to understand 
that the great King is identified with the trouble 
which will be making preparation for the establishment 
of the Reign of Righteousness by the overthrow of everything 
that is unrighteous. 



R5830 : page 13 

THE SPIRIT AT PENTECOST 

—JANUARY 9.- ACTS 2:1-13".— 

WHAT THE PENTECOSTAL BLESSING WAS-ITS IMPORTANCE 
TO THE CHURCH THEN AND NOW-THE LESSON IT TAUGHT- 
HOW UNDERSTOOD BY SOME AND MISUNDERSTOOD BY OTHERS. 

"Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that 
the Spirit of God dwelleth in you?"—" 1 Corinthians 3: 16". 

PENTECOST was a notable day in the Jewish 
calendar. It marked the fiftieth day in the 
harvest— after the gathering of the first ripe 
sheaf. Our Lord in His glorious resurrected 
condition was the Antitype of that 
sheaf, the First-fruit of God in the great 
Plan of Redemption. The first forty days, 
as we have seen, were used in giving occasional 
lessons to the disciples— helping them 
over the difficulties of their position, getting 
them properly started, with proper faith in the resurrection, 
to make a good witness and to gather out the Lord's 
jewels from amongst men. But when Jesus left them at 
the end of the forty days. He instructed them not to 
begin their ministry at once, but to wait until they would 
be endued with power from on High— by the Holy Spirit. 



Accordingly, they waited ten days, and then their waiting 
was rewarded by the outpouring of His Spirit upon 
them in the upper room on the fiftieth day, Pentecost. 
They did transact just one item of business during those 
ten days; but it was without authority from the Lord, and 
was never recognized by Him. It consisted in casting 
lots for a successor to Judas. As they cast lots on only 
two men, it followed that one of the two must be the 
choice of the lots. But the Lord never recognized the 
matter, and we hear nothing more of Matthias whom they 
chose. Instead, in due time God brought forth St. Paul 
—"not a whit behind the very chiefest of the Apostles." 

APPEARED IN GOD'S PRESENCE 

When our Lord ascended, the Apostle declares. He 
appeared in the presence of God for us— for His Church, 
for all who would comply with the terms and conditions 
of discipleship. ('Hebrews 9:24".) He did not appear 
for the world, but merely for us. He loved the world. He 
died for the world, and He is yet to bless the world; but 
the time for the blessing of the world must wait until 
first the Divine Program in respect to the Church shall 
have been carried out. 

How much of our Lord's time was spent in going to 
the Heavenly Throne, and how much of the ten days 
was necessary for the return of the Holy Spirit, we do 
not know; but we do know from the Apostle's words that 
the Holy Spirit sent forth upon the waiting disciples in 
the upper room was the testimony to them that Jesus' 
work was satisfactory to the Father, that the Father gave 
the Holy Spirit to Him for His Church, and that Jesus 
shed it forth.-" Acts 2:33". 

The events of that day of Pentecost were very valuable 
to the Church at that time, but have been equally 
valuable to all of the Lord's members. The Scriptures 
represent that all who are received into God's family 
receive a begetting of the Holy Spirit; and this begetting 
was what Pentecost meant to those waiting ones in the 
upper room. From that time onward they were sons of 
God; and "if children, then heirs, heirs of God and joint-heirs 
with Jesus Christ" their Lord. ("Romans 8:17".) 
And so it is with us who have come into the Body of 
Christ since Pentecost. We do not receive special manifestations 
of Divine power, such as the cloven tongues 
that came upon those disciples; but we do receive from 
God the same Holy Spirit which they received. 

MEANING OF THE PENTECOSTAL BLESSING 

The Lord represents Jesus and His Church under the 
figure of a great Priest— Jesus was the Head of that 
Priest; the Apostles were the first members of the Body, 

R5831 :page 13 



under the Head; and all the Church of Christ from then 
till now are members in particular of the same Body, the 
same Church. The Holy Spirit came with an outward 
manifestation upon Jesus, the Head of the Church, that 
we might know thus that He was accepted by the Father. 
Then at Pentecost the Holy Spirit came with an outward 
manifestation upon the disciples, in order that they might 
know that they had been received into the same fellowship, 
as members of the same Body. 

But it was not necessary for us to have an outward 
demonstration today; for this pouring out of God's blessing 
was upon the Church as a whole; and as we come into 
the Church of Christ by a full consecration of our hearts 
to do the Lord's will, and with full trust in the work of 
Jesus, we receive the Spirit and are counted in as members 
of that Church Body, though without any outward 
demonstration whatever. 

We can see a necessity for the outward demonstration 
in the case of the Apostles for two reasons: First, they 
were Jews, and had believed in Jesus, had made their 
consecration and had been received into discipleship by 
Him. But the Father could not receive any into sonship 
until after Jesus had died. Additionally, the Father could 
not recognize any human beings as His children and grant 
them full forgiveness of sins, full reconciliation and an 
entrance into His family, until Jesus, as the great High 
Priest, had not only died, but had ascended up on High 
and proffered or made applicable the merit of His death 
on our behalf. And so we read respecting the Apostles 
before Christ's death: "The Holy Spirit was not yet 
given, because Jesus was not yet glorified."— s John 7:39 s . 

There had been no human sons of God recognized 
from the lime Adam, the first of these sons, sinned, until 
Jesus came as the Son of God. The Jews were members 
of the House of Servants, as we read: "Moses verily 
was faithful in all His House as a servant, for a testimony 
of those things which were to be spoken after; but 
Christ as a Son over His own House, whose House are 
we." (^Hebrews 3:5, 6 s .) The Pentecostal blessing, therefore, 

R5831 : page 14 

was the beginning of the recognition of the followers 
of Jesus as sons of God and heirs of God's promise. 

GIFTS AND FRUITS OF THE SPIRIT 

Another matter: At Pentecost the Lord gave gifts to 
the Apostles, and to the remainder of the Church through 
them. These gifts were represented in the ability to 
speak with various tongues and in power to perform 
miracles— heal the sick, etc. Evidently these gifts were 
necessary for the establishment of the Church; but they 
must have all expired when the Apostles, through whom 
alone they were bestowed upon others, fell asleep in death. 
But while God has not continued the gifts with the 



Church, He has promised something still better; i.e., the 
fruits of the Spirit. The fruits are more valuable than 
the gifts, because they represent character and not merely 
powers.— ' 1 Corinthians 12:31; 13\ 

The fruits of the Spirit are meekness, gentleness, 
patience, long-suffering, brotherly kindness, love; and 
these evidence that the individual possessing them has 
become a member of the Church of Christ, and has been 
begotten of the Holy Spirit. Much therefore as we rejoice 
that the Apostles had the gifts and afterwards cultivated 
the fruits, we are glad that we now have the fruits 
of the Spirit. 

One of the gifts of the Spirit was manifested by one of 
the Apostles immediately— the power of speaking with unknown 
tongues. They were all Galileans, and therefore 
used to only the one dialect. The testimony, however, is 
that under the Divine power of the Holy Spirit they spoke 
in various languages so that the people of the countries 
represented by those languages understood clearly and 
were astonished, saying, "Are not all these which speak 
Galileans, and how hear we every man in our own 
tongue?"-" Acts 2:7, 8\ 

We are not to understand that the miracle was in the 
hearing, but in the speaking. It was not that all the 
people from the different lands heard the same utterance, 
as though it had been in their own language, as stated for 
them, but that the different Apostles speaking these different 
tongues were all heard by the people and appreciated 
by the people who used those tongues. It was a 
miracle, surely, and had the designed effect. Not merely 
was it a convincing power and experience for the Apostles 
themselves and for the other believers of that time, but 
it became a witness to the holy Jews who had gathered 
at Jerusalem from all the nations of the world. 

These annual gatherings at Jerusalem were directly 
commanded by the Lord through Moses, and were observed 
by all the Jews who remained loyal to God and 
His Word. If they had moved into other countries and 
were located there for business reasons, they nevertheless 
came regularly every year to Jerusalem to worship 
the Lord. It was these reverential people who were especially 
blessed at Pentecost. For although some of the 
number tried to explain away the phenomenon by saying 
that the Apostles had evidently drunk too freely of grape 
juice, new wine, nevertheless, apparently the majority of 
those who heard were provoked with such an interpretation 
and took more readily to what the Apostles said, and 
realized in time that they were all telling the same 
glorious Message of the love of God, though telling it in 
various languages, so that all present might understand. 

A TEMPLE OF GOD 

The figure of a temple is variously used in respect to 
the Church. Each Christian is spoken of as being a 
temple of the Holy Spirit after he receives the begetting 



of the Spirit. Each congregation might be considered 
the Temple of God. And the Church as a whole when 
gathered to the Heavenly condition will be God's Temple, 
in that God will dwell in them. According to another 
figure, each Christian is a living stone in preparation for 
the great Temple of the future, now being chiseled, 
polished, made ready for his place in the Temple above. 

The thought is that as God in olden times was represented 
in the Tabernacle by the Shekinah glory of the 
Most Holy, and was also represented in the literal temple 
of Jerusalem, so He is represented now in all those who 
are begotten by His Holy Spirit, and will be represented 
further by all who walk in harmony with their spirit-begetting 
and continue to abide in the Lord's love. 



R5831 :page 14 

ST. PETER'S PENTECOSTAL SERMON 

—JANUARY 16.-' ACTS 2:21-39\— 

THE SIGNIFICATION OF PENTECOST-SPEAKING WITH OTHER 
TONGUES-ST. PETER'S EXPLANATION OF THIS-DAVID NOT 
ASCENDED TO HEAVEN-HE SPAKE NOT OF HIMSELF, BUT 
PROPHETICALLY OF JESUS' RESURRECTION-PRICKED TO 
THE HEART-OTHER FIGURATIVE EXPRESSIONS-NONE 
TO BE SAVED IN IGNORANCE, THOUGH JESUS DIED FOR ALL. 

"Whosoever shall call on the name of 
the Lord shall be saved."— v Acts 2:21\ 

TODAY'S lesson is a most interesting Bible 
Study; for it covers a wide range of Truth. 
The Apostles, in harmony with Jesus' instructions, 
had waited in the upper room for 
the Pentecostal blessing, as necessary to 
their qualification before beginning their 
great work as the representatives and 
mouthpieces of Jesus and Jehovah. It came 
on the fiftieth day after Jesus' resurrection, 
in harmony with the type.— 'Leviticus 23: 15-2T; 
"1 Corinthians 15:20". 

The Apostles received the begetting of the Holy Spirit 
and with it certain outward manifestations of miraculous 
power, which in turn they were privileged to communicate 
to all believers by the laying on of their hands. These 
special "gifts of the Spirit" were evidently intended to 
assist in the establishment of the Church and to mark 
the Apostles as the special representatives of God. These 
were but eleven in number, until St. Paul was received 
of the Lord, and became "not one whit behind the very 
chiefest of the Apostles." ("2 Cor. 12:1 P.) We have these 
Apostles still with us, represented by their teachings. 

Although, later on, certain Bishops of the Church 



claimed to be Apostles also, they never have had any authority 
according to the Bible, never have been able to 
convey any of the miraculous gifts and are referred to 
by Jesus as falsely claiming authority which they do not 
possess. (" Revelation 2:2\) With the death of the 
Apostles and the death of those to whom they had committed 
these gifts, all such gifts necessarily ceased, being 
supplanted by the fruits of the Spirit, developed through 
knowledge, faith and obedience. 

SYNOPSIS OF ST. PETER'S SERMON 

The eleven Apostles, exercising their gift of tongues, 
began to talk to the assembled crowd of Jews who were 
worshiping at Jerusalem— not merely residents of Palestine, 

R5831 : page 15 

but thousands from all parts of the world, gathered 

at Jerusalem at that season in harmony with the demands 

of the Law, to worship the Lord. From their 

dress, etc., the Apostles were recognized as Galileans. 

Much astonishment therefore was manifested when they 

were heard talking in the various tongues of the various 

nations. At first some thought that they were intoxicated 

and uttering merely peculiar sounds; but presently 

the multitude began to gather themselves to one and another 

of the Apostles as they heard their own language 

spoken. This not only called attention to the Apostles, 

but also manifested a Divine power and made their 

R5832 : page 15 

Message the more impressive. 

The essence of the preaching was that Jesus, who had 
been crucified, had risen from the dead and had now shed 
forth this miraculous power upon His followers. This led 
to the mention of the prophecy of David which foretold 
the resurrection of Messiah, saying, "Thou wilt not leave 
My soul in Sheol"-Hades. fPsalm 16:10'; 'Acts 2:27\) 
The Apostles pointed out that this was fulfilled in Jesus, 
in that God raised Him from the dead; but that it was 
never fulfilled in the Prophet David, who on the contrary 
was still dead in his sepulchre, awaiting resurrection. 
David, as a prophet, had merely foretold the resurrection 
of Jesus. 

With various details the preaching went on, explaining 
the righteousness of Jesus, the beauties of His teaching, 
the wickedness of those who had crucified Him without a 
cause, and showing how the entire Jewish nation was 
guilty before God, because as a people they were bound 
by their Law Covenant and the action of their officials 
had brought condemnation and guilt upon the whole 
people. Three thousand believed. The case was so 
plain that they were pricked to the heart— they realized 
that Jesus was the Son of God, and that a great crime 



had been committed in crucifying Him. With fear and 
sorrow they cried out, "What shall we do?" The answer 
was, "Repent"— God is gracious; He will forgive you. 
In further explanation, they were told that they and their 
rulers had done this wicked deed in ignorance, and that 
God would very graciously forgive those who would 
acknowledge their sin and call upon Him for forgiveness. 
They did so; they made a consecration of their 
lives to God, and became followers of Jesus. 

DIVINE FAVOR ABOUT TO RETURN TO ISRAEL 

The Bible declares that the Jewish people, because of 
their rejection of Messiah, were cut off from God's 
favor. Nevertheless the time is at hand when they shall 
be brought back again to the favor of God. Their eyes 
have been holden for more than eighteen centuries now, 
as are the eyes of the world in general. Only the few 
have the eyes of their understanding open to see the 
Truth respecting these matters. St. Paul avers this, saying, 
"The god of this world hath blinded the minds of 
them that believe not."— v 2 Corinthians 4:4\ 

But through the Prophet, God has assured us that in 
due time all the blind eyes will be opened and all the deaf 
ears will be unstopped. (" Isaiah 35:5'.) To the Jew first, 
and also to the Gentile, will eventually come a full 
knowledge of the grace of God through Christ. It will 
then be for them to accept or reject intelligently. The 
rejectors will be wicked in a sense that none of the world 
are wicked now, because their wrong-doings are largely 
based upon ignorance and superstition. When brought 
to the full light, their crisis, or judgment, will be to everlasting 
life if they accept and obey the Lord, or to everlasting 
death if they sin against and wilfully reject the 
light and opportunities of that blessed Millennial Day. 

Respecting the Jews in that coming time, it is written 
that they shall look upon Him whom they pierced, and 
mourn because of Him; and that the Lord at that time 
will pour upon them the spirit of prayer and of supplication. 
CZechariah 12:8-10\) But that return of God's 
favor to Natural Israel will not come until Spiritual Israel 
shall first have been completed. Bible Students believe 
that we are now at the dawning of the New Dispensation, 
that the Church class will soon be completed and 
glorified with the Savior in His Kingdom, and that then, 
forthwith, God's mercy will begin to operate toward the 
Jews again. This seems to be the clear teaching of 
St. Paul in "Romans 1 1:25-32". 

THE CURSE TO BE ROLLED AWAY 

Another item of special importance in the lesson is 
that the Hell to which Jesus went was not Hell-fire, 
but the grave, the state of death. God did not raise Him 
up from the Fire, but raised Him from the dead. We are 
to remember that this same word— Hell, Sheol, Hades— 



is used in the Bible respecting all mankind. All the good 
and the bad— old and young, male and female, of every 
nation— go down to the Bible Hell; and according to the 
Bible they sleep there, awaiting the resurrection Morning 
and the awakening of all the dead— "every man in 
his own order"— not all at once.— * 1 Corinthians 15:23". 
The Bible represents that we are now in a night time, 
in which Satan is "the prince of this world," and Sin 
and Death reign. But it pictures the New Dispensation 
of Messiah's Kingdom as the glorious dawning of the 
New Day of blessing for mankind, in which the curse of 
sin and death will be rolled away and the blessing of the 
Lord through Messiah's Kingdom will extend to every 
member of the race, giving all an opportunity for eternal 
life. This will not be the same opportunity that is granted 
to the Church at the present time— not an opportunity 
for glory, honor and immortality on the spirit plane, as 
the Church have— but an opportunity of returning to 
human perfection, to all that was lost in Eden and redeemed 
at Calvary. 

OUR GOLDEN TEXT-ITS BEAUTY 

Here we note the beauty of the 21st verse— our Golden 
Text. The death of Jesus guarantees that all who will 
call upon the Lord in sincerity of heart will be saved 
from sin and death. It guarantees that all shall be brought 
to the condition where they will understand sufficiently 
to desire to call for this blessing. The heathen, the majority 
of people of civilized lands, and the Jews, have no 
such hearing ears now. Only the few out of every nation 
have yet received this great blessing. Only these, brought 
back into relationship with God, have yet been rescued 
from their alienated condition; and they are to be ultimately 
saved in the First Resurrection, to glory, honor, 
immortality and a share in the Kingdom of Messiah. 
Through these, ultimately the blessing of light and knowledge 
and uplifting influences will reach every member 
of the race, to afford all an opportunity for life everlasting 
in a world-wide Eden. 



CASTLES 



Let them that would build castles in the air. 

Vault thither, without step or stair; 

Instead of feet to climb, take wings to fly. 

And think their turrets top the sky. 

But let me lay all my foundations deep. 

And learn, before I run, to creep. 

Who digs through rocks to lay his ground-works low. 

May in good time build high and sure, though slow. 

CHRISTOPHER HARVEY. 



page 16 

International Bible Students Association Classes 
STUDIES AND LECTURES BY MEMBERS OF THE PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 17 

VOL. XXXVII. JANUARY 15 NO. 2 
A. D. 1916-A.M. 6044 



CONTENTS 

"Lord, Teach Us to Pray" 19 

Knowledge of Truth Necessary . . 19 

Our Lives to Be a Prayer .... 20 

Conditions of Effective Prayer . .21 

The Kingdom at the Door .... 23 
Natural Israel Not Heirs to Spiritual 
Promises 24 

No Spiritual Promises Before Christ . 24 

Called by God to Highest Place . . 24 

144,000 Called 25 

"And Sitting Down, They Watched Him" . . 25 

The Sons of God 26 

St. Peter's Sermon on Restitution . . 27 
Obeying God Rather Than Men .... 28 

The Value of Moderation 29 

Some Interesting Items 30 

Sharp P. O. Censorship .... 30 

Eureka Drama Work 30 

An Indian's Enthusiasm for the Truth . 3 1 

"An Ecclesiastical Battle" ... 31 

page 18 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



BRETHREN WILL KINDLY REMEMBER 

All checks and money orders of the Society should be 
made out and sent to the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT 
SOCIETY, and not to individuals. 

Write as plainly as possible— especially your name and 
full address at the head of each letter. 

Orders for books, etc., should be on a sheet of paper 
separate from your letter. 

If you have occasion to reply to one of our letters and see 
it marked "File A," or "File R," etc., please include this in 
the address on the envelope, so that your letter may reach the 
correspondent who wrote to you. 

We thank our readers for interesting clippings sent in 
from time to time during the past year— especially for those 
which gave the date and name of paper from which they 
were clipped. 

We have Volunteer matter ready now for 1916. Orders 
are being filled as received. Do not allow valuable time to 
slip by unimproved. The people are hearing and reading now 
as never before. 

MONEY BY MAIL UNSAFE 

A money order costs little and is safe. Plain writing 
of your full address is also a safeguard. 



I. B. S. A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR THE MONTH OF FEBRUARY 

Questions from Manual on Series Third of 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
STUDIES III.-IV. 

Week of February 6..Q.21 to 28 Week of February 20..Q.37 to 44 
Week of February 13..Q.29to36 Week of February 27.. Q. 1 to 7 

Question Manuals on Vol. III., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 5c. each; 
or 50c. per dozen, postpaid. 



R5832 : page 19 

"LORD, TEACH US TO PRAY" 

"Pray without ceasing; in everything 

give thanks."—" 1 Thessalonians 5: 17. 18'. 

IN THE beginning, when Adam was in harmony 
with God, he was in the condition 
represented in the Scriptures as covenant 
relationship with God. The Word declares 
that Adam broke this holy Covenant. 
("Hosea 6:7", margin.) He became a sinner; 
and his children, born later, were 
sinners with him, through heredity. Instead 
of being born in covenant relationship 
with God, the children of Adam were born 
aliens. But God has had dealings with a few who exercised 
special faith and a desire to come into harmony 
with Him. Abel, the second son of Adam, was one of 
these. He approached God with an animal sacrifice and 
was accepted. Enoch and Noah also came into a condition 
of fellowship with the Lord by faith, even though 
they were still legally under the condemnation passed 
upon Adam, the Ransom-price not yet having been given. 

Later on, God entered into covenant relationship 
with Abraham, because of his great faith and obedience; 
and afterwards with his son Isaac; then with his grandson 
Jacob. Still later, God entered into relationship with 
the seed of Jacob, under the Law Covenant at Sinai. 
The Lord had changed the name of Jacob to Israel— "a 
prince with God" ('Genesis 32:24-30"); and the whole 
nation of Israel, the descendants of Jacob, were received 
as God's people, and were treated as if without sin. They 
had the privilege of going to Him in prayer. But the 
sins of the Jewish nation were only typically blotted out 
from year to year. The blood of bulls and goats could 
never really take away sin, and the Jews held only the 
relationship of servants to God. 

The Gentiles were altogether without God. They had 
no privilege of prayer. We come down to the beginning 
of the Gospel Age and to the case of Cornelius. We 
read that he was a just man, who gave much alms to 
the people and prayed always. But his prayers could not 
be accepted, even after Jesus died. The death of Jesus 
did not bring Cornelius into covenant relationship with 
God. But when the seventy symbolic weeks of Jewish 
favor had been fulfilled, the due time had come for the 
Gospel to go to the Gentiles. God was then ready to receive 
him, and He sent an angel to him, who gave him 
this message from the Lord: "Cornelius, thy prayers and 
thine alms have come up for a memorial before God." 
The prayers and the alms of Cornelius had risen up as 
an incense before the Lord. 



R5833 : page 19 

Had God not accepted these offerings before? No. 
They had been noted of God, but had not been received. 
God's way of receiving— except in a limited or typical 
way previous to the Gospel Age— is by certain definite 
means which He has appointed— through an Advocate 
in this Age, and through a Mediator in the next. "No 
man cometh unto the Father but by Me," says Jesus. 
Even when the due time had arrived, Cornelius could 
not come until God sent him word how to proceed. 

KNOWLEDGE OF TRUTH NECESSARY 

The angel of the Lord said to Cornelius: "Send men 
to Joppa, and call for one Simon, whose surname is 
Peter, who shall tell thee words whereby thou and all 
thy house shall be saved." ("Acts 1 1:13,14".) Those words 
were necessary to his saving— to the bringing of him 
into covenant relationship with God. Cornelius, being 
obedient, sent for Simon Peter, who gave him the necessary 
instruction for drawing nigh unto God through 
Jesus. And unless we come to the Father through Christ, 
our prayers would not be received any more than those 
of Cornelius had been. 

What St. Peter told Cornelius was to the effect that 
God had provided a great Sin-Offering; that Jesus had 
tasted death for every man; that now, in advance of 
dealing with the world, God is taking out a Little Flock, 
to be joined with Christ in the blessing of the world. 
When Cornelius heard the good Message, he believed 
with all his heart; and likewise those who were with him. 
Doubtless he had heard of Jesus before, but now he 
understood the matter. He had been in the right condition 
of heart all along. He had been praying and fasting. 
But even so he could not be accepted of God except 
through Jesus. He must have Christ as his Advocate. 

HOW JESUS BECOMES OUR ADVOCATE 

But what does it mean to have Jesus as our Advocate? 
It means that first, we must accept Him as our Ransom 
from sin and death. Next, He tells us, "If any man will 
be My disciple, let him deny himself, and take up his 
cross and follow Me." By merely believing that Jesus 
died, and that He was holy, etc., no one can become His 
disciple. "The devils also believe, and tremble." But 
justification to life comes when we receive the Lord on 
His terms. Then He becomes our Advocate. 

No one has a right to expect an answer to prayer except 
one who has become a disciple of Christ through 
full consecration. And whosoever cometh to the Father 
by Him shall in no wise be cast out. ("John 6:37".) There 
is but one exception to this rule, and this is a class of 
minors, children lacking the full age of responsibility 



R5833 : page 20 

and of comprehension of these matters, one or both of 

whose parents are disciples of Christ. That age of responsibility 

would vary— in some it might be from twelve 

to fifteen years of age, and in some even later. But 

whoever reaches the point of full comprehension and 

responsibility, and does not consecrate himself to the 

Lord, would lose the privilege of prayer. In the case, 

then, of a minor child, either of whose parents is consecrated, 

he would have a right to look for answers to his 

prayers to God. 

The Lord does not hinder any one from bowing the 
knee. Savages do so right along, but their prayers do 
not ascend up to God. The Jews were at one time an 
exception as regards prayer, but they were a typical 
people. That arrangement, however, was temporary, and 
has passed away. But soon they will again have the 
privilege of prayer, through the great Mediator; and all 
the world may join them in this privilege. Jesus will 
not be the Advocate for the world. This arrangement 
is only for the Church of the present Age. 

OUR LIVES TO BE A PRAYER 

Prayer seems to be the natural attitude of the human 
mind toward the Almighty. Even the heathens have a 
disposition to pray. Their fears, their hopes, all lead 
them to appeal to some great Power beyond themselves. 
But the people of God, who know of His Wisdom, Power 
and Love, and who have met the conditions of acceptable 
prayer, are alone authorized to come to the Throne of 
Grace. We realize what a blessing it is to have access 
to God, access to His presence— to have the ear of the 
Almighty Ruler of the Universe. We know that with 
the emperors and kings of earth it is very difficult to gain 
a hearing; and that with people of great prominence it 
is not easy to secure an audience. Yet the great God has 
made provision that His people may come to Him and 
make their petitions known. 

The unrepentant sinner cannot come to God. But 
Divine Wisdom has made arrangement by which the 
sinner can get rid of his sin, and can then come to Him 
in prayer and communion. The Jews had typical sacrifices, 
a typical Atonement Day, and a typical forgiveness 
of sins. But the forgiveness of our sins, through the 
merit of Christ's sacrifice, is actual, and brings us to the 
place of acceptableness with the Father. He is pleased 
to have His children come to Him in prayer. And it is 
our glad privilege to offer Him worship and praise— the 
homage of our hearts. 

We would make a distinction between worship and 
prayer. Worship is a bowing down, an acknowledgment 
of the majesty of God, an act of reverence, of adoration. 
But prayer is the offering of a petition. So when the 



Lord's people are encouraged in His Word to come to 
Him in prayer, it is with the understanding that they are 
informed before they come as to what is pleasing to God 
for them to request. We have an example given of what 
a proper prayer would be in the one which our Lord 
taught His disciples. 

The Holy Spirit is the blessing most to be sought. 
This Spirit of God may be possessed in a greater or a 
lesser measure. We are given a measure of the Spirit 
when we are accepted as the disciples of Christ; and 
that flame of love there started is to become a consuming 
power in our lives. It is to burn out everything contrary 
to God, that our life may be a burning and shining light. 
In proportion as we recognize that we are deficient in the 
Spirit of righteousness, the Spirit of Truth, in that same 
proportion we should be importunate in prayer. Whoever 
realizes his need, and knows the Source from which 
he can obtain the needed supply, will come to the Throne 
of Heavenly Favor. We are not to neglect the duties 
and responsibilities of life in order to spend much time 
each day upon our knees, but our entire life is to be a 
ceaseless prayer. 

From the time we become the Lord's children, we 
should strive more and more to attain the character-likeness 
to Christ, and we should continue in prayer and 
not faint. We should seek for more and more of the 
Spirit of the Lord, and should see that we fulfil the conditions 
by which we may obtain the filling of the Spirit. 
In this sense of the word, we should pray without ceasing, 
continuing to present the petition until we receive what 
we desire. But we shall not obtain the fulness of our 
desire until we are changed into the higher life, into the 
perfection of the new nature, in the resurrection. Then 
we shall pray no more. Then we shall be fully satisfied. 
Prayer will be swallowed up of praise. 

OUR LORD'S SAMPLE PRAYER 

In the prayer taught us by our Lord, we first give 
honor to God, recognizing Him as our Father, acknowledging 
His greatness, and expressing the desire that His 
Name be hallowed. We remember the Kingdom that is 
promised; and we tell Him of our desire of heart for that 
Kingdom to come. We pray that His will may be fully 
done on earth. This implies that we have given up our 
own will, that we wish to have God's will wholly done 
in our mortal bodies. 

In this prayer there is a brief mention of our daily 
temporal needs: "Give us this day our daily bread"— no 
stipulation of fruits and vegetables, of delicacies, etc.— 
but simply our necessities for the day. We ask no more— 
we wish no more. Then we pray that our trespasses may 
be forgiven, EVEN AS WE FORGIVE. Finally comes the 
petition for our protection from evil influences. This 
expresses the appreciation of the fact that there are 
temptations from those with whom we have contact, and 



from the powers of evil— the powers of the air— and 
from our own flesh; and that we need Divine aid. The 
petitions of this prayer, however, are very brief. 

BECOMING MODESTY IN PRAYER 

It would seem as though many have a wrong conception 
of prayer. We hear some people trying to tell the 
Lord tilings that He knows better than they. It is always 
improper, even in our intercourse with men, to tell a 
person better educated than ourselves anything about 
that which he knows far better than we. Jesus and the 
Apostles never undertook to give any instructions to the 
Father regarding His Plan, so far as we know. And 
when any one attempts to give the Lord instructions, he 
deceives neither the Lord nor others who hear; for He 
knows and they know that such a one is not addressing 
God, but the people. We have before mentioned an announcement 
in a Boston paper that on a certain occasion 
"Rev. So-and-so delivered the most beautiful prayer ever 
offered to a Boston audience." 

Undoubtedly if we had the right conception of prayer 
—the Bible conception— our prayers in public would be 
very brief. The Scriptures are the only criterion, the 
only guide. They give us no account of any instance 
where the Lord's saints offered lengthy prayers in public. 
Praying in an unknown tongue would also be valueless, 
the Apostle Paul tells us, unless some one present interpret 
the same; and if one prays in an incoherent manner, 
so that he cannot be understood by those who hear, 
prayer might as well be offered in an unknown tongue. 

R5834 : page 21 

"How shall any say. Amen, at thy giving of thanks, seeing 
he understandeth not what thou sayest? While this 
shows that the Lord wishes us to take into consideration 
the hearers, we are not to pray to them, but are to turn 
the thoughts of all toward God, to an appreciation of His 
Goodness, of His Wisdom, Love and Mercy. 

Leaving out all thought of teaching the people at 
that time, we should seek to direct all in a reverent manner 
to the Throne of Heavenly Grace, in thought, that 
they may humble themselves before God. That which 
Christian people sometimes attempt to do in prayer 
should be done in preaching. According to the declaration 
of the Word, it has not pleased God to save by 
prayer those who believe, but by preaching. ('Romans 10:14'; 
" 1 Corinthians 1:21\) This does not mean necessarily 
public speaking, but includes also more private 
proclamation of the Truth and also preaching by the 
printed page. We are to follow the direction of the 
Word in all ways. 

While we thus speak of public prayer, and in respect 
to the propriety of brevity, and of the examples of Scripture 
concerning this, we would not give the thought that 



one should be limited in his private devotions. He who 
was perfect set us an example of private prayer. Our 
Lord sometimes prayed all night. But we presume that 
with the most of us it would be better not to do this; 
for we would be weaker for service the next day. In 
our weakness and imperfection we are probably not able 
to appreciate the peculiar position of our Lord. We 
would have nothing that we could say to the Lord which 
would keep us all night in prayer, except that which 
would be repetition. And our Master said: "Use not 
vain repetition"— "Your Father knoweth what things 
ye have need of before ye ask Him." We are to ask 
rather for the condition of heart whereby we may be 
able to receive whatever He shall see fit to send, that we 
may get a blessing out of each of the Lord's providences. 
So, then, summing up the matter, our petitions in public 
should be modeled considerably after the sample our 
Lord gave His disciples— a brief expression of earnest 
desire for the coming of God's Kingdom, an acknowledgment 
of sin, a request for Divine forgiveness and help 
and supply of our needs, and a rendering of worship and 
praise. We think this should be about the range of our 
private devotions also, as a rule, respecting ourselves. 
It is eminently appropriate, however, that we remember 
one another at the Throne of Grace in private, and in a 
general way in public. But evidently the instruction of 
Scripture is that we should not seek to use prayer as a 
means to gain earthly favors, or tell the Lord what we 
wish done, or to be heard of men, but that we are to put 
first the spiritual things, the things for which we have 
been instructed to pray. 

CONDITIONS OF ACCEPTABLE, EFFECTIVE PRAYER 

When Jesus said to His disciples, "If ye then, being 
evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, 
how much more shall your Heavenly Father give the 
Holy Spirit to them that ask Him," He was setting before 
them a glorious standard in respect to the Heavenly 
Father. But later on, this standard was very largely 
lost. During the Dark Ages the God of Love was made 
to appear anything but loving and kind, and as having 
no real interest in the majority of His creatures. It was 
made to appear that the few in whom He had an interest 
were those who were relentless, cruel and vicious toward 
all outside their pale. 

How terribly our God has been maligned by those 
who have claimed to be His special representatives! How 
differently was He depicted by the Son who knew Him 
so well! Hear Him: "Be ye like unto your Father which 
is in Heaven; for He is kind unto the unthankful and to 
the evil." When the Apostles asked Jesus whether they 
should call fire to come down from Heaven upon the 
Samaritans who refused to sell them bread, what was 
the Master's reply? "Ye know not what manner of spirit 
ye are of! The Son of Man came not to destroy men's 



lives, but to save them." And He was the Image of the 
Father, and came not to do His own will. 

Man is in a sadly fallen condition and needs to be 
restored to the image of God, to the likeness of God, to 
the condition of love, mercy and sympathy of which God 
is the embodiment. Yet, notwithstanding our fallen condition, 
parents love to give good gifts to their children. 
What parent, if his child should ask for a fish, would 
give him a serpent? Or if he should ask for bread, would 
give him a stone? And as we have received these traits 
from the Lord, and still have them to a considerable 
extent even in our blemished condition, we may form 
some idea of how He who is the Perfect One, the Infinite 
One, would delight to give good gifts to His children 
—"How much more shall your Father in Heaven 
give good things to them that ask Him?" And His very 
best things are the spiritual things. 

PROSPECTIVE SONS BEFORE PENTECOST 

We are to remember that our Lord when on earth 
was in the fullest sense the Representative of the Father 
in the flesh. He was indeed "God manifest in the flesh." 
And those who were of the right attitude of heart were 
able to see the character of the Father in the Son. Those 
who believed on Jesus were accepted and treated in many 
respects as though they had been already fully received 
of the Father. The Scriptures, however, declare that the 
Holy Spirit had not yet come. We see that the Spirit 
could not be given in begetting power until Jesus had 
died, and had entered into the presence of God to make 
reconciliation for the sins of the Church. Forty days 
after the resurrection of Christ, He ascended to Heaven 
to present His merit, imputing it on behalf of all who 
would become His disciples during the Gospel Age, the 
period of the High Calling. 

Even though the Holy Spirit had not yet been bestowed, 
Jesus told His disciples that they might pray, 
"Our Father." This was in view of the condition of 
sonship into which they were so soon to be ushered. God 
is not the Father of any others than those who come to 
Him in His appointed way— through His Son as the Ransom-price, 
having made a full surrender of themselves 
and their all to God. While our Lord was still in the 
flesh. His true followers were sons in a prospective sense. 
And yet, after the Master's death and resurrection. He 
told them to tarry at Jerusalem until they were endued 
with power from on High. The Father would defer the 
answer to some of their prayers. He would not give them 
the blessing just at the time it was asked. There might 
be some good reason for withholding it until some future 
time— as in the granting of the Holy Spirit in begetting. 
Yet they were to hold themselves in the proper attitude 
of faith, that they might be ready for the blessing when 
it should come from on High. 

Their prayer might properly have been: "Heavenly 



Father, we have learned that at the proper time Thou 
wilt give us the Holy Spirit. We perceive that Thou 
hast already given Thy Spirit to Jesus our Master; that 
at the time of His baptism He received an unction from 
on High. And so we wait for the Holy Spirit— we wait 
to receive this unction, this blessing from Thee." And 

R5834 : page 22 

those who tarried in the upper room after the ascension 
of the Lord, received at Pentecost this very blessing, the 
Holy Spirit— in its due time. 

JESUS THE ONLY WAY 

If we come down to the present, and inquire what we 
may pray for, the Lord answers through His Word that 
we may not pray except upon these same terms; namely, 
faith in His Son as our Redeemer, and a full dedication, 
devotion, of ourselves to walk in the footsteps of the Master 
—our blessed Exemplar. No man can come to the 
Father but by Him. All such will be accepted, up to the 
required number of the Elect. It would, therefore, not 
be right to encourage any to come to the Father in 
prayer until they have become members of His family 
by a full consecration. 

In the case of Cornelius, the Roman centurion, which 
we have cited in this article, we have seen that he was a 
just man, a good man. But he did not belong to the 
Jewish nation, to whom God had given His Law. The 
only way in which Cornelius could have come into God's 
favor prior to His appointed time— three and a half years 
after the cross— was to have become a Jewish proselyte. 
But when it became chronologically due time for the 
Gospel to go to the Gentiles, this good man was notified, 
and gladly accepted the conditions and became a son of 
God, through faith in Christ. He received the begetting 
and anointing of the Holy Spirit, just as the Jews had 
previously received them. All this shows us that God 
has a particular course marked out by which any may 
become His children. Unless they come in the appropriate 
way and in the appropriate time, none will be accepted 
as sons of the Highest. 

PRAYERS THAT COME UP AS A MEMORIAL 

God's dealing with Cornelius would indicate that in 
the case of any who now come to God, and pray to Him, 
not knowing the appointed way, their prayers would, like 
those of Cornelius, come up as a memorial before God. 
As the Lord took notice of the prayers of Cornelius and 
the desires of his heart to worship and serve God, so we 
may suppose that He would take notice now of prayers 
and desires to come close to Him. He might not send 
some one like Peter to give them instruction at this time. 
That would depend upon His decision as to whether this 



would be the course of wisdom, as to whether such a one 
was suited to His present purpose. But any prayers 
offered in sincerity would not pass unnoticed, but would 
receive reward in due time, whether now or later. 
Suppose that one were living in a heathen land where 

R5835 : page 22 

Christ was not known, and suppose such a one was feeling 

after God and praying according to his light. The 

Lord could not accept him as His child under those conditions; 

but He might, if His Wisdom approved, guide 

that honest seeker to a knowledge of Christ, whether it 

would come through tracts in the mail, through a sermon, 

or through meeting one of the Lord's ambassadors 

who could communicate with him in his own tongue. We 

are sure that every hungry soul will receive the light and 

the knowledge necessary to his salvation in the Lord's 

own good time. After hearing of God, and of the manifestation 

of His love in Christ, it remains for each individual 

to accept or to reject the Message. If he fails 

or refuses to make consecration to God when he receives 

the light, no prayer he would offer would be accepted. 

THE CHIEF OF ALL GOOD GIFTS 

We read that the Heavenly Father will give good gifts 
to those who ask Him; that is. He will give that which 
would be good for them. We are not to dictate to Him 
what His blessings are to be. We are not to ask for all 
manner of earthly things. In the case of the Jews, they 
asked chiefly for the earthly blessings; because Heavenly 
blessings were not promised them. But we who come 
into the relationship of sons of God are to pray for what 
He has specifically promised us— the Holy Spirit. And 
our Father in Heaven will give us those things which are 
best to fit and prepare us for the Heavenly Kingdom. 

The Lord will give whatever temporal blessings are 
to the best interests of the New Creature. Everything 
that He would give will be a good gift. We do not always 
know what would be best for us. A parent dealing 
with a child might find it necessary at certain times to 
give medicine instead of food. The parent gives this for 
the good of the child. So with our Heavenly Father. 
Sometimes He gives us tests of faith, tests of loyalty, 
tests of love. All these experiences are designed to develop 
in us strength of character, and to thereby fit us 
for further and more advanced blessings. 

The Father deals with us as New Creatures in Christ. 
If, for instance, some of His children are becoming overcharged 
with the blessings or cares of this life, God 
might give to such some kind of a purgative as respects 
earthly things. Such a one might break a leg or have 
some other earthly calamity— something that would work 
out for his good as a New Creature. If the Lord's consecrated 
people would all come to the point where their 



chief desire, their highest aspiration, the burden of all 
their prayers, would be that they might be filled with the 
Spirit of God, the Spirit of Truth, the Spirit of a sound 
mind, that they might know and do His will, what a great 
blessing it would bring! It is the will of the Lord that 
His children should have in large measure this chiefest 
of all blessings, but He grants it only on certain conditions. 
He withholds it until they learn to appreciate its 
value and to so earnestly desire it that they will apply 
themselves diligently to meet these conditions, and will 
continue in supplication until their importunity shall 
bring down the answer. 

THE UNSPEAKABLE PRIVILEGE OF PRAYER 

The Apostle Paul exhorts the saints that they "pray 
always, with all prayer and supplication in the spirit, 
watching thereunto with all perseverance." These words 
do not signify that we should be always upon our knees 
or continually uttering a prayer. But we should never 
cease to pray, and our prayers should be in the spirit- 
earnest, sincere. The children of God are not to "say 
prayers," they are to pray. There is much formal prayer 
—much saying of prayers— which do not get higher than 
the head of the one who repeats the words. The Scriptures 
speak of this as drawing near to God with the lips 
when the heart is far from Him. It would be better that 
we should not approach the Lord at all than that we 
should do so in an improper manner. 

It is a most wonderful privilege to draw near the 
great Creator and Lord of Heaven and earth; and we 
should come in the spirit of reverence and devotion. Our 
Lord declared that the Father seeketh such to worship 
Him as worship Him in spirit and in Truth. We must 
come only in the name of Christ. He is the only Way of 
approach. And we must come thoughtfully and earnestly. 
We should not think of uttering a single word that we 
do not mean and have not thought upon. We believe a 
great many have done themselves injury by going 
through a form of words in a mere formalistic manner. 
This is not prayer. True prayer is the language of the 
heart. Therefore the greater our earnestness, the more 

R5835 : page 23 

acceptable the prayer will be, and the greater blessing 
shall we receive. 

We are not to come to God without faith and without 
an earnest desire for His blessing. We are to enter into 
the spirit of our petition, that the Lord may see the earnestness 
of our heart in the matter. There seems to be a 
difference between the thought of prayer and that of 
thanksgiving. Prayer, as we have said, is the offering of 
petition. None may come to the Lord with recognition, 
except those who have come into Christ. Others are 
strangers and aliens. But any one may express thanks 



to God or render worship, adoration, homage. 

PERSEVERANCE IN PRAYER NECESSARY 

There is a difference also between prayer and supplication. 
Prayer would be any petition, great or small; 
whereas supplication would mean a special desire for a 
thing— an earnest entreaty. Whether it be ordinary 
prayer or be supplication— an intense form of prayer— 
we should always come in the spirit, with appreciation of 
the fact that we are coming into the presence of the 
great Jehovah, and that it is a privilege accorded to only 
a very few at this time. 

And we are to "watch thereunto, with all perseverance." 
If we really believe that the Lord has indicated 
that we should pray, and that it is His will to give us the 
things we need, and above all His Holy Spirit, then we 
should be alert to note when we receive the answer to 
our petitions. If we pay no attention to our prayers after 
they are uttered, never look to see whether they are 
being answered, this would indicate that we have not 
really appreciated our need. It would seem that this is 
the reason why God does not answer many of our prayers 
more quickly. We should learn to watch for the 
answers to our prayers, and thus learn the lesson of appreciation 
and gratitude to Him as we realize that He has 
granted us our request. 

We are, then, to pray with perseverance, not watching 
merely for a few hours for the fulfilment, nor merely 
for a day or a week. The Lord might see best to defer 
the fulfilment of our petition, either to test our faith or 
to bring us into a better condition to receive the blessing. 
Perhaps we have all had these experiences, and were thus 
more hungry for the answer when it came. We are to 
be sure that the Lord is never indifferent to the pleading 
of His children, and will pursue the course which is best 
for us, just as would a faithful teacher with his pupil, 
and as would a loving parent with his child. Our Father 
in Heaven wishes to give us His best things, and will not 
withhold anything that is really good. ("Psalm 84:1 1\) 
But He requires sometimes that we shall wait for a considerable 
time. At other times, there may be a speedy 
answer to our petitions. 

Whether we are on our knees or in the busy walks of 
life our hearts should go out continually to the Lord for 
His guidance in all our affairs and experiences, that we 
may serve Him in a manner that will be pleasing and 
acceptable to Him, that we may be shielded from temptations 
that without His aid would be beyond our endurance, 
and that He will in His own due time deliver us 
from all evil and imperfection and grant us a place in His 
Heavenly Kingdom. Dear brethren, let us constantly put 
into practise the injunction of our Master, "Watch and 
pray, lest ye enter into temptation."— "Mark 14:38". 

SHOULD WE WRESTLE IN PRAYER? 



But although the Scriptures enjoin upon us persistency 
in prayer, and the parable of The Importunate Widow 
also teaches this, nothing in the Word of God, in our 
judgment, warrants us in doing what some people call 
"wrestling with God in prayer." We believe that our God 
is willing to give us the things that are best for us, and 
anything that God is not willing to give us we should not 
desire. We should not strive to induce the Lord to do 
anything that He is unwilling to do, but should wish that 
only His will be done. At the time when Jacob wrestled 
with the angel, we would understand that he did the right 
and proper thing. Any of us in the same position would 
have done well if we had followed his course. That was 
a rare occasion. Jacob was returning to his home for the 
first time since he had fled to Padan-Aram from his 
brother Esau, and he feared that Esau might still seek 
his life. And now the Lord had manifested Himself to 
Jacob in the form of this angel. The angel could have 
broken away, but he permitted Jacob to get into that 
earnest attitude where he said: "I will not let thee go 
unless thou bless me!" 

But we do not need to wrestle with God for His special 
blessing. We already have this blessing. We are not 
servants crying for a crumb. The Lord has put upon us 
His best robe; He has given us His Holy Spirit. But He 
has promised us certain things conditional upon our asking, 
and He wishes us to continue to come to Him in 
faith, in simple, earnest prayer— not wrestling in prayer. 

THE KINGDOM AT THE DOOR 

The world is full of woe and wretchedness because of 
sin. And our hearts cry out. How long, O Lord, how long 
until Thou wilt deliver Thy people and establish righteousness 
in the earth? So we pray day by day, "Thy 
Kingdom come; Thy will be done on earth!" Should we 

R5836 : page 23 

grow tired of this? No; for the Lord has bidden us to 
continue to wish for it, to pray for it. 

The Kingdom will come! And the Lord wishes us 
to have this thought— Thy Kingdom is coming! To give 
up praying would be to give up our faith. Continue to 
hope, continue to believe, continue to pray without ceasing! 
Continue to say: "Thy Kingdom come!" Continue 
to long for the time when that Kingdom will bless all the 
families of the earth. This is very different from 
wrestling, according to our view of the meaning of that 
word. This is importunity, this is persistency, this is 
continuance. And in everything we are to give thanks. But 
we would not want to hasten the Lord's time one minute. 
Even though we pray, "Thy Kingdom come," this does 
not mean that we wish to have the Kingdom come before 
the Father's time. But we whose eyes are anointed know 



that the time will not tarry long, but that it is nigh. 

Whatever may be our natural inclinations as regards 
constancy and definiteness in prayer, we must take our 
instructions from the Word of God. We must overcome 
our natural tendencies along this line. Let us as true, 
obedient children conform our views and our conduct to 
the words of counsel which our Father has given us. Let 
us remember the promise of the Master, "Ask, and ye shall 
receive, that your joy may be full."— "John 16:24\ 

"Breathe on us. Lord! Thy radiance pour 

On all the wonders of the page 
Where hidden lies the Heavenly lore 

That blessed our youth and guides our age. 
Grant faith, that treads the stormy deep. 

If but Thy voice shall bid it come; 
And zeal, that climbs the mountain steep. 

To seek and bring the wanderer home. 
Give strength, blest Savior; in Thy might 

Illuminate our hearts, and we 
Transformed into Thine image bright, 

Shall teach and love and live like Thee!" 



R5836 : page 24 

NATURAL ISRAEL NOT HEIRS TO SPIRITUAL PROMISES 

"Israel hath not obtained that which he seeketh for; but the 
Election hath obtained it, and the rest were blinded. ..unto 
this day."— "Romans 11:7,8". 

THE words of the Apostle Peter, "The Promise 

is unto you and to your children" ("Acts 2:39"), 

are in full harmony with all of the 

Lord's dealings with Israel, and with His 

Covenant with them as the posterity of 

His servant Abraham. The "Seed," promised 

by the Lord in His Covenant with 

Abraham, was for many centuries supposed 

to mean only the natural seed of 

Abraham, Isaac and Jacob— only those 

who were under the Law of Moses— the Jewish nation. 

But there was a condition attached to this promise of 

heirship. When God entered into the Covenant with 

Israel, the understanding was that if they would keep 

the Law they should have everlasting life and should 

inherit the privilege of blessing all the families of the 

earth— all peoples. But that if they did not keep the Law, 

then they would be cut off from all these favors. 

God knew that not one of Israel could keep the Law; 
and He had no thought that any of the natural Israelites 
living before our Lord's day would become members of 
the Body of Christ spiritual. He knew that no one could 
come into the Body of Christ until Jesus had first come 



and opened the way. Nevertheless, it was not an empty 
offer that was made to the Jewish nation. God did not 
promise that all Israel might become members of the 
Spiritual Seed— the Church of Christ. He merely promised 
that on certain conditions they should bless all the 
nations of the earth. Since the Spiritual Seed was not 
mentioned, the natural seed were right in line for that 
which was specified— to be blessers of the world. 

NO SPIRITUAL PROMISES BEFORE CHRIST 

The keeping of the Law was required, however, that 
Israel might have a right to life everlasting and to share 
in any of God's promises. But they could not keep the 
Law; consequently none of them gained life. Yet there 
were some who manifested such heart loyalty to God that 
He declared that they were acceptable to Him. These faithful, 
obedient ones met the conditions by which they might, 
through the Redeemer whom God would in due time provide, 
become a part of the "Seed" who was to bless "all 
the families of the earth." As they had no knowledge 
of the purpose of God to have a Spiritual Seed, the 
attaining of a place in the natural seed to bless all mankind 
was all that they had hoped for. St. Paul points 
out that these Worthies of past ages will have a glorious 
place in the Kingdom. "These all died in faith, not having 
received the Promises,. ..God having provided 
some better thing for us, that they without us should not 
be made perfect."— "Hebrews 1 1:13,40". 

Jesus declared to the unfaithful Jews of His day, "Ye 
shall see Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and all the 
prophets in the Kingdom of God, and ye yourselves thrust 
out." ('Luke 13:28'.) The faithful saints who lived before 
Christ will be the human representatives of the 
Kingdom. They will be "princes in all the earth," as 
declared by the Lord through the Prophet David. 
("Psalm 45:16".) Thus they will receive a great blessing. 

Until Christ came God never led the Jews to understand 
His Plan for the Spiritual Seed. His time for 
bringing this feature of His Plan to light and for calling 
candidates for places in this Seed class, had not yet come. 
Those who lived prior to this Call were not deceived in 
any manner nor defrauded of anything. God merely 
told them of the possibilities which were before them 
of becoming blessers of the world. Such as accepted the 
possibilities and rendered the Lord full obedience to the 
best of their ability, became heirs of the earthly phase 
of the Kingdom and the promises belonging thereto. 

When our Lord Jesus came. His ministry and that 
of the Apostles up to the time of the close of the "seventy 
weeks" (symbolic) yet remaining of Jewish favor, was, 
according to God's agreement with Israel, confined to 
the Jewish people. And as many of them as were of the 
right condition of heart undoubtedly received the Message. 
As the Jews were the chosen people of God, because 
of being the natural seed of Abraham, His friend. 



when the time came for calling out the Spiritual Seed 
the opportunity of becoming of this Seed must first go to 
Israel. Afterwards, the offer went to the Gentiles, to 
take out from them a sufficient number to complete the 
Spiritual Seed— the Gospel Church. 

After the glorification of the Church, then will come 
the blessing of the earthly seed. As the chiefs of this 
earthly seed will be "princes in all the earth"— the Ancient 
Worthies— so later on, all who come in under the terms 
of the New Covenant will be joined to Israel and will 
also become the seed of Abraham. Eventually, the seed 
of Abraham, as foretold by the Lord, shall be "as the 
sands upon the seashore" for multitude. "In becoming 
Thy seed, shall all the families of the earth bless themselves," 
seems to be the literal rendering of one statement 
of God to Abraham in connection with the Covenant 
made with him. But the blessing of all will come 
through the Spiritual Seed, the glorified Church— Head 
and Body. So God's Plan seems to be one of giving more 
blessings to the Spiritual Seed, and less to the natural 
seed, though very great blessings will be the portion of 
all who will come into harmony with Him. 

CALLED BY GOD TO HIGHEST PLACE 

Natural Israel never were heirs unconditionally of 
any part of the Promise to Abraham nor heirs, as a nation, 
of the spiritual part of the Promise— the chief, the 
principal part. They were on trial before the Law of 
God, which was expressed in their Law Covenant, to see 
whether or not they would be worthy of eternal life. 
And so it was with our Lord Jesus when He was made 
flesh, born under the Law— subordinate to the Law. 
("Galatians 4:4".) It was only because He was perfect 
and kept the Law, that He was able in God's due time to 
present His body a living sacrifice as a Substitute for 
Adam. His faithful keeping of the Law proved His 
right to eternal life; and His sacrifice of that life as a 
man, under God's arrangement, raised Him to the highest 
place in the Universe next to Jehovah— the Divine 
plane— with authority to execute Jehovah's Program for 
the salvation of the world of mankind. He thus became 
the Head of the Spiritual Seed of Abraham. 

When Jesus made His consecration. He was begotten 
of the Spirit. He was born of the Spirit, completed of 
the Spirit, in His resurrection, and He was the First 
born to this condition. Afterward, those Jews who were 
in the right condition of heart were accepted on the same 
terms. But instead of God's making those called to be 
of the Spiritual Seed actually just, perfect— as our Lord 
Jesus was— He justifies them by faith. Jesus was absolutely 
without imperfection— the Apostle Paul speaks of 
Him as being "holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from 
sinners." ("Hebrews 7:26".) God imputes to the followers 
of Jesus a sufficiency of His merit that they may be 
reckoned just— counted as perfect. 



R5837 : page 25 

The whole object of this reckoning is to give us the 
privilege of becoming Spiritual Israelites by sacrificing. 
So the Father's arrangement is that if we desire to be the 
disciples of Jesus we must take up our cross and follow 
Him, becoming dead to the flesh, dead to self, dead to 
everything worldly. Then Christ becomes our Advocate. 
The Father accepts all such as His sons. The Apostle Paul 
exhorts all who have accepted the redemption that is in 
Christ, saying, "I beseech you, therefore, brethren, by 
the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living 
sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable 
service."— 'Romans 12: P. 

ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY-FOUR THOUSAND CALLED 

The holiness of our offering is not of ourselves, but 
is ours only through the imputed virtue of the sacrifice 
of our Savior. All our imperfection is set aside, nullified, 
by His merit. And those only can become members 
of Spiritual Israel who offer themselves as sacrifices. 
As for others, if the whole world were to keep the Law 
they would not belong to the Spiritual Seed, for God 
wants only 144,000. ("Revelation 14:1,3".) So this privilege 
of becoming one of the Spiritual Seed was not a 
thing that the Jew inherited as heir to the Promise. St. 
Paul said that the offer was "to the Jew first." We 
think the Apostle meant that the Gospel Call for Spiritual 
Israelites was sent to the Jew first— not a command that 
he keep the Law, but a proclamation of the Gospel and 
an invitation to follow in the footsteps of Jesus. The 
offer was first made to the Jews who were living when 
the Gospel privileges were opened up. If any of these 
were willing to enter into a Covenant of Sacrifice with 
Christ, He would accept them as His disciples. 

The picture that God gives through the Apostle Paul 
in the 1 1th chapter of Romans represents Israel as the 
trunk and the branches of the olive tree, and the root of 
the tree as the Promise which God made to Abraham, 
which was to bless the world. God had not explained 
His Plan to them, but had merely said: "Do you wish 
to enter into a Covenant with Me— to be My peculiar 
people?" "Yes," was the answer. "When will you be 
ready?" "We are ready now," they replied. And so 
this Covenant was made, which constituted them the 
nation, or tree, growing out of the root of Promise. The 
Promise was primarily spiritual, though this fact was 
long kept hidden. 

God never purposes to do anything except through 
the Spiritual Seed, but Natural Israel did not know this. 
They declared that they would be all that God wished 
them to be, if only they might have the Promise made to 
Abraham their Father. What it was they did not know, 
although they thought they knew. They were anxious 



to have the best at any rate. And they still had this 
thought and this hope in Jesus' day; as St. Paul said: 
"Unto which Promise our twelve tribes, instantly serving 
God day and night, hope to come." ("Acts 26:7".) And 
again the Apostle says: "Israel hath not obtained that 
which he seeketh for, but the Election hath obtained it, 
and the rest were blinded"; that is, those of the Jews 
who came into Christ became of the Elect.— 'Rom. 1 1:7". 

ISRAEL'S FAILURE IN THEIR TESTING TIME 

What was the condition on which the Jews might 
inherit that blessing? It was that they would lay down 
their lives sacrificially. And they would be tested as to 
their sincerity in claiming that they would obey God in 
order that they might win that Promise. But the Message 
came to them, and they were called upon to answer 
the question. Will you accept Jesus of Nazareth as your 
Messiah, and take up your cross and follow Him? Then 
the test was upon them. They were brought face to face 
with the proposition which would prove how much they 
meant in their professions of loyalty to God as His special 
people. But the great majority failed in the testing. 
"They all with one consent began to make excuse." 
("Luke 14: 18".) When the point was reached of making 
a positive decision as to whether they would accept God's 
conditions and His way of accomplishing His Plan, but 
few were ready. They listened and then went, one to his 
farm, another to his merchandise. The cost was too much! 

Those who were found in that condition of mind were 
none of them living up to their profession. But God did 
not make that Promise for nothing. When the Israelites 
were proven unworthy of becoming heirs of the Abrahamic 
Covenant, they were broken off and Gentiles were 
grafted in to take their places and become partakers of 
"the root and fatness of the olive tree." ("Romans 1 1:17".) 
Only those Jews who were desirous of doing God's will 
in the fullest sense of the word were allowed to remain 
as branches of the olive tree. Only those who accepted 
Christ were made heirs of the Promise, as members of 
the Spiritual Seed. After all the "Israelites indeed" of 
the natural seed were gathered in, the Message went to 
the Gentiles, that the full number of the Elect might be 
found. But the Lord tells us through the Apostle Paul, 
in "Romans 1 1", that God's ancient people may yet be 
grafted into the olive tree from which they were broken 
off, "if they abide not still in unbelief." "And so all 
Israel shall be saved," after "the fulness of the Gentiles be 
come in." O the riches of the love and goodness of God! 

TAKEN LONG TIME TO DEVELOP 144,000 

If all the Jews living in Jesus' day had loved God 
with all their heart, with all their being, with all their 
strength, and had made a full consecration, we understand 
that God would have accepted that sacrifice on their 



part. We do not know how many there would have been 
in the Body of Christ in that event. God might have 
increased the number of the Elect. But as it is, it has 
taken a long time— nearly nineteen hundred years— to 
find a sufficient number to complete that Body. The 
Lord has limited the number of these to 144,000. 



"AND SITTING DOWN, THEY WATCHED HIM THERE' 

OMatthew 27:36\) 

Sitting down, they watched Him there. 
Watched Him, fairest of the fair. 
Gazed with cold, unpitying eye. 
While the jeering crowd passed by. 
For His vesture cast a lot 
(Seamless robe, without a spot); 
Watched the "Man of Sorrows" there. 
Who the world's great sin must bear; 
Watched while darkness veiled the sun. 
Watched until He cried, "Tis done!" 

God of Heaven! forbid that I 
Thus should gaze with pitiless eye 
On a suffering child of Thine, 
Watch him while his foes malign, 
Watch him while his life-blood flows. 
Watch until the dark day's close; 
Grant me. Lord, a heart of love. 
Make me like a tender dove; 
Let me bring him strength and peace. 
Until death shall send release! 

G. W. SEIBERT. 



R5837 : page 26 

THE SONS OF GOD 
-JANUARY 23.- ROMANS 8:12-30\- 

DIVINE SONSHIP LOST BY ADAM-JEWS NOT A HOUSE OF SONS, 
BUT OF SERVANTS-CHRIST A SON-THE HEAD OF THE 
HOUSE OF SONS-THE STRAIT GATE AND NARROW WAY BY 
WHICH THE CALLED MAY BE ACCEPTED INTO THE FAMILY 

OF GOD-EVIDENCES OF OUR BEGETTING-THE PREDESTINATION 
OF THE ELECT-TO WHAT ELECTED. 

"For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, 
they are the sons of God."— 'Verse 14\ 

TODAY we have another wonderful lesson 



from the inspired Apostle St. Paul. It 
points out that the Church is a New Creation, 
begotten of the Holy Spirit, now being 
gestated in preparation for the glorious 
resurrection birth to the spirit plane. There 
is no more important lesson than this. 

According to the Bible, Father Adam 
was created a son of God— in the image of 
God and only a little lower than the angels 
—on the earthly plane, instead of the Heavenly. ("Psalm 8:5".) 
When Adam sinned, his blessed relationship with 
God as a son was forfeited. Forthwith he was a sinner 
and under the sentence which God had foretold— not an 
eternal torment sentence, but a death sentence, with an 
accompaniment of mental, moral and physical degeneracy. 
There have been no human sons of God since Adam's 
time— except Jesus. The Jews, received by the Lord 
under the Law Covenant, were not a House of Sons, and 
never understood themselves to be sons of God. Instead, 
they threatened to stone Jesus to death because He declared 
Himself a Son of God. As St. Paul declares, 
"Moses was faithful as a servant over all his House [of 
servants], but Christ as a Son [the Head] over His own 
House," a House of Sons— the spirit-begotten Church. 

THE HOUSE OF SONS 

St. Paul points out to us that the natural man, no 
matter how wise or educated or talented, cannot understand 
and appreciate fully the deep things of the Bible, 
because God has caused them to be so written that only 
the spirit-begotten can fully comprehend them. "They 
are spiritually discerned." (" 1 Corinthians 2: 14".) Thus 
the Church of Christ is a company of regenerated beings. 
Once they were members of the Adamic race and, through 
sin, "were children of wrath, even as others." ("Ephesians 2:3".) 
Now they are reckoning themselves as dead to the 
Divine sentence upon Father Adam. They have accepted 
Jesus as their Redeemer, and the sacrifice of His life as 
the Atonement-price for their sins. 

When they accept the invitation to become followers 
of Jesus, He becomes their Advocate with the Father; 
and by the arrangement of the Divine Plan His meritorious 
sacrifice is applicable to them as a covering for 
sins past and imperfections future, and affords them 
opportunity to be accepted of the Father, begotten of the 
Holy Spirit and eventually to attain joint-heirship with 
Himself in the Kingdom, "if so be that we suffer with 
Him, that we may be also glorified together."— "Verse 17". 

These regenerated, spirit-begotten children of God are 
not yet perfected; but if they continue in the School of 
Christ, the faithful will eventually reach perfection on 
the spirit plane as sons of God, led by the Spirit. These, 
on the authority of the Scriptures, exercising faith, are 
enabled to call upon God as their Father— "Abba, Father." 
Through the Word and through their own experiences 



these receive the witness of the Spirit of the Lord that 
they are God's children and joint-heirs with Jesus— the 
grand perfection being dependent upon their suffering 
with Him. These have no obligation any longer to the 
flesh; for they are New Creatures. These are no longer 
to live after the flesh, but in harmony with the Spirit of 
God as revealed to them through the Word of God. 

These New Creatures, sons of God, in their weakness 
and ignorance might ask amiss. But the Lord would not 
deal with them according to their imperfection of asking; 
He would accept the spirit of their request. The groanings 
and desires of our spirits, our minds, will be taken 
by the Lord as instead of our imperfect utterances in 
prayer; for God, who knoweth all things, yea, the 
thoughts of our minds (spirits), accepts these. All such 
may know that "all things work together for good to 
them"— because they love God— because they have been 
called according to His purpose.— v Verse 28". 

EXPLANATION OF THE GOSPEL CALL 

"Verses 28-3 V make plain to us that God has a special 
purpose in the special Gospel High Calling of this present 
Age. Other Scriptures show that this Calling of this 
present Age is to joint-heirship with Jesus in the Messianic 
Kingdom which is shortly to grant restitution blessings 
to all the families of the earth. To get a suitable 
class to be the teachers, blessers, rulers and judges of the 
world in the future has been the object of this Gospel 
Call. Jesus, the Head of the Church, was the first to 
respond and has been glorified and honored, and through 
all eternity will be honored. His followers, called during 
this Gospel Age, will have a similar blessing at the hands 
of God— glorification on the spirit plane, if faithful. 

Our Study concludes with an explanation of God's 
Call. God foreknew, or purposed in advance, that He 
would have such a Church as the Apostle describes, to accomplish 
the work mentioned. All that was predestinated 
or arranged in advance. But in order to be of that predestinated 
and glorified class, certain things were necessary; 
i.e., that all those who would be finally accounted worthy 
of a share in the Kingdom, must be copies of God's dear 
Son— in heart, in character, and like Him also in the 
resurrection, spirit beings. This is a glorious predestination. 
It assures us that God will have none others in the 
Kingdom than those who are character-likenesses of Jesus. 

Then the Apostle points out the procedure by which 
God has selected this predestinated or foreknown class to 
be copies of His Son. They were called in the sense 
that the Lord brought to their attention the glorious opportunity, 
and we may safely say that such a call was 
extended only to the honest-hearted who were feeling 
after God, desirous of knowing Him and serving Him. 
These called ones needed first to be justified before they 
could accept the call, and this justification must come 
through repentance and through acceptance of Jesus as 



the Redeemer. It was those who accepted Jesus and 
were justified by Him through faith, whom God also 
glorified (honored) by begetting them with the Holy 
Spirit, bringing them into His family as children, joint-heirs 
with Jesus, to the privilege of suffering for the 
Truth and being glorified in connection with the Kingdom. 



"Think it not strange, beloved. 
When fiercely burns the fiery flame! 
Think it not strange, but praise His name. 
Who counts thee worthy to partake 
Of painful sufferings for His sake. 
Nor think it strange 

When loved ones scornful from thee turn. 
The Truth reject, the Message spurn; 
Consider Him who thus endured, 
And Immortality secured!" 



R5838 : page 27 

ST. PETER'S SERMON ON RESTITUTION 

-JANUARY 30.-' ACTS 3\- 

HEALING A LAME MAN-THE APOSTLES IGNORED THEMSELVES 
AND ASCRIBED THE POWER AND HONOR TO JESUS-THE 
PEOPLE WERE IMPRESSED-ST. PETER IMPROVED THE 
OPPORTUNITY TO POINT OUT THE SIN COMMITTED BY THE 
NATION WHO CRUCIFIED JESUS, AND ALSO THE MERCY 
OF GOD AND HIS WILLINGNESS TO FORGIVE THEM AND 
BLESS THEM-THEY SHOULD REPENT IMMEDIATELY TO 
GET THE CHIEFEST BLESSING-AFTERWARD WOULD FOLLOW 
"TIMES OF RESTITUTION"-ALL THE PROPHETS SPOKE 
OF THOSE TIMES-THE CHURCH OFFICIALS WERE OFFENDED 
BECAUSE THE PEOPLE WERE TAUGHT THE TRUTH-CHRIST'S 
FAITHFUL MINISTERS WERE IMPRISONED. 

"Times of Refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord; 
and He shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached 
unto you, whom the Heaven must receive until the Times 
of Restitution of all things, which God hath spoken 
by the mouth of all His holy Prophets 
since the world began."— "Verses 19-21". 

THE Apostles at Pentecost, in receiving the 
Holy Spirit, received not a spirit of fear, 
but a spirit of courage and of a sound mind. 
They had been commissioned by their Redeemer 
to preach the Gospel Message which 
was to gather from the Jews and from 
every nation a consecrated class of people 
to become the spirit-begotten sons of God 



and eventually to be the Bride, the Lamb's 
Wife and Joint-heir in His Kingdom. 

Full of this courage, St. Peter and St. John, the 
leaders amongst the Apostles, went up to the Temple to 
pray— not because they any longer thought the Temple 
the proper place where prayer should be offered to God, 
but because they knew that it would be a good place to 
meet the people. Probably they expected that the Lord 
would there bring them in contact with the most devout 
Jews so as to give them an opportunity of testifying the 
good tidings to these. 

The opportunity was soon found. They beheld a poor, 
lame beggar and perceived him to be a man of faith and 
trust in God. Looking upon him, St. Peter said, "Look on 
us"; and he looked, expecting to get money. But St. 
Peter continued, "Silver and gold have I none, but what I 
have, that give I unto thee: In the name of Jesus Christ 
of Nazareth, rise up and walk." (" Verse 6\) The lame 
man, astonished at such an offer of blessing, made an 
effort to obey the command, because he had faith. As he 
struggled to obey, St. Peter took him by the hand and 
assisted him in the exercise of faith. God's blessing attended. 
His feet and his ankle bones, long withered, 
became strong; and he went with the Apostles through the 
Temple, holding on to them and shouting his praises to 
God and his acknowledgment that God's mercy had come 
to him through these men. 

A NOTABLE RESTITUTION SERMON 

A concourse of the holy Jews immediately gathered 
about. Now came St. Peter's opportunity for a great 
sermon— a witness to the Lord. He was not filled with 
pride and boastfulness, saying, "You may well look at 
us, for we are especially favored of God. None of your 
Scribes or Pharisees could have healed this man as we 
have done"; etc. St. Peter did nothing of this kind. In 
meekness and humility he said. Why should you look at 
us as though we had done anything of ourselves, or that 
any special holiness of ours had accomplished this 
miracle? We are merely the instruments of God, and this 
is a manifestation of God's mercy through Jesus. This 
miracle is done in Jesus' name— in the name of the Redeemer 
who has died for the sins of the world. 

St. Peter proceeded to tell his hearers that the nation 
had wickedly crucified the Savior, but he assured them 

R5839 : page 27 

also of God's mercy, and declared that they might still 
repent and come back to God's favor, but only by renouncing 
their relationship with those who had done this 
evil deed and by taking their stand with and for the 
Lord. Veiy briefly and comprehensively he stated the 
Divine Plan as a reason why his hearers should consecrate 
themselves to God. Verses 13-26'.) They should repent of 



sins personal, as well as national, and be fully converted, 
or turned around— to know the Lord, to obey Him, to be 
followers of Jesus whom they had crucified. The result 
of this would be the covering of their sins by the Lord, 
permitting them to be accepted through Jesus as children 
of God; and ultimately this would mean that their sins 
would be blotted out completely with the glorious change 
of the First Resurrection— "sown in weakness, raised in 
power; sown in dishonor, raised in glory; sown an animal 
body, raised a spiritual body."— " 1 Corinthians 15:43,44'. 

Following this blotting out of their sins and the giving 
to them the new bodies, free from sin and all its 
blemishes and imperfections, would come the glorious 
Times of Restitution of all things, which God had foretold 
through all the holy Prophets of the past. These 
would be Times, or years, of Refreshing, as well as of 
Restitution— a thousand years. Therein would be fulfilled 
all the promises of God to Abraham and to all the 
prophets and to Israel; namely, that in Messiah's glorious 
Kingdom the earth would be brought to Edenic conditions, 
"God's footstool would be made glorious." ("Isaiah 60:13"; "66: 1".) 
The curse would be rolled away, and the 
blessing of the Lord rolled on to humanity instead. 

Any prophet that had not mentioned these Restitution 
years could not have been a holy Prophet, St. Peter assures 
us; for Restitution is the Message of the Bible, 
from Genesis to Revelation. The Master Himself, the 
Redeemer of the world, declares: "Behold, I make all 
things new." "There shall be no more curse." Eventually 
there shall be no more sighing or crying or dying. 
All things will be made new by Messiah's Kingdom, although 
it will require the entire thousand years for the 
full accomplishment of all these glorious things. 

THE GREAT ANTITYPICAL MOSES 

St. Peter pointed out how Moses had foretold the calling 
out of a special Messianic class. ("Deuteronomy 18:17-19".) 
Jesus is the Head of this class; and all now 
received into God's family by the begetting of the Holy 
Spirit are counted members of the Body of Christ, the 
Church. Moses was a type of this great Christ, and said 
to the fathers, "A [greater] Prophet [than I— an antitype] 
shall the Lord your God raise up unto you from 
amongst your brethren." ("Verse 22".) God raised up 
Jesus first, says the Apostle; and since Pentecost He has 
been raising up brethren of Jesus— the Apostles first, then 
all the saintly characters of these past eighteen hundred 
years, called according to God's purpose to be the members 
of the Body of Christ, otherwise styled the Bride 
class. The full raising up of these will not be accomplished 
until the resurrection of the Church is completed. 

When this great Antitype of Moses (Christ and the 
Church, His Body) shall have been lifted up, glorified, 
then will come the time for the blessing of the world, by 
the opening of the eyes of their understanding and 



through all the Restitution privileges of that time. During 
the Millennium, whoever will hear that great Prophet 
may come into a great blessing of perfection, of restitution 

R5839 : page 28 

—physically, mentally, morally— and thus to everlasting 
life. But whoever rejects that great Prophet, the 
glorified Messiah, will be destroyed from amongst the 
people— will meet the fate of the intelligently wicked. 
"All the wicked will God destroy. "-"Psalm 145:20\ 

The Apostle explains that the Lord's blessing was to 
begin with the Israelites, the natural children of Abraham. 
It did gather the "Israelites indeed." Then the Jewish 
nation was set aside from God's favor; and the door of 
opportunity was thrown open to the Gentiles, who have 
received the Lord's blessing of opportunity for eighteen 
hundred years. As soon as the foreordained number of 
the Elect are glorified, the present Age and its objects 
will have ended. Then the Restitution work will begin; 
and Israel according to the flesh will again take first rank 
in Divine favor, as explained in "Romans 1 1:25-32". 



R5839 : page 28 

OBEYING GOD RATHER THAN MEN 

-FEBRUARY 6.- ACTS 4:1-31".- 

THE COURAGE OF GOD'S SERVANTS-ST. PETER THE SPOKESMAN 
BEFORE THE SANHEDRIN-THE WISE MEN MARVELED-THE 
APOSTLES IGNORANT AND UNLEARNED-NOT THE SPIRIT 
OF FEAR, BUT OF A SOUND MIND AND OF COURAGE- 
TAUGHT IN THE SCHOOL OF JESUS -WONDERFUL RESULTS 
-WHEN TO OBEY AND WHEN TO DISOBEY. 

"Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you 
like men, be strong."— "1 Corinthians 16:13". 

ST. PETER and St. John, arrested for preaching 

Christ as the Healer of the lame man in 

the Temple, were called to answer before 

the Jewish High Court— the Sanhedrin, 

composed of seventy learned Jews. These 

sat in a circle, and had their prisoners before 

them. When we remember that the 

Apostles were illiterate fishermen, unaccustomed 

to public speaking and to contact 

with the great and learned, we may well be 

amazed at their courage and at the straight-forward presentation 

of the Gospel given there by St. Peter. It 

astonished the Sanhedrin, too. They wished to arraign 

the Apostles, not for the good deed of healing the lame 

man, but rather for their preaching of Jesus. 



However, under the guidance of the Holy Spirit, St. 
Peter wisely and properly drew attention to the fact that 
they were on trial really for the healing of the sick. 
Again he disowned any power on the part of himself and 
his companions. Admitting that they were merely ordinary 
men, he credited the miracle wholly to Jesus. What 
a lesson is here for all who would represent the Lord as 
His ambassadors! As St. Paul said, "We preach not 
ourselves, but Christ Jesus."— '2 Corinthians 4:5'. 

Under any circumstances, how courageous indeed were 
the Apostle's words: "Be it known unto you all, and to 
all the people of Israel, that by the name of Jesus Christ 
of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from 
the dead, even by Him doth this man stand here before 
you whole!" St. Peter was not only preaching that Jesus 
was not a deceiver but the real Messiah, whom the Jews 
had long expected, but, additionally, he was declaring that 
the Sanhedrin had murdered the Messiah. It was the 
truth; and it was necessary to utter the truth. To have 
evaded the point would have shown fear; and the Apostle 
would have failed to make a right and proper impression 
on the Sanhedrin and the auditors. 

Some one might suggest that St. Peter did not use 
gentlemanly language— that he should not have made 
such a home-thrust at the Sanhedrin. Mr. Benson, in 
The North American Review, gives a definition of the 
term gentleman which seems to fit this case. We quote: 

'"How do you define a gentleman, then?" said the 
lawyer, leaning forward at a certain point of the conversation. 
'The gentleman, it has been said, is a man 
who is never offensive unintentionally,' said the parson. 
Two of the guests murmured 'intentionally,' by way of 
correction; and the parson smiled. 'No,' he said, 'a gentleman 
is sometimes offensive when honor and reason demand 
it, but then he means to be. The man who is not a 
gentleman is often offensive when he does not mean to be.' 
'But is he always a gentleman when he is intentionally 
offensive?' asked the lawyer. 'The gentleman is,' said the 
parson, with a smile." 

In St. Peter's case it was not a time for quibbling. It 
was a time when a gentleman was in duty bound to use 
his opportunity, in no unkindly way, in placing the truth 
before his hearers. And how much St. Peter crowded 
into a few words, according to this record! He identified 
Jesus the Nazarene, the one who had been crucified, as 
the Messiah, the One whom God had approved, as was 
manifested in the raising of Him from the dead. 

THE SANHEDRIN PERPLEXED 

Next the Apostle quoted to them from the prophecy of 
David ("Psalm 1 18:22"), saying, "This is the Stone which 
was set at naught of you builders, which is become the 
Head of the corner. Neither is there salvation in any 
other; for there is none other name under Heaven given 
among men whereby we must be saved." If there was a 



force, a sting, in these words to his hearers, it was because 
they were so seriously in the wrong. How fortunate 
it would have been for them if they had been humble-hearted, 
like those who heard St. Peter on the day of 
Pentecost! Then they also would have cried out in 
consternation, "Men and brethren, what must we do?" 
But, alas! education, honor of men, high station, often 
put the possessors of these at a disadvantage. 

The Sanhedrin were rich, not only financially, intellectually 
and in honors of men, but also in education. To 
them forcefully belong the words of Jesus, "Woe unto 
you rich!"— you are at a disadvantage. Pride, honor of 
men, self-conceit, hinder many such from receiving the 
simple Message of the Gospel. Thus we perceive that 

R5840 : page 28 

there are compensations in the Divine arrangement, and 
that in some respects poverty is a blessing in disguise. 
Hence the assurance of the Word that not many rich, not 
many great, not many learned, not many noble would be 
among the chosen of the Lord or would receive positions 
in the Bride class and in the Heavenly Kingdom.— 
"1 Corinthians 1:26-29". 

Perceiving the boldness of St. Peter and St. John, 
and noting that they were unlearned and ignorant, the 
Sanhedrin marveled, and "took knowledge of them that 
they had been with Jesus." Ah, yes! of Jesus also some 
one had said, "How knoweth this man letters, having 
never learned?"— in any of our schools. ("John 7:15".) 
They knew of His power with the people through the 
Spirit of the Lord and of His straight-forward presentation 
of the Truth. They recognized these men as of the 
same character— filled with Jesus' Spirit. And to this 
day this is true of the followers of Jesus. As the Apostle 
wrote, "God hath not given unto us the spirit of fear, but 
of power and of love and of a sound mind." ("2 Timothy 1:7".) 
All of the Lord's people should remember this 

R5840 : page 29 

point and should cultivate such a spirit and be copies of 
the Lord Jesus and of the faithful Apostles, so that of all 
such people might take knowledge that they have been 
with Jesus and have learned of Him. 

But let no one forget that there is only one way of 
coming into relationship with God— through the Lord 
Jesus Christ. As the Apostle indicates in this discourse, 
"There is none other name under Heaven given among 
men whereby we must be saved." We must have faith in 
Jesus. We must understand that He died for the sin of 
the world. We must make a personal acceptance of Him 
as our Savior. We must consecrate our little all to follow 
in His steps faithfully, even unto death. On these conditions 
we become His disciples; and having become disciples, 
learners in the School of Christ, and having been 



begotten of the Holy Spirit, we are privileged to show 
forth more and more His praises and to let our light 
shine before men, that they, seeing our good works and 
our likeness to the Master, may glorify God on our behalf. 

The Sanhedrin were perplexed as they perceived that 
the disciples had so strong a case, and had really turned 
the tables upon them, charging them before the people 
with being the real culprits— murderers of the Son of 
God, the Messiah. As they looked at the man who had 
been healed, they perceived a great miracle. They could 
say nothing. So they put forth the Apostles from their 
midst, that they might discuss the case privately. They 
could not deny the miracle, and they were afraid of what 
it might lead to if talk of this kind about Jesus and about 
their being His murderers should spread amongst the 
people to any degree. They thought best to let the disciples 
go, charging them, threatening them, not to preach 
any more in the name of Jesus. 

COURAGE IN PREACHING THE GOSPEL 

Then was shown the marvelous courage of the 
Apostles. They replied, "Whether it be right in the sight 
of God to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge 
ye. For we cannot but speak the things which we have 
seen and heard." 

The Bible directs the followers of Jesus to be subject 
to the powers that be. ("Romans 1 3: 1-V" ; " 1 Peter 2:13-17".) 
But while seeking to be thus law-abiding in every respect. 
Christians are to recognize that there is a still higher 
Law and a still higher Ruler, and are to be subject to the 
worldly powers only in the absence of a contrary admonition 
from the Higher Power— from God. 

God had commanded the disciples through Jesus that 
they should be God's mouthpieces to preach the Gospel 
Message that the death of Jesus was efficacious for the 
cancellation of sins; and that He who was slain was by 
and by to come and set up His Kingdom, and to bless the 
world by releasing it from the bondage of sin and death. 
They were also to invite all who had faith to believe this 
Message to associate themselves as disciples of Jesus, 
loyal and faithful to the Prince of that Kingdom which is 
not yet set up. By such faithfulness they would manifest 
the faith that was in them and their loyalty to God; and 
on account of this they were promised a share with 
Messiah in the Kingdom which He would establish. 

It was therefore the duty of the Apostles, as it is the 
duty of all the followers of Jesus, to make known the 
Gospel Message wherever there are hearing ears, and 
not to fear what man may do— although it would be our 
duty not to offend against the laws by holding a meeting 
where the crowds would interfere with traffic, or otherwise 
be in conflict with legal regulations. The Apostles 
were not interfering with the regulations of the Jewish 
Law in speaking in public, as they did in the Temple. 
Their courage was really authorized by the Law; and the 



Sanhedrin, in forbidding them, went beyond its bounds. 

The Church, young in faith, had no doubt been greatly 
distressed by the imprisonment of the leading disciples; 
and when they were released, then a general meeting for 
rejoicing and praise to God was held, thanking the Lord 
for the courage given to the Apostles, for the promises 
of His Word, and for the miracle which had led up to all 
this. As a consequence, we read that all were so encouraged 
that "they spake the Word of God with boldness"; 
and that "with great power gave the Apostles 
witness of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus; and great 
grace was upon them all." 

Our Golden Text, in full accord with the lesson, is 
properly an exhortation to all of God's people everywhere 
to be faithful and loyal to God and His Cause. Let us 
each apply it to himself: "Watch ye, stand fast in the 
faith, quit you like men, be strong." 



R5840 : page 29 

THE VALUE OF MODERATION 

"Let your moderation be known unto all men. 
The Lord is at hand."— 'Philippians 4:5\ 

QUESTION.-The Apostle Paul says, "Let 
your moderation be known unto all men." 
What is the particular thought here in the 
word "moderation," and what is the connection 
between these words and the sentence, 
"The Lord is at hand," which follows? 

Answer.— The Spirit of the Lord is said 
to be a spirit of wisdom, a spirit of justice, a 
spirit of love, a spirit of a sound mind. 
Whoever, therefore, receives the Spirit of 
the Lord, in proportion as he receives it, has these qualities 
of mind and heart. At the beginning of a Christian's 
experience, the measure of this moderation, or reasonableness, 
or gentleness, is of course, comparatively small. 
But he gradually gets a greater appreciation of the value 
of this quality. His ideas become more reasonable as he 
becomes sanctified by the Spirit. He will have more and 
more of the spirit of a sound mind, of gentleness, meekness, 
and will become more and more prepared for the 
Kingdom soon to be established. 

This attitude of mind comes in large measure as a 
result of knowledge. As he conies to know more about 
God and His plans, more about the origin of sin in the 
world, how it came about and how its penalty has passed 
upon all men by a process of heredity, the true disciple 
of Christ feels more of the spirit of moderation and acts 
with more consideration and charity toward others than 
if men were perfect. As we realize that these imperfections 
vary in number and in degree in different persons. 



so in our dealings we must be moderate toward all, wise 
in our dealings with all, patient toward all, having the 
spirit of justice, of reasonableness, of mercy. 

This injunction of the Apostle does not refer to the 
exercise of this quality toward the Church only, but 
toward all men. Properly, of course, this moderation 
would begin at home, and would be more particularly 
manifest in good works in the Church, as in opposition 
to the evil sentiment— anger, malice, evil-surmising, 
hatred, strife— works of the flesh and of the Devil. But 
the spirit of moderation should not be confined to the 
home, but should be manifested toward all with whom 
we have intercourse or dealings. It was said of the 
Apostles that people "took knowledge of them that they 
had been with Jesus and learned of Him." We should 

R5840 : page 30 

so live before all, both the brethren and the world, that 
they would thus take knowledge of us. We should see to 
it that our conduct is a credit to the great and noble 
Cause with which we are identified. 

The connection between letting our moderation be 
known and the statement, "The Lord is at hand," seems 
to be that the Lord's people are to have in mind their 
expectation based upon the promises of God's Word, that 
Messiah's Kingdom is shortly to be established, and that 
this should help them in living an exemplary life. Whether 
the passage should be considered from the viewpoint that 
the Church of the Apostles' time were living in the latter 
part of the great seven-thousand-year week, and that the 
great Sabbath was at hand, when the Lord was about to 
come and set up His Kingdom and set tilings straight in 
the world, and that hence they could well be patient and 
considerate, or whether it should be from the viewpoint 
of time— that the Lord's children should exercise the 
grace of moderation because they had little time left in 
which to manifest it— we do not know. At any rate, 
knowing that the opposition of sin will not last very 
much longer, we may have the greater patience and exercise 
this patience with the greater ease when we have 

R5841 : page 30 

this thought before our minds. 

The Apostle gives a similar thought when he says that 
the tribulations which the Lord's people undergo are not 
worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed 
in them. This should make us very moderate, 
very forbearing, under circumstances which would make 
others very rude, very angry, very immoderate. We can 
be very gentle, not only because of our knowledge of the 
nearness of the Kingdom, but also because of our knowledge 
of the weaknesses of others, which cause them to 
impinge upon our rights. 



R5841 : page 30 

SOME INTERESTING ITEMS 
PARIS BRETHREN MEET REGULARLY 

Extracts from a Letter of Brother Joseph Lefevre, main 
Elder of the I. B. S. A. Class in Paris, France, to Brother 
Louis F. Ruel, of New York.— Translated. 

Please, Brother Louis, openly tell our Beloved Pastor 
Russell, and through him all the dear brethren over there, 
of the cheerfulness and perfect peace which I derive daily 
from "My Morning Resolve" (especially the last part of 
it), in my long exile from my home in Denain (invaded territory), 
and from separation of my wife and other dear ones 
there. Also, the added blessing that I find, when at times my 
courage would fail me, in recalling the words: 

"Faith can firmly trust Him, 
Come what may," 
and then, softly repeating them, I regain greater comfort and 
joy! Yes; I desire of you the favor to thank the Lord for 
the precious help I have received from this "Resolve" counseled 
by the "faithful servant." I deeply appreciate the 
service, and must give vent to the feelings it suggests. 

I do not write to the dear Pastor, because being unable to 
express myself properly in English, I think better to sacrifice 
my own satisfaction than to divert otherwise too much of his 
attention from the interests of the many. However, I know 
how much he loves also the brethren of Northern France— 
and these, too, know it. Therefore, daily, from every heart 
of our people, ascends to the Heavenly Throne a fervent 
prayer beseeching for Brother Russell, our Pastor, an ever-increasing 
measure of the Spirit of grace, wisdom and understanding. 
Be sure and tell him that despite the keenly hard 
and long trial they are undergoing, all our French brethren 
and sisters, whose sentiments I am here voicing, are his "glory 
and joy" (" 1 Timothy 2:20 v ), by their faithfulness, faith and 
perseverance. 

The Lord lias made His Truth known here to some new 
hearts by my humble voice and despite my poor health. We 
have a class now of about forty-five, and every week new, 
thirsty souls come to the spring of the New Life. A number 
have known the beauty and privilege of consecration, and they 
are making large strides in spiritual progress. Nearly all the 
members attend the weekly testimony meeting. Three evenings 
during the week there are meetings (one at the other 
end of Paris), for Berean Studies or to discuss the Epistle 
to the Romans, with an average attendance of twenty. 

Until lately I have had to take personal charge of all the 
meetings, with the preparatory study that each entailed, which 
fortunately could be done owing to some leisure left by my 
working only eight hours daily at the office [an Insurance 
Company]. But now the Lord has given me a competent 
assistant in my dear Brother Theophile Leguime [formerly a 



Deacon at Denain], also physically weak, but strong in faith, 
who since the invasion was living with the friends at Auchel, 
Pas-de-Calais [a few miles from the battle front], and who 
has just been compelled to leave that place because the 
military authority became suspicious of his large correspondence 
with the brethren at the front and elsewhere, in the 
interest of the Truth and for their edification and comfort. 
The experience and ability of this brother will much avail, 
so that several things will be thus better cared for, under 
God's providence, answering my prayers that "He would send 
forth laborers into His Harvest."— "Matthew 9:38\ 

SHARP P. O. CENSORSHIP 

An Exchange asks: How far can a government department 
go in censoring printed matter committed to the mails? 

Will the Postmaster-General bar the following extract 
from a speech made by Kaiser Wilhelm of Germany in 1891 
to recruits? 

"Recruits! before the altar and the servant of God, you 
have given me the oath of allegiance.* * * Only one enemy 
can exist for you— my enemy. 

"With the present Socialist machinations, it may happen 
that I shall order you to shoot your brothers or even your 
parents— which God forbid— and then you are bound in duty 
implicitly to obey my orders!" 

If the Postmaster-General permits the above to go through 
the mails, why should he object to the little article by Jack 
London, reading in part: 

"Young man, the lowest aim in your life is to be a good 
soldier. The good soldier never tries to distinguish right 
from wrong. He never thinks; never reasons; he only obeys. 
If he is ordered to fire on his fellow citizens, on his friends, 
on his neighbors, on his relatives, he obeys without hesitation. 

"A good soldier is a blind, heartless, soulless, murderous 
machine. He is not a man. He is not even a brute, for 
brutes kill only in self-defense. No man can fall lower than 
a soldier— it is a depth beneath which he cannot go." 

Postmaster-General Burleson does object to the above. 
When it appeared on post-cards circulated by a peace society, 
he issued an order barring such post-cards from the mails. 

THE NEXT POSSIBLE STEP. 

To say that a newspaper carrying this text should be 
barred from the mails would be the next logical step. The 
distinction by the department is that such matter on a post-card 
is "openly displayed." In a newspaper it is not. 

The censorship is based on section 212 of the criminal 
code, which excludes from the mails all matter which carries 
openly any reflection on the character or conduct of any 
person. The department, however, has construed this to 
mean any class of persons. 

Leaders of the various peace societies are indignant over 
what they call this usurpation of power on the part of the 
department. 



EUREKA DRAMA WORK 

DEAR ONES IN CHRIST:- 

With the closing of the year 1915 we find that our activity 
in the EUREKA DRAMA work must close also. 

We have been working continually nearly all summer, 
showing almost every night. We traveled by wagon, and 
camped out, making our expenses very light; but as the cold 
weather came we found that the rental of halls and board 
and lodging were more than we could handle, so we have decided 
to discontinue our efforts until Spring, except in a few 
towns we can easily reach by rail. 

We have the DRAMA on the loan plan, and would like to 
keep it, hoping to start again as soon as the weather permits. 
We completed four counties in the past year. We showed, on 
an average, to one hundred and fifty persons each evening, 
and much interest was aroused. 

We did not specially encourage the signing of the cards, 
but merely mentioned it, and we think by so doing we received 

R5841 : page 31 

the names of those most interested. When we first 

started with the DRAMA we would pass pencils and encourage 

the people to sign, but we found that we could get those most 

interested by merely drawing their attention to the subject of 

the free booklet. All of us were blessed in the service and 

by the experiences we passed through, some of which were not 

the most pleasant, but we believe they were for our good. 

We have shown in many churches, and on two occasions 
we showed on Sunday evening after the preaching service. We 
also found some towns bitterly opposed, and the ministers 
would write articles for the local papers condemning Brother 
R. and the DRAMA. This only helped to increase interest, and 
two of these articles we were privileged to answer through 
the same columns. We did this in as kindly a way as possible. 

Please let us know if it will be all right to keep the DRAMA 
here and use it during the winter, as we have opportunity. If 
the work does not close by Spring, we hope to become active 
again in the service of the Truth. 

Wishing you all a very happy New Year and much joy 
in your service for the King of kings, 

Your Brother in Him, L. E. EDWARDS. 



FRENCH LETTERS FROM TERRITORY INVADED 
BY GERMANS 
(From the French WATCH TOWER.) 
I have been happy to receive word that you can again send 
us "LA TOUR DE GARDE" with the precious teachings of the 
faithful and wise servant. What a joy and comfort we 
find in having our eyes opened and being able to understand 



the Divine Plan! The Lord is permitting evils, mourning 

and sufferings for a little while still, but soon He will 

heal every wound, wipe away all tears and reign in righteousness. 

This is indeed "the vision of glory presented to our 

faith," in which glory we shall share if we are faithful to the 

end. And this is the time for us to realize in part Psalm 46, 

and wait patiently for the fulfilment of the rest. 

J. B. and J. TILMANT.-Belgium. 

R5842:page31 

Accept my best wishes for the dear family of the faith 
in Geneva, and especially for the brethren and sisters in THE 
TOWER office. Here on Sunday mornings we have Berean 
Bible Studies which are very useful, I can assure you, and 
worship in the afternoon. We frequently give an opportunity 
to the brethren, urging them to show what progress they 
have made in the study of the Word of our Heavenly Father. 
We also have very edifying testimony meetings. In these, 
twelve brethren and sisters and friends on the average, take 
part, and you can believe that God's blessings are much appreciated 
by the little class at Bruay, and we ask you to help us 
bring them before the Throne of the Father. The wonderful 
article in the July TOWER was to me a comfort and a blessing. 
Let our thanks go to the God of all grace for the 
sweet privilege He has granted us to know the Truth 
through the channel of him appointed! We keep on our 
heart every one of you, also our beloved Pastor Russell, to 
whom please transmit our most hearty greetings in Christ. 
E. LARVENT (Department of Nord).-France. 

"MY LORD AND I" 

DEAR PASTOR: -Enclosed find Money Order to the amount 
of $25. This is for the Lord's work in whatever way you 
see best. It represents my little self-denials, sometimes only 
a penny. I keep a box which I call The Lord's Box, and put 
in it whatever I can save by denying myself. What a little it 
is, to be sure, for all the dear Lord has given me! If I had 
the whole world to give it would be small in comparison. 

Each morning I take the Vow and Resolve; and almost 
every afternoon the Lord and I come together in close communion. 
I take my DAWNS and Bible, and we have a glorious 
meeting. I am very much isolated. I have to sneak away 
and hide everything that belongs to the Truth. I have no 
fellowship with the brethren. All mail is intercepted and destroyed 
except my WATCH TOWER, and the Lord has wonderfully 
preserved that. 

I have to be loving and kind to them that persecute me. 
Every day I am developing more and more of the blessed 
fruits of Christ's Spirit. What a changed being I have become! 
I don't know myself. Two years ago I was a most 
impatient, fault-finding person (professing Christ's name, 
too). For many years I was in the nominal church. Then 
I came into Christ's Church, and all is so different. 

I am striving to do the best that I can, like Lot in the 



midst of ungodliness. This is His will, and His will be done 
for me! I need your prayers, dear Brother, as I pray daily 
for you; and may He give you the very best place in His 
Kingdom; for you deserve it. 
I am. Yours in Christ, 

AN INDIAN'S ENTHUSIASM FOR THE TRUTH 

ESTEEMED PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

I am a Canadian, native-born Indian. A little over a year 
ago, while in London, Ont., a good friend of mine gave me 
a copy of BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLY-Vol. III., No. 13-saying, 
"There is a lot of good, common sense reading." 

I perused the pages and, thank God, from that time I was 
awakened to know more of the blessed Truth! I have been 
a Bible student all my life and I now see why I have so 
frequently been at loggerheads with my spiritual teachers. 

I sent for more of the "B. S. M." and I thank the Lord 
that with these you sent me also a copy of THE DIVINE PLAN 
OF THE AGES. After reading this my hope revived, for it was 
the very thing I had been blindly searching for in the church 
with which I had cast my lot. 

I am so happy now that I fear not death— glory to His 
name! I take up my cross daily and tell my friends the 
blessed Truth. Of course, I find the Devil busy with his 
misrepresentations, but I try daily to be more like my Master 
and to know more of the Truth which satisfies. 

It had been my one desire to see you face to face since 
the Truth became my stay, and I thank God that He granted 
my desire: I shook hands with you at the depot, London, 
Ont., and heard you lecture there. 

In closing let me say that I am studying your series, 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, and loaning these and others of 
your writings to my friends, as I can spare them. I am told 
one of these burned the papers I gave him; but as for me, I 
shall die a Bible Student. 

With true Christian love to you and all your helpers and 
all Bible students, I am SAMUEL JOHN.-Ont. 

"GREAT WAS THE FALL THEREOF" 

DEAR PEOPLE OF THE LORD:- 

Enclosed find $1 to cover the difference in expense on the 
leather-bound "Emphatic Diaglott." And whatever is left 
over, please use in the cause of the Lord. 

We have a class for all here on Wednesday evenings. 
You ought to see the enthusiasm. We started out with 4; 
now we are over 30; and our class is only 3 months old. 
But the "break" in our favor came only 3 weeks ago, just at 
the close of a four-weeks' "revival" conducted by an 
"evangelist" of the "Christian Church"— the only church 
here. Much abuse was hurled at us during those four weeks, 
but we said never a word. The speaker frequently referred to 
me as "false teacher," "weak-minded," and "ignorant," but at 
the last day of his tirade his patience "busted" and he openly 
challenged me to a debate. I saw my call and promptly accepted. 



So we hired the M. W. A. Hall for the last evening 

of his stay here. (It was just the right time, too— for us.) 

The evangelist contended that Jesus was not a created being, 

that Jesus' body certainly rose, and that the dead are in "conscious 

existence," and also that all the dead have nothing 

more coming to them than what they have already received. 

Every one in the neighborhood, including most of the cripples, 

came to attend what they termed "The Great Debate." The 

evening passed off nicely, the audience was attentive and 

quiet, the chairman maintaining strict order throughout. 

So far as the debate is concerned, my opponent was not 
very well posted, and he fell down on all points with a crash. 
It was a sad ending of their "revival." 

I am writing this hurriedly, so please overlook composition 
errors. You may use any or all of this letter for any purpose, 
if you wish. 

In fellowship and Christian love, E. N. FEROE.— Wash. 



"AN ECCLESIASTICAL BATTLE" BY 
JUDGE J. F. RUTHERFORD. 

DEAR MR. COWARD:- 

I have to thank you for the copy of the vindication of 
Pastor Russell, which you were kind enough to send me, and 
which, I need hardly tell you, I read with interest, having, as 
you know, been to some extent prejudiced against your 
leader and his work. 

Its perusal cannot fail to increase my interest in his 
writings, as each point raised by his champion carries conviction 
with it to any one who enters the jury-box with an open 
mind, as, thanks to your interview, I was prepared to do. 

Again thanking you, and with best wishes for yourself 
and work, I am 

Yours faithfully, CHAS. A. SMITH.-West Indies. 



page 32 

International Bible Students Association Classes 
STUDIES AND LECTURES BY MEMBERS OF THE PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 33 

VOL. XXXVII. FEBRUARY 1 NO. 3 
A. D. 1916-A.M. 6044 



CONTENTS 

What Is Embodied in True Humility . 35 

Suggestions for Self-Examination . 35 

Humility the Path to Glory ... 35 

Illustration of True Submission. . 36 

Illustration of False Humility . . 36 

The Highest Standard of Obedience . 37 
Typical Experiences of Elijah and Elisha 38 

A Word of Warning .... 38 

The "Chariot"— the "Fire"— the 
"Whirlwind" 39 

What Elijah's Mantle May Signify . 39 
The Humble to Be Exalted .... 40 
Satan's Counterfeit of True Religion . 41 
Christian Communism 44 

Why Repentance Was Not Preached . 45 
Persecution's Good Results .... 46 

Error's Bitter Fruitage. ... 46 

Opposition Inspired by Selfishness . 46 

Gradual Triumph of the Light . .47 
Some Interesting Letters .... 47 

page 34 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agenciesr-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as FolIows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



1916-THE MEMORIAL SUPPER-1916 

On April 16, after 6 p. m., the anniversary of our Lord's 
death date, that great event will be duly celebrated by Bible 
students all over the world. We will give further mention 
later. 



"EUREKA" DRAMA OF CREATION 

Notwithstanding many requests, we get but few responses 
regarding the work being done by the EUREKA DRAMAS. We 
fear that many are lying idle, and this seems a great pity, in 
view of the wonderful blessing that goes forth where they 
are shown. We hope that all the dear friends are feeling 
encouraged and stimulated and becoming more and more 
active in showing forth the Master's praise. 

We wish to remind the friends that we have lecture records 
in Swedish, Danish, German, Italian, Spanish and Polish. 
These have been prepared at considerable cost, and should be 
shown. They are good records, of which no one need be 
ashamed. There are multitudes anxious to hear, and those 
who have the opportunity of thus preaching the Gospel should 
surely esteem it and use it. Although the cost is more because 
of the smaller demand for these records, we propose 
supplying them, wherever they can be excellently used, at the 
same rates we have made on the English records and slides. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR MARCH 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
March follow: (1) 187; (2) 315; (3) 108; (4) 1 10; (5) 240; (6) 
149; (7) 324; (8) 267; (9) 114; (10) 1; (11) 12; (12) 22; (13) 
165; (14) 273; (15) 104; (16) Vow; (17) 47; (18) 50; (19) 
153; (20) 240; (21) 87; (22) 199; (23) 144; (24) 14; (25) 8; 
(26) 99; (27) 5; (28) 222; (29) 154; (30) 252; (31) 130. 



R5842 : page 35 

WHAT IS EMBODIED IN TRUE HUMILITY 

"Doing nothing from party-spirit or vain-glory, but 
in humility esteeming others as excelling yourselves. 
— 'Philippians 2:3\ Diaglott. 



LOWLINESS of mind, humility, is a mental 
quality which enables its possessor to look 
up with appreciation, not only to God, but 
also to earthly beings, recognizing their 
good qualities. The Apostle urges that this 
lowliness of mind should be in all of God's 
people; this fact proves it to be a quality 
that demands careful cultivation. 

Not all of the Lord's people are lowly 
in mind. Some of them think more highly 
of themselves than they ought to think. Some of them 
may be proud of having the Truth or of their ability to 
serve the Truth. Any such pride is very objectionable 
in the sight of the Lord, and indicates that its possessor 
has a very small mind; for, with a proper estimate of 
matters, the best of us can see that we have nothing 
of which to be proud, nothing of which to boast. If we 
have received anything of the Lord, we should boast of 
our receipts, instead of glorying in something as if we 
had attained it of ourselves. 

So the Lord's people should spend earnest effort to 
stimulate and encourage humility. Some have this quality 
naturally; but the larger number have to contend 
against the reverse tendency— self-esteem, self-exaltation, 
pride— a feeling that they are superior to others. 

SUGGESTIONS FOR SELF-EXAMINATION 

When we come to consider St. Paul's injunction, "in 
humility esteeming others as excelling yourselves," it is a 
question as to just what the Apostle meant. Those who 

R5843 : page 35 

have come into Christ should make progress, and should 
therefore feel that they are better than they were before 
they came into Christ. Those who have come into Christ 
know that they are not lower than all others. Evidently 
the Apostle did not mean that the Lord's people should 
rate themselves as inferior to other men. In his own 
case he felt that he was the chief of sinners, because he 
had been an open opposer of the Truth; and Jesus had 
said that whosoever should injure one of the least of 
His disciples would transgress seriously. We cannot 
say, therefore, that we are the chief of all sinners. We 
think that few of the Lord's people could say, I am the 
chief of sinners— either from the standpoint of committing 
crime or from that of persecuting the Church. We are 
not to bear false witness against ourselves. 

In what way, then, are we to understand the Apostle's 
injunction? In this way: We are to realize that no two 
of the Lord's people are just alike. If we have the right 
focus upon the matter, we shall think of our own talents 
in a humble manner. We shall think, "I have something 
of this quality or that talent or grace; and therefore I 



have much responsibility to the Lord. I wonder whether 
I am using as faithfully as I could, this talent which I 
think is greater than that of my neighbor or my brother. 
Though they may have less than I have, they may be 
using all that they have with more resolute purpose to 
succeed than I am using what I have. If this be so, 
then he is better than I am, in this respect." 

A PROPER ATTITUDE TOWARD BRETHREN 

As we look around in the Lord's family, we are bound 
to see the weaknesses and frailties of its various members. 
We are not to allow our thoughts to dwell too much upon 
their undesirable qualities, however, but are to remember 
all their good ones, especially their loyalty of heart. With 
ourself personally, it is always a recommendation in any 
one that God has called and accepted him. Whenever we 
see one who has come into the Truth, we say to ourself, 
"Well, no matter what he may be according to the flesh, 
God saw in his heart something good, noble and true; and 
since God is dealing with him as a son, he is therefore to 
be esteemed as a brother." Although we might not be 
able to esteem that man highly according to his natural 
qualities, yet we would do him good as we had opportunity. 
He might not be one whom we would select as a companion; 
yet God may esteem that brother more highly than 
He does us. Realizing this we would try to keep very 
humble and to learn whatever helpful lessons we might 
be able to get from that brother. 

In all persons there are certain qualities that may be 
esteemed and appreciated; even as the old lady said that 
she could wish that others had as much perseverance as 
Satan. We are to appreciate good traits whenever we see 
them in others. We do not know whether in the Lord's 
sight they may not be more noble, more self-sacrificing, 
more lowly in mind than ourselves. Our duty is plain. 
We are not able to read the heart, and hence we are to 
think kindly and generously of all those whom God has 
brought into His family. "Love beareth all things,... 
endureth all things." "As we have opportunity, therefore, 
let us do good unto all men, especially unto them of the 
Household of Faith."— "1 Corinthians 13:7"; "Galatians 6:10". 

HUMILITY THE PATH TO GLORY 

The Apostles Peter and James also emphasize the 
necessity on the part of the Lord's people that they be 

R5843 : page 36 

clothed with humility. They tell us that this grace is indispensable 

to those who would abide in the Father's 

favor; for God resists the proud, while He continually 

shows favor to those who are of humble spirit. Thus He 

encourages humility and discourages pride. (" 1 Peter 5:5"; 

"James 4:6".) We can see a reason for this course. The 



Almighty sees that we have nothing whatever of which 
to be proud or to boast. Whatever we have has been of 
the Lord's providence, or favoring circumstances. 

The Scriptures give some marked instances of the evil 
results of pride. Lucifer, one of the very highest of spirit 
beings, became proud and vain in his imagination, and 
encouraging these evil qualities he lost his exalted position, 
having become Satan, the adversary of God. If 
Mother Eve had possessed the proper humility she would 
have said, when tempted of the serpent, 1 will not listen 
to this suggestion to disobey my Creator; He knows what 
is for my highest good, and I therefore submit myself to 
Him who knows all things. "Pride goeth before destruction, 
and an haughty spirit before a fall."— "Prov. 16:18". 

In contrast, we have given to us a beautiful illustration 
of the opposite spirit— humility— in the case of the Logos. 
We are shown how He humbled Himself, and how God 
has highly exalted Him— to the very position which Satan 
coveted. So if we are fully obedient to the Lord, the results 
with us will be as with the Lord Jesus, a great 
blessing, a high exaltation. After presenting this argument, 
the Apostle says, "Humble yourselves, therefore, 
under the mighty hand of God, that He may exalt you in 
due time."—" 1 Peter 5:6". 

The Heavenly Father has deeper love for those who 
are humble. This is the reason why we should humble 
ourselves. Since we find that "God resisteth the proud," 
and that humility is one of the basic principles of a properly 
crystallized character, we should more and more seek 
to develop this grace and attain to the attitude in which 
God can give us the greatest blessing. 

THE "SOUND MIND" IS HUMBLE 

To humble ourselves does not necessarily mean to 
think that we have no talent, no power, no ability. Such 
an attitude would be foolishness. But we should think 
soberly of ourselves. We should think of all our powers 
as coming from God. So if we find that we have some 
blessings more than our neighbor or our brother or our 
sister, let us be thankful; but let us not for a moment 
think that we have anything to make us proud. It is a 
gift. We should appreciate the gift, but we should not be 
puffed up over its possession. The fact that we have received 
the gift indicates that we lacked it, needed it. 

The one who has naturally a proud heart, but who 
brings himself to the point of submission, manifests 
humility. If, on the other hand, one who by nature has 
too low an estimate of himself, will submit himself to 
God, the Father will show him the proper attitude of 
mind. The Apostle speaks of those who receive the Holy 
Spirit as having the "spirit of a sound mind." In proportion 
as we seek to become acquainted with God and to 
submit ourselves to His will, in that same proportion we 
become balanced in mind. We become more and more 
sane, if you please. He who receives the mind of Christ, 



the mind of God, the holy mind, is instructed more 
thoroughly by the Word. Thus we are getting the balance 
of a sound mind, the spirit of a sound mind. Our 
reasoning faculties become more developed as we grow 
in grace and in the knowledge of the Truth. 

ILLUSTRATION OF TRUE SUBMISSION 

No one can come to the Father except through full 
consecration. We must admit that we need the Master, 
and that without Him we can do nothing. So we take 
this position: "I am nothing but a sinner; I know that 
I am imperfect, that I have nothing which I have not 
received. God provides everything; whatever I have is 
a gift from Him. Knowing all this, I gratefully accept 
these things, and humble myself under His mighty hand." 

The world says. "No! I will not submit myself; if I 
need any punishment I will take what is coming to me." 
Such is the spirit of a worldly heart that has not yet 
learned its need and its impotence. But the spirit of a 
consecrated heart is that of submission to the will of the 
Lord. Such recognize that their only source of help is 
the Almighty God, through the Lord Jesus Christ as the 
Savior. For those alone who become His disciples can 
our Lord become the Advocate; and unless He be the 
Advocate none can be accepted of the Father. We might 
have a blessing in the Times of Restitution, but nobody 
can come to God now except through the Advocate. 

The terms of discipleship are that we lay down all 
earthly rights, earthly interests. Everything must be submitted 
before the Father will accept us as disciples of 
Christ at all, before He will beget us of the Holy Spirit, 
before we can become a part of the anointed Body of 
Christ. If we would make any true progress, we must 
say from the heart, "Thy will, not mine, be done." We 
know that God's will is best, whether we understand that 
will or not. A person with large self-esteem might, as a 
natural man, think his own will better; but when he comes 
to see the Truth, he will say, "I have made mistakes before; 
but now I will do the Lord's way, regardless of 
what my judgment may be." 

Such a course would evidence real humility, no matter 
how proud-spirited one might be by nature. As he 
would progress in the good way, and see more clearly 
wherein he had made mistakes, his humility would increase. 
So we are to submit ourselves, humble ourselves, 
have no will of our own, but merely seek the Lord's will. 

ILLUSTRATION OF FALSE HUMILITY 

There is such a thing as a false submission, which 
might deceive even the person himself. One might talk 
a great deal about submission to the will of God, and yet 
be only nominally submitting while he is really doing his 
own will. We are to watch, therefore, that we are carrying 
out the profession of submission, and that in our daily 



course of life we are asking, "Is this the course which the 
Lord wishes me to pursue? Is this the will of God?" 
The most submissive will receive the greatest blessings. 

R5844 : page 36 

God will test our submission and our humility. We cannot 
suppose that our Lord Jesus, who was perfect, did 
not know that He had perfect powers. But no matter 
what His own ideas were. He submitted Himself to the 
Father, and said, "Not My will, but Thine, be done." A 
man who had no tastes or preferences would be a nonentity. 
We may know what we would will for ourselves; 
and yet. knowing this, we are to say to ourselves. "You 
cannot have your own way about this; you are to seek to 
know what is the Lord's will concerning you in this 
matter, and to carry it out, as far as in you lies." 

SUBMISSION A TEST OF LOYALTY 

Sometimes the Lord's hand is very heavy. It was in 
the case of our Lord Jesus, heavy, pressed down. But 
when the Lord felt the Father's hand pressing down. He 
meekly bowed Himself beneath the weight, in humble 
acquiescence to the will of the One whose purpose He 
had come to carry out. But the Hand did not crush Him, 
although it seemed to do so. Instead of being a crushing, 
it was the Hand of Love, testing His obedience to the 
full. When His obedience was fully tested, the same 

R5844 : page 37 

Hand lifted Him up and "set Him at His own right hand 
in the Heavenly places; far above all principality, and 
power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is 
named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to 
come."— "Ephesians 1:20-23". 

Thus it will be with us, if we are found faithful. God 
will exalt us in due time. But He cannot exalt any who 
are not humble. Submission indicates faith. We would 
not submit ourselves unless we had absolute confidence in 
God. And not faith only, but loyalty also, is necessary. 
Therefore the Father tests us in these two qualities. Without 
these, we would be quite unfit for the Kingdom; and 
so the various tests of the present time are tests of faith 
and loyalty to God, and of entire submission to His will. 
It is to those "who, by patient continuance in well doing, 
seek for glory and honor and immortality" that God has 
promised "eternal life."— "Romans 2:7". 

We should recognize Divine providences and look for 
them. We should expect God's providential leadings in 
all of life's affairs. We should not pass through life with 
the thought that we are running this, or regulating that. 
As a child would look to his parent, or a pupil to his 
teacher, or as an apprentice to his master, or a maid to 
her mistress, so should our eyes be looking to the Lord 



asking His guidance.— 'Psalm 123:1, X. 
OUR ATTITUDE IN TRIAL 

This Divine guidance we should seek in all things. 
Suppose that some business complication arises. Perhaps 
one loses his situation. A child of God who had not 
learned full submission to the Lord's will might immediately 
blame some one else or find fault with his employers. 
But the right attitude for the Lord's people would be to 
say, "The Father knows all about this matter; He could 
have prevented it and would have done so had it been 
for my best interests. There is some lesson here for me 
to learn, and I will look for it." If he should discover 
that there had been some carelessness on his part, then 
he must perceive that the logical consequence would be 
that he lose the position. 

But if after careful investigation of matters, he feels 
that he could not have been more faithful or more loyal to 
duty, then he should look further and say, "Lord, I do 
not see wherein I have deserved to lose this situation, but 
I am looking to Thee, to see what is Thy providence in 
the matter; for Thou knowest that I must have some kind 
of employment; and therefore I merely pray. Give me this 
day my daily bread. I cannot suppose that this is accidental. 
Surely Thou hast some lesson for me in this 
experience. I know not what Thy providence may be. 
Give me, I pray, the necessary grace and wisdom to perceive 
Thy will." 

As he prays thus, he should at the same time be on the 
lookout for the Lord's providences and guidance. The 
child of God who thus acknowledges the Lord, and is 
faithful to Him in all the details of life's affairs, is the 
one who will come off victorious and be participator with 
the Master in His Kingdom. This great exaltation will 
be given all who are fully submissive to God's will, 
whether their powers and talents be many or few. 

THE HIGHEST STANDARD OF OBEDIENCE 

In our context the Apostle Paul urges that the Church 
cultivate the mind of Christ. He says, "Let this mind be 
in you which was also in Christ Jesus." He had been 
reciting the qualities necessary to the Church in order 
that they could be acceptable to the Father. Amongst 
these was an eager desire to please God. The Apostle 
exhorts all such to pursue the course of humility and 
submission taken by our Lord as the only proper path 
for the Master's footstep followers. St. Paul was endeavoring 
to impress that the mind of Christ was eminently 
worthy of imitation and painstaking cultivation. 

As a further evidence of the Master's great humility, 
the Apostle brings forcefully to their attention what 
Jesus was in His prehuman existence. As the Logos, He 
was in the form of God— the spirit condition. Yet He 
was not ambitious; He was not self-seeking. On the 



contrary, He made Himself of no reputation— divested 
Himself of His former glory and honor, that He might 
do the will of the Father. His spirit was directly opposite 
to that of Satan. The Logos thought not to usurp 
the Father's place, or to claim equality with Him, but 
manifested a very different disposition— an attitude of 
humility. Then "let this mind be in you," urges the 
Apostle. "Humble yourselves under the mighty hand of 
God, that He may exalt you in due time." Consider that 
God has called you with the same High Calling, that you 
might attain to a place at the right hand of Christ, even 
as He attained to a place at the Father's right hand. 
Realizing this, permit this mind of Christ to be in you. 
God was not seeking to force this mind upon Christ, 
nor is He seeking to force it upon us. Our Lord having 
taken this position of humility, in order to be man's 
Redeemer, it was needful that He maintain that mind in 
order to work out the blessed fruitage of patience. Three 
and one half years were required for Jesus to complete 
His work; and it was not until after He reached the Cross 
and could say, "It is finished," that He was "set down 
with the Father in His Throne." If we have become 
Jesus' disciples, if we have accepted the conditions of the 
High Calling, if we have received this mind, then we are 
to let, or permit, this mind to work out in us the character-likeness 
of our Head. 

THE UNIVERSAL STANDARD OF OBEDIENCE 

We have seen that the Logos did not meditate the 
usurpation to be equal with God, but humbled Himself. 
Lucifer took the opposite course. Instead of humbling 
himself, he said, "I will be like the Most High." ("Isaiah 14:14\) 
Here we have an illustration of what we should 
not do. It is a principle of the Divine Government that 
"He that exalteth himself shall be abased, but he that 
humbleth himself shall be exalted." "Humble yourselves, 
therefore, under the mighty hand of God, that He may 
exalt you in due time."— "Luke 14:11"; v l Peter 5:6\ 

Every creature of God, whether angel or man, should 
have this humble mind. This is the only proper attitude. 
This test comes during the Gospel Age to only the 
Lord and the Church. To what extent it may ever come 
to others is a question. It would seem to be impossible for 
this test to come to all. Those who have the right disposition 
will desire to do the Father's will at any cost. 
Doubtless if any one of the holy angels were allowed the 
privilege of becoming the Redeemer of a race, he would 
be glad to do so. We do not know, however, just how it 
would have been had the angels not seen the result of 
the obedience of the Logos to the will of the Father. 

The world will be subjected to a test during the Millennial 
Age. The proper attitude for every creature 
would be to risk everything in the Father's service; it 
will eventually be the standing of the world of mankind 
—every one who shall attain everlasting life. We must 



remember, however, that Divine Justice never calls for 
self-sacrifice. It calls for obedience; and the obedience 
of the Church is the extreme of obedience— even "unto 
death." But the Father has offered a reward so high that 
such obedience has become the standard par excellence 
throughout the Universe.— 'Revelation 2: 10". 



R5844 : page 38 

TYPICAL EXPERIENCES OF ELIJAH AND ELISHA 

What a stenographer reported from 
one of Brother Russell's meetings. 

BEFORE we leave the dear friends here to go 

to another city, some of you will wish to 

say, "Brother Russell, we may not see you 

again for quite a while; and we wish you 

would say something about the hopes of the 

Church for the near future. Do you think 

that the Church will be changed very soon?" 

We answer. We do not know. We admit 

that there are many things that we do not 

know. If we knew all about the Book of 

Revelation, we would get out the Seventh Volume very 

soon. There are a few things of which we are not just 

sure. We do not like to do any guess-work. We could 

guess about some things, but we do not allow ourself to 

guess. "If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of 

God."- 1 Peter 4:1 V. 

"But, Brother Russell, what is your thought as to the 
time of our change? Were you not disappointed that it 

R5845 : page 38 

did not come when we hoped that it would?" you will ask. 
No, we reply, we were not disappointed. Two years before 
that time we pointed out in THE WATCH TOWER 
that we did not think the change would come October, 
1914. But, Brethren, those of us who are in the right 
attitude toward God are not disappointed at any of His 
arrangements. We did not wish our own will to be done; 
so when we found out that we were expecting the wrong 
thing in October, 1914, then we were glad that the Lord 
did not change His Plan to suit us. We did not wish Him 
to do so. We merely wish to be able to apprehend His 
plans and purposes. 

"What do you think of things now?" you ask. "What 
would you think are the present indications' 1 " To this 
we say. We have already mentioned in THE WATCH 
TOWER and in talks given to the friends what is our 
thought as to the type of Elijah and Elisha in the close 
of the earthly career of the Prophet Elijah. We will 
briefly refer to it again here, and perhaps might add a 



word further. We recognize that the Church of God 

is the antitype of Elijah because she is, with her great 

Head, The Christ of God. It is The Christ in the flesh 

that antitypes the Prophet Elijah. His experiences during 

his career as God's Prophet typified the experiences 

of The Christ class during all the more than eighteen 

hundred years of their earthly career. His closing experiences 

would parallel, we understand the Scriptures to 

teach, the closing experiences of the last members of the 

Christ Body in the flesh. 

PASSING OF LAST CHRONOLOGICAL POINT A TEST 

We remember that when the Lord would take up 
Elijah into the heavens He brought certain things to 
pass that would make a parallel to the taking away of 
the last members of Christ. We believe that this is a 
reasonable inference. We have seen how the Lord, upon 
the day that Elijah was to be taken away, sent him to 
four successive places— Gilgal, Bethel, Jericho and Jordan. 
At each of these different places Elijah evidently 
thought that the Lord would take him. And so it has 
been with us. During this Harvest of the Age the 
Lord, through His Word, has seemed to send His people 
to four different points of time- 1874, 1878, 1881 and 1914. 
At each of these points of time the watching saints who 
realized that the end of the Age was upon the Church 
have thought that the "change" might come. They 
watched for it. When they came to each of these points, 
the Lord said, "Go to another place." Finally we reached 
the last place of the four— October 1st, 1914. This was 
the last point of time that Bible chronology pointed out 
to us as relating to the Church's experiences. Did the 
Lord tell us that we would be taken there? No. What 
did He say? His Word and the fulfilments of prophecy 
seemed to point unmistakably that this date marked the 
end of the Gentile Times. We inferred from this that 
the Church's "change" would take place on or before 
that date. But God did not tell us that it would be so. 
He permitted us to draw that inference; and we believe 
that it has proven to be a necessary test upon God's 
dear saints everywhere. 

WHAT SMITING OF THE WATERS MAY MEAN 

Did the Times of the Gentiles end by October 1st, 
1914? It certainly looks very much as if they did. The 
great nations of the world there began to go to pieces 
under the terrible shaking process then begun. The 
shaking is still going on, day by day, week by week, and 
will continue until the work of destruction is complete. 
Do we see anything definite as yet as to when we are to 
finish our earthly course? We do not see anything 
positive thus far. If any of you find out anything, we 
wish you would tell us. 

What do we expect? We expect just what the picture 



points out. Of late we have been thinking considerably 

of what took place when Elijah and Elisha came 

to the river Jordan. They stopped there and stood talking. 

Something must be done before they could go 

further. So the Lord's people have been standing for 

a time since we came to October, 1914. Then Elijah 

took his mantle, wrapped it together and smote the waters 

of Jordan. The waters divided to right and left, and 

the Prophets went over dry shod. After they had 

crossed, they went on, talking together. They had received 

no further instructions from the Lord. They 

simply walked on. Suddenly the chariot of fire appeared 

and separated them, and Elijah was taken away in the 

chariot by a whirlwind. 

CHARIOT OF FIRE TO MAKE SEPARATION 

What does this signify in antitype? We think that 
it signifies a division between the Little Flock and the 
Great Company. We are to be careful not to form a 
judgment as to who are to be of the Great Company, 
however. Some say to us, "What do you think of such 
a brother?" We are not to judge one another. It is not 
for us to say that such a one belongs to the Great Company 
class. We are to consider all the friends as one 
people. Only the Lord knows who are His wholly faithful 
ones, and He is leaving the matter to be manifested 
at the end of the earthly career of the Little Flock. The 
Lord Himself will do the dividing. 

A WORD OF WARNING 

Right here we will give you a little illustration of 
how serious a mistake might be made along this very 
line. On one of our tours we were in a car with one of 
the Pilgrim brethren and another brother living in that 
vicinity, plainly dressed. The Pilgrim brother remarked, 
"That is Brother So-and-so, and I do not think that 
he is very much interested." He intimated that he 
thought the brother was one of the Great Company class. 
We asked him why he thought so. He replied, "I don't 
know; but he does not seem to take a very active part 
in the service nor does he attend the meetings." Now 
we will tell you the facts concerning this brother. That 
man whom the Pilgrim brother thought was probably 
a member of the Great Company class was one who had 
given about twenty thousand dollars to the Lord's work, 
and he was living in very humble circumstances and 
wearing very plain clothes because of his sacrifice in 

R5845 : page 39 

the interests of the cause of Christ. The Pilgrim brother 
knew nothing of this, and had no particular interest in 
the matter. Thus you see how any of us might be deceived 
in respect to each other. "The Lord knoweth 



them that are His." 

When the Lord's time comes for separating His Little 
Flock class. He will make no mistake. It will be the 
Little Flock that will go in the chariot, and no others. 
Let us, therefore, keep ourselves in the love of God. 
Never mind what any one else thinks. Of course we are 
to love and serve the brethren; but even when we do 
our best, some of the brethren may misunderstand us. 
But trust it all in the Lord's hands. He will take care 
of the entire matter. Do not decide about anybody else; 
but let each of us watch himself, and see to it that he 
keep his heart in the right attitude toward the Lord and 
the brethren. St. Paul says, "Judge nothing before the 
time." ( v l Corinthians 4:5'.) All will soon be manifested. 
We shall see the Elijah class taken away in the 
chariot; the others will not be taken. Then we shall 
see the radical division. We shall know all about it then. 
The Lord will attend to it. 

THE "CHARIOT," THE "FIRE," AND THE "WHIRLWIND" 

Now, as to the meaning of the fire and the chariot: 
Fire always represents destruction, and a chariot of fire 
would seem to signify some very trying experience that 
will separate the Elijah class from the Elisha class, and 
bring the deliverance of the Elijah class. 

"Brother Russell, are you not afraid of alarming us?" 
some may ask. No! We are all very desirous of getting 
into the Lord's Chariot, surely. It is the best thing in 
all the world. "But it means trouble!" Well, we desire 
trouble, if this trouble will be our chariot to take 
us Home. We are waiting for it day by day. When 
Elijah's chariot came, it was in a whirlwind that he was 
carried into the heavens, into the atmosphere, beyond 
earthly vision. What did the whirlwind signify as regards 
the Church? "Does it mean more trouble?" you 
will ask. We think it does. Dear friends, we are waiting 
for that chariot and whirlwind. "What will it be?" 
Well, we know that the Lord pictures the great time of 
anarchy that is coming as a great whirlwind. He says, 
"Behold, evil shall go forth from nation to nation, and a 
great whirlwind shall be raised up from the coasts of the 
earth. And the slain of the Lord shall be at that day 
from one end of the earth even unto the other end of 
the earth; they shall not be lamented, neither gathered 
nor buried; they shall be dung upon the ground."— 'Jeremiah 25:30-33 v 
x 30:23,24\ 

To our understanding the Elijah class will be amongst 
the first to be affected by the great whirlwind of anarchy. 
We believe it signifies that many of the Lord's people- 
all of the faithful at that time— will be taken from the 
present life in some anarchistic movement. We would 
not talk about these things to the public; for the public 
would not be interested in them. The Master said, "Cast 
not your pearls before swine." We are talking about it 
here because we think that all here are deeply interested. 



and are expecting to share in the chariot and whirlwind 
experiences. Here is the point, then. We think that our 
final experiences will be during some kind of anarchistic 
uprising. For some time we have been wondering just 
how all the Church would be taken. If the "change" 
comes to each one by death in the usual way, it would 
seem very wonderful to see the consecrated all over the 
world die suddenly. Neither can they all die of old age: 
for this would mean that some would have to live a 
good many years yet. 

R5846 : page 39 

THREE IMPORTANT POINTS 

But here is the way the Lord pictures the matter: 
First, there will be the chariot of fire. We do not know 
what this will be; but we understand that some fiery experience 
will cause a separation between the two classes 
of the Lord's people. Then will develop the whirlwind 
of anarchy. Perhaps this will be mobs that will destroy 
the lives of the faithful ones. We do not know. We 
cannot now imagine just what it will be. We do not 
wish to think anything foolish; we are merely studying 
the type, or picture. We do not intend to do anything to 
get into trouble. To do so would be like what the Devil 
suggested to Jesus: "Cast Thyself down from the pinnacle 
of the Temple." We are to be just as wise, kind, 
meek, gentle and as faithful to the Lord as we know 
how to be, and then have our minds perfectly calm and 
restful. When the Lord's time for us comes, all will be 
right. Let us rest in His love and wisdom and care. 
What He provides for His children will be the very 
best thing for us, and we shall be glad to have it. 

"Are you expecting the fiery chariot any minute now, 
or do you think it some little distance off— perhaps some 
months yet, or perhaps a year or more?" will be asked. 
At least a year, or probably more, is my thought. Something 
else is coming first, dear friends. We do not as yet 
see clearly just what it is; but this matter of Elijah's rolling 
his mantle together and smiting the waters of Jordan 
seems to mean something, and also the crossing of the 
river. This picture is not given for nothing. "What 
does it mean?" you ask. Ah, we know that most prophecies 
are understood only after they are fulfilled! We 
might, however, have a suspicion. "What would that 
be?" Something like this: In Bible symbolic language, 
water represents Truth, and it also represents peoples. 
Both of these are given in Scripture as being symbolized 
by water. ('Revelation 17: V; "Jeremiah 51:12,13*; "Revelation 17:15"; 
"22:1,2"; "Ezekiel 47:1-12"; "Ephesians 5:26".) 
Furthermore, Jordan means testing, or judging down. 
Now who or what would be judged in the antitype? 

WHAT ELIJAH'S MANTLE MAY SIGNIFY 



We answer, we believe that the peoples of earth, the 
public in general, are to be judged by the Truth. The 
peoples are represented by waters. It would seem that 
in some way the people are to be judged and tested; and 
that a division of public sentiment is to be caused, in connection 
with the Truth. Waters are to be separated 
from waters, people from people, the Truth being received 
by some and rejected by others. Elijah wrapped 
his mantle together and smote the waters; and they were 
divided. Elijah's mantle was the outward indication, or 
sign, of God's power with him, and represented God's 
power and blessing with the Church. The mantle was in 
Elijah's hand when he smote the waters with it. So 
the Church, it would seem, will use what is in their hand, 
the power and authority of the Truth, the power of God, 
in smiting the waters— peoples. 

"Do you think that this has not yet taken place?" may 
be a question in your minds. We think it has not as yet 
fully taken place. "Do you not think that the PHOTO-DRAMA 
OF CREATION has had a part in this?" It may be. 
"Will there be something more?" We do not know. 
We RATHER THINK THERE IS SOMETHING MORE. We do 
not state this positively. We are keeping watch to 
see in what way God will exercise some very wonderful 
power causing some division as respects the Truth. 
We are merely thinking aloud with you. We are looking 
for some very pronounced division on the subject 
of the Truth, something that will eventually lead up to a 

R5846 : page 40 

great hatred. You remember that in our Lord's ministry 
He presented certain truths that caused the Scribes and 
Pharisees to hate Him. It was their hatred that led up 
to His arrest and crucifixion. The hate was there. They 
said, "We must kill Him." 

We shall not do anything foolish; we shall not go 
out on the streets to stir up trouble. We are to exercise 
the spirit of a sound mind— gentleness, meekness, patience, 
brotherly4dndness and love. We are to be "wise as serpents 
and harmless as doves." CGalatians 5:22.23"; 
'Matthew 10:16\) All these instructions we must not forget. 
But when we see any trouble coming upon us when 
we are doing what is right, when we are obeying the 
Lord, then we are able to take it as from Him. If we 
do not manifest the Master's spirit, if we speak proudly 
or boastfully to people, then we shall have it to regret 
that we did not follow in the footsteps of Jesus. 

So, then, you see what we are looking for. Whether 
this will take place in a few months or in a few years 
more we may not be sure. But we think we shall see 
something that will bring a division in the sentiments 
of the people before we get into the fiery chariot. And 
now, dear brethren and sisters, we leave you with these 
thoughts, asking God's blessing upon us all. 



"Mine eyes can see the glory of the presence of the Lord; 
He is tramping out the winepress where His grapes of wrath 

are stored: 
I see the flaming tempest of his swift-descending sword: 

Our King is marching on." 



R5846 : page 40 

THE HUMBLE TO BE EXALTED 

-FEBRUARY 13.- PHILIPPIANS 2:1-1 P. - 

HUMILITY THE GREAT LESSON FOR ALL-THE ONLY BEGOTTEN 
AN ILLUSTRATION-HOW HE WAS RICH-HOW HE BECAME 
POOR-WHY HE WAS EXALTED-HOW HE WAS 
EXALTED-CHURCH WALKS IN HIS FOOTSTEPS. 

"For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though 
He was rich, yet for your sakes He became poor, that ye 
through His poverty might become 
rich."— "2 Corinthians 8:9'. 

ST. PAUL, then a prisoner in Rome, wrote 

these words of our lesson to the Philippian 

brethren, whom he so dearly loved and from 

whom he had received so many proofs of 

their love for him. No other Church is 

mentioned as having aided St. Paul in his 

times of need. Their special assistance to 

him is mentioned— twice in Thessalonica 

("Philippians 4: 16"), once in Corinth ("2 Corinthians 1 1:9"), 

and now at Rome. 

The Epistle to the Philippians has been styled an 
epistle of joy— so richly did the Apostle's heart seem to 
respond to the faithfulness of the brethren there. He 
would have them know that he appreciated their love, and 
that such love should abound toward each other and 
toward all. His joy would be filled full in proportion as 
he could realize that the brethren had the proper mind of 
Christ, its love and harmony. He exhorted, therefore, 
that they remember the conditions on which such character 
could be developed. Nothing should be done by 
them through strife or for vain-glory. All of their conduct 
should be marked by lowliness, humility and willingness 
to discern the good qualities of others— noting 
wherein others were superior to themselves. 

This would not mean that they should deceive themselves, 
but that they should be on the alert to appreciate 
true quality and character wherever found— looking for 
noble qualities in others, and generously hoping that they 
existed even when not discerned— considering the interests 
of the Lord's cause, and ignoring self-will or pride. 



Therefore they should not look merely at their own things 
or interests, but also upon those of others— the rights of 
others, the ability of others. This, the Apostle assures 
us, is a mark of the Holy Spirit, the Spirit of a sound 
mind, which comes to the followers of Jesus as they grow- 
in grace and the Master's character-likeness. 

This mind, or disposition, the Apostle declares, was 
fully exemplified in Jesus. In His pre-human condition. 
when in the form of God, a spirit being, Jesus was humble. 
He did not meditate usurpation of Divine authority to 
exalt Himself, to seek a name higher than His own, as 
Satan did. He had no thought of robbing the Divine 
glory and honor by putting Himself upon an equality 
with God the Father. On the contrary. He had the same 
spirit that He had afterwards, when He declared, "Not 
My will, but Thine, be done"; and again, "I came not to 
do Mine own will, but the will of Him that sent Me"; 
and again, "My Father is greater than all."— "Luke 22:42"; 
'John 6:38V 10:29V 14:28\ 

The Master always had this disposition of reverence 
for the Father and of full trust and confidence in the 
Divine Wisdom, Love, Justice and Power. Hence, when 
the time came that the Father had purposed— when He 
would send a Savior into the world, first to redeem it and 
later on to become its King and Deliverer— and the proposal 
to render this great service to God and to men was 
proffered to the great Logos— "the Only Begotten of the 
Father"— it was promptly accepted. "I delight to do Thy 
will, O My God!" was the response of the chiefest of all 
God's creatures. This involved a great humiliation- 
leaving the dignity of the chiefest on the spirit plane, to 
become a human being— a man amongst men— "the Man 
Christ Jesus"— not a sinful man, but a perfect one, in the 
image and likeness of God, as was the first Adam originally- 
"holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners." 

"THE MAN CHRIST JESUS" 

After Jesus by the change of nature found Himself a 
man amongst men. He still preserved the same loyalty to 
the Father. He was only a child when we hear Him say, 

R5847 : page 40 

"Wist ye not that I must be about My Father's business?" 
("Luke 2:49".) Having learned that He could not attend 
to the Father's business until He reached the age stipulated 
in the Sinaitic Law, He remained quietly at home 
until nearly thirty. Then promptly He went forth to 
John the Baptist at Jordan; and by a public immersion 
He testified His full obedience to the Father's will— 
the full consecration of His life, even unto death. 

Then there came upon Him a begetting of the Holy 
Spirit, as testified by John. Then, too, God granted that 
spirit-begotten One a special mental illumination; as we 
read, "The heavens [the higher things] were opened unto 



Him." The Divine Plan was made plain which involved 
His own death as the Antitype of the serpent raised on 
the pole by Moses, as the Antitype of the bullock of sin-offering 
slain by Aaron, as the Antitype of the Passover 
lamb slain by the Israelites and eaten by them for their 
strengthening and deliverance from Egypt— delivering 
the people of God from Satan's yoke of bondage to sin. 
In all these experiences, we find that the Master was 
faithful, loyal to God, loyal to His covenant, loyal to the 

R5847 : page 41 

principles of righteousness. Thus it is written of Him, 
"Thou hast loved righteousness and hated iniquity; therefore 
God, even Thy God, hath anointed Thee with the oil 
of gladness above Thy fellows." ("Psalm 45:7".) The oil 
of gladness represented the holy joy of our Lord and the 
holy prospects which sustained Him during this period 
when He made Himself of no reputation, and became 
poor indeed— finally losing even His life— all in loyalty 
to God's will and the Program marked out in the Bible. 

His final cry on Calvary was, "It is finished!" His 
baptism into death was finished— His full approval for 
obedience to God and the principles of righteousness, all 
that the Father had given Him to do in the way of sacrifice, 
had been accomplished. Ah, then it was God's turn 
to act! Would He leave His faithful One in death? 
Nay, "faithful is He who promised," who performed His 
good promises to His faithful Son. 

The Apostle tells of this, saying, "Him hath God 
highly exalted, and given Him a name which is above 
every name"— a title and honor, a distinction, a place 
above all others. ("Verses 9-1 1".) He was received into 
glory; and all the angels of God worshiped Him whom 
the Father had thus exalted to His own right hand, giving 
Him, additionally to what He had resigned, glory and immortality- 
the Divine nature. Well can we understand 
the acclaim of the Heavenly ones: "Worthy is the Lamb 
that was slain to receive power, riches, wisdom, strength, 
honor, glory and blessing."— "Revelation 5:12". 

MESSIAH'S GLORIOUS KINGDOM 

But there is more glory yet to come to the great 
Redeemer. Those who crucified Him, yea, all the world 
of mankind, for whom He tasted death, are yet to be 
made aware of His great sacrifice on their behalf and of 
the great honor and high exaltation which came to Him 
as a result. He is to be the world's King of Glory and 
is to reign for a thousand years. As "Verse 10" declares, 
eventually every knee on earth will bow, and every tongue 
will acknowledge Him; and all others not willing thus to 
recognize and obey Him are to be destroyed from amongst 
the people as "natural brute beasts." ("2 Peter 2:12"; "Jude 10".) 
"And it shall come to pass, that every soul which 
will not hear that Prophet shall be destroyed from among 



the people." ('Acts 3:23'.) And all this glorifying of the 
Son will directly be to the Father's glory; for the entire 
Plan of Salvation is of the Father and through the Son, 
as the Apostle assures us.—' 1 Corinthians 8:6'. 

Now then, let us not lose the point of the Apostle's 
lesson expressed in our Golden Text. While the world 
by and by is to profit by the Redeemer's great sacrifice 
and subsequent Kingdom, and all are to have the opportunity 
of being restored to human perfection and a 
world-wide Kingdom, a special blessing of God is for 
the Church, who now accept the Redeemer, consecrate 
their lives, as He did His, to the Father's will, and walk 
in the footsteps of Jesus. They shall become His joint-heirs 
in the Kingdom, and reign with Him a thousand 
years— yea, and beyond. 

The essence of this lesson is elsewhere expressed by 
the Apostle Peter. "Humble yourselves therefore under 
the mighty hand of God, that He may exalt you in due 
time." (' 1 Peter 5:6\) Only the humble-minded are prepared 
to learn the great lessons which must be learned 
before they will be ready for exaltation that would be 
profitable to themselves or to others. The course of 
selfishness and self-seeking is illustrated in Satan, who 
has failed and is ultimately to be destroyed. The same 
self-seeking spirit is styled the spirit of the world; and 
it is about to lead the world to the great catastrophe foretold 
in the Bible— from which, however, they will be 
rescued by Messiah and His Kingdom, and will have the 
opportunity of learning the great lesson of humility and 
obedience and of getting the reward. 

Jesus, on the contrary, has illustrated to us the proper 
course which leads to glory, honor and immortality. 
namely, the course of full self-abasement and of full submission 
to whatever may be the Divine will. As the 
Savior has entered into His glory as a reward for His 
obedience, so the faithful of His people, the Church, 
demonstrating their humility and obedience, will be 
sharers. His joint-heirs in His future Kingdom of glory. 



R5847 : page 41 

SATAN'S COUNTERFEIT OF TRUE RELIGION 

"There is a way which seemeth right unto a man, but 
the end thereof are the ways of death."— 'Proverbs 14:12' 

IT MAY be a subject of some surprise to learn 
that Satan has a gospel, yet such would 
not be the case if all were familiar with 
the Satan of Scripture. Unfortunately for 
themselves the great majority today are 
not acquainted with the delineation of the 
Devil which God's Word supplies. They 
know little or nothing about his motives. 



his methods, his ministers, his machinery 

or his media. To them he is either a 

hideous monster with horns, hoofs and a tail, or else an 

abstract principle of evil— the absence of good, a negation. 

The words which Goethe put into the mouth of 

Mephistopheles in "Faust," "I am the spirit of Negation," 

is the popular definition of the Devil today. He is impersonal, 

immaterial, impossible. As one has quaintly 

put it, "They spell Devil without a 'd' as they spell God 

with two 'o's.'" Good and evil is their scheme. "All 

the Devil there is, is the devil within you," is the last word 

of modern theology. 

Now, an intelligent enemy always keeps in the background, 
remains hidden, out of sight. It is an important 
factor to his success that his identity should be concealed. 
The assassin who plunges a knife into the back 
of his victim is generally hired for the purpose. The 
one who throws the bomb is merely a pawn, the master-mind 
that planned the deed is unseen and unsuspected. 
The police in some of our large cities know perfectly well 
that many of the most daring crimes are engineered by 
one who is too astute to show his hand. Those whom 
he employs to execute his plans may be caught, but the 
genius who "pulls the strings" is secure. Therefore it 
need not surprise us to find that the masses do not believe 
in the existence of a personal Devil. It would be strange 
were it otherwise. "Where ignorance is bliss 'tis folly to 
be wise" is doubtless an axiom, of the truth and value of 
which, in relation to humanity, the Devil is fully assured. 

The Word of God does not leave us in any doubt as 
to the existence of a personal Devil. It furnishes us with 
a full-length portrait of him. It gives us a comprehensive 
description of his being, his emissaries and his aims. 
Personal names are ascribed to him and personal characteristics 
attributed to him. He is represented as being 
the originator and source of all evil in the Universe, and 
the implacable enemy of God and man. His power is so 
tremendous that we are informed, "Michael, the archangel, 

R5847 : page 42 

when contending with the Devil (he disputed about 
the body of Moses), durst not bring against him a railing 
accusation, but said. The Lord rebuke thee." fJude 9\) 
His dominion is so great and his impudence so audacious 
that he offered all the kingdoms of the world to the Son 
of God, on the one condition that He would fall down 
and worship him. And our Lord did not challenge his 
right to make such an offer, but upon a subsequent occasion 
acknowledged him to be the Prince of this world. 

Moreover, the Word of God not only describes at 
length the person and power of the Devil, but it also acquaints 
us with his purposes, which may be summed up 
under two heads, namely: To deny the Word of God and 
to destroy the Work of Jesus Christ. It would be apart 
from our present purpose were we to turn aside and show 



at length how every available weapon was employed in 
the first centuries of the Christian Era to destroy the 
Bible, and how in these last days Satan is using the pens 
of the "higher critics" to destroy the authority of the 
Holy Scriptures. Suffice it to say that, from the day 
when he repudiated the words of Jehovah to Eve, until 
the moment when he is cast into the Abyss, his untiring 
energies will be devoted to the work of denying the 
Oracles of God. 

Ever since the first Messianic prediction Satan has 
tried to destroy the Work of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
First, by way of anticipation and secondly by a method 

R5848 : page 42 

of imitation. When Jehovah declared to the serpent that 

the Seed of the woman should bruise his head, it was not 

long before that old serpent, the Devil, tried to frustrate 

the purposes of God. Cain (who was of that wicked 

one) slew his brother Abel as the first attempt to destroy 

the woman's seed. Later on, God declared to Abraham that 

"in him should all the families of the earth be blessed," 

or, as the Holy Spirit's comment upon these words informs 

us, "Now to Abraham and his Seed were the 

promises made. He saith not. And to seeds, as of many, 

but as One, And to thy Seed, which is Christ." ("Galatians 3: 16".) 

When in Egypt the descendants of Abraham 

began to wax numerous and it appeared that there was 

an immediate likelihood of this prophecy receiving its 

fulfilment, Satan tried to frustrate the prophecies of 

God and destroy the channel through which that Seed 

was to come by inciting Pharaoh to issue a command that 

the male children of the Hebrew women should be destroyed. 

("Exodus 1:16".) When at a still later date 

God made known to King David that the promised Messiah 

was to be born of the royal tribe of Judah, Satan 

made a still more persistent attack to thwart God, as 

may be witnessed during the time of the divided kingdom, 

when the ten tribes made an untiring and determined 

effort to exterminate the tribe of Judah. 

When the fulness of the time was come and Immanuel 
was born at Bethlehem, Satan promptly made an effort 
to destroy the young child's life. Through Herod he 
slew all the children in Bethlehem from two years old 
and under. But his effort was in vain. For being 
warned of God in a dream Joseph had taken the young 
child and his mother and fled into Egypt. At the commencement 
of our Lord's ministry (in the Temptation), 
Satan tried to make Him throw Himself down from the 
Temple. On another occasion when, wearied out with 
the day's work, our Lord sought a few minutes' sleep in 
the bow of the boat, the Prince of the Power of the Air 
lashed the Sea of Galilee into a fury until the disciples 
feared that the little ship was doomed. And it was not 
until the Creator of the sea commanded it to be still that 
the plot of the Devil was foiled. 



Other instances could be cited in which the Devil 
sought to prevent our Lord offering Himself as a Sacrifice 
for sin. Perhaps the supreme occasion was while He 
was upon the cross itself. Weakened by His sufferings, 
tortured by His merciless enemies, hanging helpless between 
the earth and Heaven, Satan challenged Him to 
demonstrate His Deity by descending from the cross. 
"Thou that destroyest the Temple, and buildest it in three 
days, save Thyself. If thou be the Son of God come 
down from the cross." ('Matthew 27:40'.) But glory to 
His blessed Name He never faltered, He patiently and 
majestically bore His sufferings in silence until He cried 
in triumph, "It is finished!" and surrendered His spirit 
into the hands of the Father. But the Devil had still 
another card to play. His sacred body having been borne 
from the cross and laid in the sepulchre. Satan then made 
it his business to see that it was securely sealed and 
guarded by a company of Roman soldiers. Ah, Satan! 
if thou canst only succeed in keeping in the tomb that 
Body, thou hast triumphed. But no, again thou art defeated! 
The grave cannot retain its victim. Death cannot 
hold the Lord of Life. "Up from the grave He rose, 
with a mighty triumph o'er His foe— Hallelujah, Christ 
arose!" And today He lives and is alive forevermore! 

Having been thwarted and defeated at every point, 
having failed to prevent the incarnation [His being 
"made flesh," 'John 1:14'] of our blessed Lord, having 
failed to prevent His offering Himself as a Sacrifice for 
sin, having failed to keep His body in the confines of 
death, it behooves us to inquire. Has Satan given up in 
despair? Has he ceased in his efforts to destroy the 
Work of Christ? Has he changed his attitude toward 
the Son of God? or is he still perpetuating his hellish 
deeds? Is he still seeking to annul the effects of Christ's 
Work? Is he yet desirous of destroying the virtues of 
the cross? An answer to these questions is of the greatest 
importance. 

Again we need to turn to the infallible Word if we 
would obtain a reliable answer. In the parable of the 
Tares our Lord has exposed Satan's methods during the 
time of His absence from this world. After the Son of 
Man had graciously condescended to scatter the Word 
of God, Satan likewise did some sowing and went and 
scattered broadcast his Tares among the Wheat. It is 
to be noted that he sowed neither thorns nor thistles, but 
something which so closely resembles the genuine grain 
that it is not until the time of the Harvest that the one 
can be distinguished from the other. Then it is seen 
that the Tares, though resembling the Wheat in every 
other respect, bear no fruit, produce no increase. In a 
word, then, just as Satan formerly sought to destroy 
the Work of Christ by way of anticipation, he is now 
engaged in the work of nullifying the virtues of the 
Death of Christ by a method of imitation. Consequently, 
as Christ has a Gospel, Satan must also have a gospel. 
And, in the nature of the case, it must be a gospel which 



so much resembles the Gospel of Christ that it is capable 
of deceiving the unwary and deluding the unsaved. It 
will be our business now, not to expound his gospel, but, 
with the Spirit's aid, to expose it. 

The gospel of Satan is not a system of revolutionary 
principles, nor yet a programme of anarchy. It does not 
inspire wars and strife, but peace and security. It does 
not set the mother against her daughter and the father 
against his son, but promotes the fraternal spirit whereby 
the race is regarded as one great Brotherhood. It 
does not seek to drag down and degrade the natural man, 
but to improve and uplift him. To use a popular phrase, 

R5848 : page 43 

it appeals to "the best, all that is good within us." It 

aims to make this world such a comfortable and congenial 

habitat that the absence of Christ will not be felt and 

God will not be needed. It endeavors to make men so 

satisfied with this life that they shall be totally indifferent 

to the life hereafter. It propagates the principles of 

self-sacrifice, mercy, charity and benevolence, teaching 

men to live for the good of others and to be kind to all. 

For those who observe its conditions and obey its commands, 

it promises the development of certain inherent 

occult powers, the solution of the more recondite problems 

of man's constitution and the accumulation of esoteric 

knowledge which is withheld from the multitude. 

In short, it declares that all who will eat of the forbidden 

fruit shall "be as gods." 

In contradistinction to the Gospel of Christ, the gospel 
of Satan is one of works. Its fundamental principles 
are: salvation by good deeds, redemption by human 
merits and regeneration by reformation. Its sacramental 
phrase is: "Be good and do good." Its motto is: "Do 
unto others as ye would that they should do unto you." 
Its various ramifications and organizations are manifold. 
Temperance reform movements. Christian Socialist 
Leagues, ethical culture societies, "Peace" Congresses 
and various other organizations are all employed (perhaps 
unconsciously) in proclaiming this gospel of Satan 
—justification by works. The pledge card is substituted 
for Christ; social purity, rather than individual regeneration, 
is the idol of the hour; the cultivation of the 
flesh is considered more practical than the "birth" 
(begetting) of the Spirit; while universal peace is looked 
for without the interposition of the Prince of Peace. 

The apostles of Satan are not saloonkeepers and 
white-slave traffickers, but for the most part "ordained" 
ministers. Thousands of those who occupy our modern 
pulpits are not engaged in presenting the fundamentals 
of the Christian faith, but have turned aside from the 
Truth and given heed unto fables. Instead of magnifying 
the enormity of sin and setting forth its eternal consequences, 
they minimize it by declaring that sin is merely 
ignorance, the absence of good. Instead of warning 



their hearers "to flee from the wrath to come," they call 
God a liar by declaring that He is too loving to destroy 
His own children and too merciful to send one of His own 
creatures to eternal damnation [krisis, condemnation]. 
Instead of preaching that "Without shedding of blood 
there is no remission" ("Hebrews 9:22"), they merely hold 
up Christ as the great Exemplar and exhort their hearers 
to "follow in His steps." "For they being ignorant of 
God's righteousness, and going about to establish their 
own righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto 
the righteousness of God." ("Romans 10:3\) "For such 
are false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves 
into [imitating] the Apostles of Christ. And no 
marvel; for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel 
of Light. Therefore it is no great thing [not to be wondered 
at] if his ministers also be transformed as the ministers 
of righteousness, whose end shall be according to 
their works."— "2 Corinthians 1 1:13-15\ 

Added to the fact that hundreds of churches are without 
a leader who will faithfully declare the whole counsel 
of God and present His way of salvation, we also have to 
remember and take into consideration the lamentable and 
ominous fact that the majority in these congregations are 
in no way to learn, and have very little possibility of 
learning the Truth for themselves. The family altar, 
where portion of God's Word was wont to be read daily, 
is now— even in the homes of nominal Christians— a 
thing of the past. The Bible is not expounded in the 
pulpit and is not read in the pew. The demands of this 
rushing Age are so many that the multitudes have little 
time and still less desire to meditate upon the things of 
God. Hence the majority who are too indolent to search 
for themselves are left at the mercy of those whom they 
pay to search for them— those who betray their trust by 
studying economic and social problems instead of the 
Scriptures of Truth. 

R5849 : page 43 

In the Scripture which we have taken as the basis of 
these remarks the gospel of Satan— the Devil's Delusion 
—is described as "a way which seemeth Right unto a 
man." That is to say, it is presented in such plausible 
language that it appeals to the emotions; it is set forth in 
such a subtle manner that it commends itself to the intelligence 
of its hearers. The success of an illegitimate 
coiner depends upon how much the counterfeit resembles 
the genuine article. A lie is not so much the absolute 
denial as the perversion of the truth. Hence half a lie is 
always more dangerous in its effects than the total of the 
truth. Consequently, when the Father of Lies enters the 
pulpit, he does not flatly deny the great doctrines of 
Christianity, but he rather tacitly acknowledges them and 
then proceeds to give an erroneous interpretation and a 
false application. For example, he would not be so foolish 
as to boldly announce his disbelief in a personal God 



—he takes His existence for granted and then gives a 
false description of His character. He announces that 
God is the Father of all men, when the Scriptures plainly 
tell us we are "the children of God by faith in Christ 
Jesus." ('Galatians 3:26'.) Again, Satan would not make 
so flagrant a blunder as to ignore the central figure of 
human history; namely, the Lord Jesus Christ. Instead, 
He is acknowledged to be the most perfect person who 
ever lived. Attention is drawn to His deeds of compassion 
and acts of mercy, the beauty of His character and 
the tenderness of His teaching. His life is eulogized, but 
His Death is ignored, the all-important atoning work upon 
the Cross is never mentioned. It is a bloodless Gospel, 
and a crossless life and, in regard to His Person, He is 
merely considered as the Ideal Man. 

In '2 Cor. 4:3,4' we have a Scripture which sheds 
an abundance of light upon our present subject. There 
we are told: "If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to those that 
are lost. In whom the god of this world [Satan] hath 
blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light 
of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, 
should shine upon them." He blinds the minds of unbelievers 
by hiding the light of the Gospel of Christ in 
presenting his own version of the Truth. Appropriately 
is he designated "the Devil and Satan which deceiveth the 
whole world." ('Revelation 12:9'.) In merely appealing 
to "the best that is within man," and in merely exhorting 
him "to lead a nobler life," there is afforded a general 
platform for all shades of opinion and every shade of 
philosophic speculation. Atheists, Pantheists, Unitarians, 
and all other Sectarians can unite to proclaim this common 
message. 

Again we quote our foundation passage: "There is a 
way which seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof 
are the ways of death." The Devil's Delusion is that we 
can be saved by our own works, and justified by our own 
deeds. Whereas God tells us, "By grace are ye saved 
through faith,. ..not of works, lest any man should 
boast." And again, "Not by works of righteousness which 
we have done, but according to His mercy He saved us." 
"Ephesians 2:8,9'; 'Titus 3:5". 

Perhaps at this point an illustration from personal experience 
may be pardoned. Some two years ago the 

R5849 : page 44 

writer became acquainted with one who was a lay 
preacher and an enthusiastic Christian worker. For over 
seven years he had been engaged in public preaching and 
religious activities. But from certain expressions and 
phrases he used, the writer was not satisfied in his own 
heart that his friend was really a "born [begotten] 
again" man. When he began to question him he found 
that he was only very imperfectly acquainted with the 
Scriptures and had only the vaguest conception of Christ's 
work for sinners. For a while the writer sought to present 



the Plan of Salvation in a simple and impersonal 
way, in the hope that if he were still unsaved God would 
be pleased to reveal unto him the Savior for sinners. 
One night to his joy the one who had been preaching the 
Gospel(?) for seven years confessed that he had found 
Christ only the previous night. He confessed (to use his 
own words) that he had been presenting "the Christ 
ideal," but not the Christ of the Cross. He had been trying 
to know Christ as the "Truth" before he knew Him 
as the "Way." 

The writer believes there are thousands like this 
preacher, who have been brought up in Sunday Schools, 
taught about the birth, life and teachings of Jesus Christ, 
who believe in the historicity of His Person, and who 
think that is all that is necessary for their salvation. 
When they reach manhood and go out into the world they 
encounter the attacks of atheists and infidels who declare 
that such a person as Jesus of Nazareth never lived. 
But the impressions of their early clays cannot easily be 
erased and they remain steadfast in their declaration that 
they believe in Jesus Christ. Yet when you examine their 
faith, too often you will find that though they believe 
about Jesus Christ they do not believe in Him! They 
believe with the head that such a person lived (and because 
they believe this, imagine they are saved), but they 
do not believe with the heart that this Person died to save 
them from their sins. A merely intellectual assent to the 
reality of Christ's Person and which goes no further is 
another phase of the Way "which seemeth right unto a 
man," but the end thereof "are the ways of death!" 

Lack of space prevents our doing more than just 
pointing out other ends of this Way which "seemeth 
right." Those who are trusting to an outward form of 
godliness, those who are religious because it is considered 
a mark of respectability, those who attend the House of 
God because it is fashionable to do so, and those who join 
some Church because they imagine that such a step will 
enable them to become Christians, all such are in the Way 
which ends in death— death spiritual and eternal. 

And now, my reader, where do you stand? Are you 
in the Way which "seemeth right," but which leadeth to 
death, or are you in the Narrow Way which leadeth to 
life eternal? Are you trusting in yourself or in Christ? 
are you relying upon your own works, or are you reposing 
upon the finished work of Christ? A pious life, a self-sacrificing 
spirit, attractive manners, a charitable disposition, 
regular attendance at religious services, saying 
prayers and even reading the Bible, none of these things 
—nay, all of them together— without faith in the Blood of 
Christ can obtain for you a passport to Heaven. If any 
of the above virtues could ever save a single soul, where 
was the necessity for the awful death of Jesus Christ? 
No, eternal life is neither a wage nor a reward, but the 
free Gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord. However 
pure your motives, however noble your intentions, 
however well-meaning your purposes, God cannot accept 



you as a son, until you accept His Son. 
By Arthur Pink. 



R5849 : page 44 

CHRISTIAN COMMUNISM 

-'ACTS 4:32*- 5:1 6 V -FEBRUARY 20.- 

CHRIST'S SPIRIT IS SYMPATHETIC, LOVING-THIS WAS ILLUSTRATED 
IN THE EARLY CHURCH AND SINCE-LOVE IS BENEVOLENT- 
"SEEKETH NOT HER OWN" INTERESTS ONLY- 
COMMUNISM TRIED-WHY IT FAILED-WHY IT WAS 
PERMITTED-ANANIAS AND SAPPHIRA-HOW SEVERE 
WAS THEIR PUNISHMENT? 

"Love one another from the heart fervently."—" 1 Peter 1:22". 

GOD is Love; and all, in proportion as they 

have fellowship with God, must have His 

character-likeness and be loving, generous, 

kind. Selfishness is of Satan, the Adversary. 

He is the embodiment of that spirit, 

since he allowed pride and ambition to mislead 

him. The world, under the influence 

of the prince of this world, Satan, and the 

influence of the fall, is a selfish world, and 

to that extent ungodly. 

The work of the Millennial Age will be to give all 
mankind a full opportunity of recovery from the snare of 
the Devil— to Restitution, to recovery of all that was lost 
in Adam, and redeemed for Adam and his race by Jesus. 
That will be a glorious Millennium, helpful and uplifting 
to all the willing and obedient. The Church at that time 
will be with Jesus on the spirit plane, invisible to men and 
armed with all the power of God. Her work, like her 
Lord's is described. She will share with her Lord in His 
Kingdom rule. His Priesthood and His Judgeship— giving 
chastisements or rewards to mankind, and these shall be 
designed with a view to educating them, to uplifting them 
to the condition of perfection. 

This Gospel Age is the period in which God has been 
selecting this Church from amongst mankind. All of the 
select ones will be saints, regardless of denominational 
lines. God has destined that none shall be of that company 
except those who are copies of His Son. ("Romans 8:29".) 
The Church has received special testing and 
education for the glorious mission marked out for her— 
the blessing of judging the world. The Church must not 
only have a sympathy for others, but must cultivate this 
quality to the attainment of Christ's likeness in heart, and 
as much as possible must have that likeness in outward 
living and in thinking. 

The record tells us that the number of believers was 



many thousand in a little while. The spirit of love began 
to burn in their hearts— thankfulness to God, appreciation 
of His favor, a desire to serve Him, and a sympathy and 
love for the brotherhood. 

We perceive that some were poor; and, controlled by 
the spirit of love, the well-to-do felt that they would 
like all the poorer brethren to have just as good as themselves. 
First they gave privately one to another, as they 

R5850 : page 44 

realized the needs. Then the matter went further and 
they organized a little community. Many of the wealthier 
sold their possessions and turned in the money to the 
Lord's treasury, desiring that a certain amount be supplied 
to themselves and all the other members of the 
community— share and share alike. 

This manifested a very beautiful spirit, and under 
perfect conditions would have been the wise as well as 
the proper course. As it was, the community proved a 
failure. Nevertheless, the Lord apparently permitted that 

R5850 : page 45 

test and failure for a good purpose— to show us that no 

such community amongst His people is possible at the 

present time. The community principle will prosper wonderfully 

as soon as Messiah's Kingdom is established; but 

it is impracticable at the present time, as it was in the 

days of the Apostles. 

BARNABAS NOT AN APOSTLE 

This lesson introduces us to Barnabas, a godly man 
and wise, a mighty power in the Church. His name signifies 
consolation, and evidently it was an appropriate 
name. His proper name was Joses; and he must have 
been a very fine character when the Apostles gave him 
the new name Barnabas— implying that he had a beautiful 
spirit and was in his daily life a "son of consolation" to 
the brethren and all with whom he had contact. 

Barnabas had a property or estate, and sold it, and 
brought the proceeds to the Apostles' feet. He was not 
an Apostle, for of them there were only Twelve, and at 
this time only eleven, because of the loss of Judas. St. 
Paul, the twelfth Apostle, the Lord's chosen vessel, and 
"not one whit behind the very chiefest of the Apostles" 
02 Corinthians 1 1:5 V ), had not yet had his eyes opened 
to the truth of the Gospel. 

Barnabas was quite willing to take his share with the 
others from the general dole; however, amongst those 
who accepted the terms of the proposition were Ananias 
and his wife Sapphira. These had property and sold it 
and kept back a portion of the price, bringing the remainder 
to the Apostles as though it were the entire sum. 
Indeed in conspiring between themselves they had agreed 



to declare that the money they turned in to the treasury 
was all they received from the property. Our lesson tells 
of how St. Peter treated the matter. Under the guidance 
of the Holy Spirit, he said, "Ananias, why hath Satan 
filled thine heart to lie to the Holy Spirit, and to keep 
back part of the price of the land?" He pointed out to 
Ananias that the property was his own, that he was not 
compelled or urged to donate it to this community, that it 
was only his own voluntary gift, and that he had thus 
lied to God, and not merely to the community. Ananias, 
hearing these words, fell down dead— smitten of the Lord; 
and his wife suffered similarly a little later. A great fear 
fell on all the company when they heard of these things. 

WHY REPENTANCE WAS NOT PREACHED 

St. Peter doubtless remembered his own sad experience 
when he once denied the Lord. We query. Why did 
he not sympathize with Ananias and Sapphira. pointing 
out to them wherein they had erred, and urge them to 
repentance, and join with them in prayer rather than 
pronounce upon them the death penalty? 

Our thought is that these two culprits were not really 
God's children— that they had never received the begetting 
of the Holy Spirit; and that the Lord took this opportunity 
to give a great lesson to the Church— to remind 
them that they were dealing, not with flesh and blood, but 
with Jehovah God. From this viewpoint, it was worth 
while to sacrifice these two persons under Divine judgment 
with a view to teaching the Church, then and in 
future generations, how displeasing in the Lord's sight is 
hypocrisy— especially in respect to religious things. 

If these two had been spirit-begotten, then their punishment 
would be the Second Death; and we would have 
no Scriptural ground for expecting them to have any 
resurrection or future consideration from the Lord. But 
if they were merely children of this world, not fully 
appreciative of spiritual things, their future interests are 
not destroyed. They still belong to the great world of 
mankind for whom Christ died, and have not yet received 
in full the blessings of reconciliation with God through 
the Lord Jesus. Such glorious favor may be expected for 
the world in general, in the sweet by and by— during the 
Millennium, when "all the families of the earth shall be 
blessed" and be brought to a knowledge of the Truth and 
to an opportunity of accepting the same unto salvation. 

If our surmise be correct, Ananias and Sapphira were 
in a very different position from Judas, who had companied 
with our Lord for years, who had witnessed His 
miracles, had received of His Holy Spirit and through 
that power had cast out demons, healed the sick, etc. Our 
charitable thought for Ananias and Sapphira is, that if 
they had not received the Holy Spirit they but imperfectly 
appreciated what they were doing. Although they did 
know that they were practising a deception, they apparently 
did not get a proper focus upon the matter. Our 



expectation for them is that they have not sinned unto 
death; and that the life which they lost they will have 
back again in the resurrection time, with full opportunity 
to get matters straight and to determine finally their 
loyalty or disloyalty to God under the illumination which 
they will then have. 

The designed effect was realized. Great fear and 
respect for God and everything appertaining to Him in 
religion fell upon the whole multitude. It was worth 
while to punish the one couple severely, in view of the 
preparation made for their blessing in future and in view 
of the lesson which their experience brought to the remainder 
of the Church. 

THE SAME SPIRIT OF DECEPTION NOW 

We are not gifted, as was St. Peter, with authority to 
represent the Lord's interests in judging others. It would 
appear, however, from all that we are able to know, that 
there are many today living equally deceptive lives. We 
are not permitted to judge them, but they judge themselves 
by what they tell us. They profess to be consecrated 
to the Lord— Jehovah— sacrificed to the Divine 
cause. Nevertheless they keep back much through self-will, 
professing to be fully devoted followers of Jesus. 

Some of these, doubtless, belong to the same class as 
Ananias. They have become associated with Christians, 
but have never been begotten of the Holy Spirit and have 
really neither part nor lot with Christ. Others may be 
real Christians, and be keeping back part of their consecration. 
If so, the latter may be sure that they will be 
dealt with. So the Apostle declares, "If we would judge 
ourselves, we should not [need to] be judged [of the 
Lord]. But when we are judged, we are chastened of 
the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the 
world." (" 1 Corinthians 1 1:31,32'.) Such Christians, 
building upon the Rock Christ Jesus, will apparently need 
to come through the fiery ordeal pointed out in the Bible, 
and "wash their robes and make them white in the blood 
of the Lamb," in great tribulation— for failing to live up 
to their covenant of complete sacrifice.— "Revelation 7:9-17". 

It would indeed appear as though hypocrisy, which 
the Bible intimates is especially wicked in the sight of 
God, is practised to a great length amongst the nominal 
followers of Jesus. Professions of creeds not believed 
and a form of godliness without its power seem on every 
hand to tell us that many must be living hypocritically 
and subject, therefore, to the Divine judgment. The 
lesson to us is, "Take heed that no man take thy crown." 

Our Golden Text here comes in appropriately. We 
are to love one another— first our Heavenly Father, then 
our Heavenly Lord Jesus; and finally, we should love, 
and as we have opportunity serve, the brethren. Actively 
engaged in this manner, we shall be kept from hypocrisy 
and be ready for our share in the Heavenly Kingdom. 



R5850 : page 46 

PERSECUTION'S GOOD RESULTS 

-FEBRUARY 27.-' ACTS 5:12'- 6:7\- 

METHODS USED OF GOD-DIVINE APPROVAL OF THE GOSPEL- 
OPPOSITION BY THE SADDUCEES AND THE CHIEF PRIESTS- 
MULTITUDES BELIEVED IN JERUSALEM-CHURCH COMMUNISM 
BEGAN TO FAIL-SEVEN DEACONS APPOINTED. 

"Bear ye one another's burdens, and so 
fulfil the law of Christ."— 'Galatians 6:2'. 

THE manifestation of love and sympathy 
amongst the early Christians had a salutary 
effect in backing up the teachings of the 
Apostles. The principle is as true today as 
it was then. The living of the Christ life 
is necessary to a proper endorsement of the 
Gospel Message. "If any man have not the 
Spirit of Christ, he is none of His." 
('Romans 8:9'.) The worldly are apt to read 
the Gospel influence in the lives of professors 
before they give particular heed to the Message. 

Alas, that we can see so many evidences of the fulfilment 
of the Apostle Paul's words respecting our day! 
He declares that at this time many would have a form of 
godliness without its power, and be "lovers of pleasure 
more than lovers of God." ('2 Timothy 3:5'.) The difficulty 

R585 1 : page 46 

seems to be that sectarianism has lost the essence 
of the Gospel Message which Jesus and the Apostles 
taught. That serious loss has had various substitutes 
favored by the great Adversary; but they are not the 
Gospel, and do not have the proper power upon the hearts 
and lives of those who even desire to do right. The 
Gospel Message which Jesus and the Apostles taught was 
expressed in our Lord's prayer: "Thy Kingdom come; 
Thy will be done on earth, even as it is done in Heaven." 
fMatthew 6:10'.) The Apostles exhorted the people to 
prepare for the Kingdom of God's dear Son and to accept 
the invitation to become members of the Bride class. 

The parables of Jesus, His sermons, and the teachings 
of the Apostles abound with the thought that Messiah's 
Kingdom will be the great panacea for all the ills of the 
world; and that the Church, if found faithful, will share 
her Master's glory, honor and immortality. It was because 
St. Paul had this glorious hope before him, he 
declares, that he was willing to endure hardness as a good 
soldier of Jesus Christ and to count all his afflictions and 
sufferings for Christ, his sacrifice, but light afflictions. 



Because of these hopes, because of this deep-seated faith, 

he counted all earthly prospects as valueless in comparison, 

and willingly sacrificed his fame, his family position 

and his Roman citizenship, and endured stripes, imprisonments, 

buffetings and derision.— "Philippians 3:7-1 P; v 2 Corinthians 4: 17" 

"ll:23-28\ 

ERROR'S BITTER FRUITAGE 

The principle has not changed. The Gospel has not 
changed. Merely the true Message has been lost sight of. 
The theory came in that Christ's Kingdom was established 
in 800 A.D.; that the Popes were representatives, 
or Vicegerents— reigning instead of Christ; that the 
Cardinals were the Little Flock class in special glory and 
honor; and that Bishops, Archbishops and priests were 
also associated in the glory of the exalted Church. 

We are not doubting the sincerity of those who 
promulgated these theories; but surely we now see that a 
great mistake was made. The nations of Europe were 
told that they were God's earthly kingdoms, responsible 
to the Papal system as the spiritual kingdom; and that 
thus in relationship with God, they had Divine appointment 
to rule the people. Under these unscriptural teachings 
the world has been for eleven centuries. What the 
Catholics started, the Protestants have continued. 

When Great Britain rebelled against the Papacy, and 
King Henry VIII. declared his kingdom to be another 
spiritual empire, put the Bishops into the House of Lords, 
and made himself and his successors the representatives 
of Christ on earth in great power, it was a part of the 
same blunder that the Catholics had previously made. 
When, later, Luther and his followers attached themselves 
to the German princes, and favored and authorized 
them, and in turn were sanctioned by them, the German 
kingdoms were thus constituted kingdoms of God. And 
so with the other nations of Europe, great and small. 

Claiming to be God's Kingdom, these kingdoms of the 
world have therefore been hindering the people from 
hearing the Gospel Message of the Second Coming of 
Christ to establish the true Kingdom of God, to put down 
sin, to scatter the ignorance and darkness of the world, 
and to help mankind out of evil back to the image and 
likeness of God. The Bible declares these deceptions to 
be from Satan— "doctrines of demons"— M Timothy 4: P. 

Now we are seeing some of the bitter fruitage of such 
false teachings. Millions have been gathered into sects 
and parties unauthorized by the Bible, while only the few 
have been properly joined to Christ Himself as His members. 
This great mass of people, deceived into thinking 
that they are true Christians, are today at war— fighting 
like demons. The great intelligence which came to the 
world through God's Message, illuminating the minds of 
men more and more, has been turned to one side. Instead 
of blessing the world, this intelligence has been cursing 
the world with inventions for human destruction, such 



as the heathen were not intelligent enough to invent, and 
perhaps not heartless enough to use. Alas, what a picture! 

In all the churches of all denominations, prayers are 
going up for and against each other. The clergy are 
bewildered. The laity are bewildered. True faith in 
the Bible is at a discount. Little but a form of godliness 
remains. However, God has not left Himself at any time 
without witnesses in the world. Today the faithful followers 
of Jesus are realizing what is wrong. They are 
awakening, are giving the Bible a fresh study, and are 
getting blessings out of it. They are realizing that our 
difficulties have come from the creeds, which are really 
contradictory to the Bible, but which represent the 
strange notions of our deluded forefathers. Now is the 
time for the people of God who have not already put on 
the whole armor of God to do so; for the Bible seems to 
assure us that still more stringent conditions are before 
us.— "Ephesians 6:12-18". 

OPPOSITION INSPIRED BY SELFISHNESS 

Our Study for today shows how the living of the true, 
simple life of faith, trust, obedience and love had its effect- 
how that many were added to the Church, including 
"a great multitude of priests." It shows us, too, how 
angered were the Sadducees and the official class at that 
time. They were grieved that the people were taught; for 
the teachings of the followers of Jesus were so contrary 
to what they had taught and what they had hoped for. 

Not believing the Prophets, they had been using religion 
largely as a cloak— "a form of godliness." Their 
real hopes were along the line of Gentile hopes— of becoming 
more intimately associated with the Roman Empire 
and thus obtaining special favor. They feared lest 
the teaching of Messiah as the coming King of the world 
would reach the ears of the Roman rulers and bring upon 
the Jews ridicule and disfavor, and perhaps take from 
them some of the liberties which they were enjoying, and 
crush all their aspirations respecting the future. Their 

R585 1 : page 47 

opposition to the Gospel was therefore entirely selfish. 

They had the Apostles arrested and put into prison 
for preaching. But the Lord sent His angel and delivered 
His faithful servants; and they, with good 
courage, appeared again the next day in the Temple, 
preaching to the people as before. Again they were arrested, 
brought before the officials and commanded to 
preach no more in this Name. The point of the official 
resentment is noted in their words, "Ye have filled 
Jerusalem with your doctrines [teachings], and are liable 
to bring this man's blood upon us." That is to say. It 
looks as though you might really convince the people of 
this city that we have committed a great crime in putting 
to death that fanatical leader of yours called Jesus. 



But the more they sought to oppose the Message, the 
more God blessed it; the more the common people received 
the Truth; the more the Church of Christ multiplied. 

GRADUAL TRIUMPH OF THE LIGHT 

We see this same principle illustrated at the time of 
the Reformation, when God's time had come to bring back 
the Bible to the people after it had been turned aside for 
twelve hundred and sixty years. When the Bishops began 
to claim that they also were Apostles, and when, using 
this Apostolic authority, they gave the people the Nicene 
Creed in A.D. 325, an end was put to all Bible study; for 
the people were taught that that creed, and other creeds 
subsequently made, contained all that was proper to be 
believed, and that any further Bible study was quite unnecessary- 
indeed, dangerous, because by believing anything 
not in the creeds, they would be heretics and 
doomed to eternal torture. 

When, under Divine guidance, Wyclif and Tyndale 
brought the New Testament to the attention of the people 
in the English language, it marked the start of return 
to an individual faith and a new beginning of Bible study. 
It has required the centuries since to help get us out of 
the gross darkness of those twelve hundred years during 
which we were without the Bible and were poisoned by 
the various creeds. No wonder that we still feel some 
of our poison! No wonder that it is still difficult for us 
to use our common sense in Bible study! Thank God for 
the light of the new Day beginning to dawn! Thank 
God that His true saints everywhere are awakening and, 
like Cardinal Newman, are praying, 

"Lead, Kindly Light, 
Amid the encircling gloom"! 

But if God will hear our prayers and grant the guidance 
of this light to His faithful, the responsibility is 
upon us to step out from all the creeds and not support 
hypocrisy and error— as becomes those who walk in the 
path of the just, which "shineth more and more unto the 
perfect Day."— "Proverbs 4: 18". 

COMMUNISM A FAILURE 

Then came some of the difficulties of communism. 
Favoritism was claimed in the distribution of the necessities. 
Meeting this emergency, the Apostles realized that 
they could not undertake to manage a community along 
earthly lines. They concluded that they should, as the 
Master had directed, give themselves entirely to the Gospel 
work. They appointed seven Deacons to attend to the 
charities; but evidently these also by and by failed, and 
we hear no more of the early communism. 

This experience, which the Lord permitted, served its 
purpose. It manifested the proper Christian spirit, but 



nevertheless taught us the impossibility of such a practise 
while ourselves and others are still limited by the imperfections 
of the flesh. 



page 47 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
THE DAILY INVENTORY 

DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER AND PASTOR:- 

Greetings in the name of our Lord and Master, Jesus 
Christ! 

The matter of formally addressing you in regard to the 
"proposition" set forth in April 15th WATCH TOWER, concerning 
the cultivation of LOVE, has been in my mind for some 
time. Since your suggestion was that we note daily our 
progress in the matter, and write you occasionally of the 
same, I feel that I should not longer delay in so doing. I am 
greatly pleased and encouraged, dear Brother, with the success 
that I have been having in the cultivation of this most 
precious fruit, and I know that you also will be pleased to 
learn of my success. 

Each evening before retiring I take an inventory of the 
little battles that have taken place in my life during the course 
of the day, and note to what degree I have exercised the 
spirit of love, forgiveness and forbearance toward those who 
oppose me. I find this to be an excellent tonic for the memory, 
which is ever inclined to forget; and by this method of 
daily rendering accounts, I have been enabled to come out of 
some of the most trying circumstances "more than conqueror." 
The spirit of resentment is fast leaving my heart; and I must 
say that since accepting and acting upon the "proposition" I 
have discovered that a great deal of it was there. 

Love for my Heavenly Father and His Truth is greatly 
augmented, and greater appreciation of, and love for, the 
brethren have I now that I am constantly on the alert to 
exercise the spirit of love toward all. The ignorant and 
vicious world, and even those who hate me for the Truth's 
sake, I have learned to pity and forgive. 

And now, dear Brother, feeling that the purpose of this 
epistle has been served, in that I have pointed out the lines 
along which I have noticed the particular development in love, 
and bearing in mind that you are a very, very busy man, I 
deem it expedient to close, happy in the intelligence that I am 
your Brother, by the Grace of God. 

May your faith endure, and may the remembrance of your 
work on earth, among men, come up before God in everlasting 
praise. AMEN. W. A. JARRETT.-Kansas. 

GRATITUDE FOR PRECIOUS PRESENT TRUTH 

DEAR FRIENDS:- 
Enclosed find money order, which I hoped to have sent 



you some time ago. I wish it were more. When I consider 
how much it means to me to have an understanding of the 
precious Present Truth, and how wonderful are the opportunities 
of the present life with reference to the High Calling 
of God in Christ Jesus, I feel that nothing that I have to give 
can properly express my gratitude to the Lord. 

I take this opportunity to express, also, my gratitude to 
the little band of faithful workers who are associated with 
our dear Brother Russell in the Lord's work. May His 
richest blessings attend you, and may He grant you an abundant 
entrance into His glorious Kingdom! 

I am an Armenian who has taken refuge in this land of 
liberty from the persecutions of the Turks, and I thank our 
Heavenly Father for His mercies in this direction, as well as 
for the better understanding of His Word which I have 
gained since Pastor Russell's books were put into my hands. 
I have found some earnest Bible students here and am so 
thankful for the help I receive through association with them! 
"Blest be the tie that binds our hearts in Christian love!" 
How we long for the consummation of our hopes— when "we 
shall be like Him" and "see Him as He is"! 
Yours in the one Hope, H. H. TEORIZIAN.-Calif. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have often thought that it was probably my duty to 
write you to give you the loving satisfaction of knowing that 
another one of the consecrated sons of God has taken the 
VOW. I did this long since, informing my Heavenly Father, 
through prayer, that I took the VOW until death. 

Dear Brother, I pray for you often that our kind and 
loving Father may give you strength, grace and wisdom in 
every hour of need. I go to the Heavenly Throne of grace 
every night and morning in behalf of all the consecrated 
Israelites in every land, in harmony with one of the provisions 
of the VOW. 

"O! who's like my Savior? He's Salem's bright King; 
The sweet song of Moses He's given me to sing." 
Your brother in the Lord's service, W. A. NICHOLS. 



page 48 

International Bible Students Association Classes 
STUDIES AND LECTURES BY MEMBERS OF THE PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 49 

VOL. XXXVII. FEBRUARY 15 No. 4 
A. D. 1916-A.M. 6044 

CONTENTS 



Views from The Watch Tower ... 5 1 

Bitterness and Passion Increase. . 52 

Responsibility of the Preachers. . 52 

Christ's Kingdoms at War? . . 52 

Truths Untaught— Error Entrenched . 53 

Our Fair Land 54 

How We Outwork Our Great Salvation . 54 

The Marvelous Grace of God! . . 55 

Our Covenant Identical With Christ's 55 

"Pay That Which Thou Has Vowed" . 56 
The Many Cold-The Few Faithful . . 57 

Worldliness Among Professed Christians 58 
The First Christian Martyr ... 59 

Victory in Death! .... 59 
Two Bands of God's Heroes .... 60 

House of Servants— House of Sons . 60 
"Let Your Light So Shine" .... 61 

Militia Laws of Canada 62 

Interesting Letters 63 

Welcome Back, Dear Brethren! . . 63 

page 50 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS. BANK DRAFT. POSTAL ORDER. OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



SCRIPTURE STUDIES AND SCENARIOS-VARIOUS 
For the information of our readers we give below a list of 



the languages into which the various volumes of STUDIES IN 
THE SCRIPTURES have been translated. Most of these can be 
supplied from the head office at Brooklyn. 

Volume I. In English, German, Swedish, Dano-Norwegian, 
Italian, French, Greek, Hungarian, Spanish, Polish, 
Hollandish, Finnish, Arabic, Slovak, Rumanian, Armenian, 
Lettish, Chinese, Japanese and Korean. We have also the 
English Braille, American Braille and New York Point. 

Volume II. In English, German, Swedish, Finnish and 
Dano-Norwegian. 

Volume III. In English, German, Swedish, Finnish and 
Dano-Norwegian. 

Volume IV. In English, German, Swedish, Finnish and 
Dano-Norwegian. 

Volume V. In English, German, Swedish, Finnish and 
Dano-Norwegian. 

Volume VI. English. German, Swedish. Finnish. Greek. 

The PHOTO-DRAMA SCENARIO is supplied in Spanish, Italian, 
Greek, Polish, Armenian, German, Finnish, Swedish and English, 
in one or more styles of binding. See WATCH TOWER, 
October 1, 1915, for prices and styles of binding. 



MONEY BY MAIL UNSAFE 

A money order costs little and is safe. Plain writing of 
your full address is also a safeguard and convenience. 



I.B.S.A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR THE MONTH OF MARCH 

Questions from Manual on Series Third of 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
STUDY IV. 

WeekofMarch 5 Q. 8tol4 Week of March 19 Q.24to31 

Week of March 12 Q. 15 to 23 Week of March 26 Q. 32 to 39 

Question Manuals on Vol. III., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 5c. each; 
or 50c. per dozen, postpaid. 



R5852:page51 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

IT WOULD appear that our nation is entering 

the danger zone as respects the great war-conflagration 

of Europe. The war fever 

seems to spread. Our President, who has 

been so staunch a friend of peace, is manifestly 

being influenced by the prevalent 



spirit of pride and the demand that American 
rights shall brook no interference. Our 
President's peace policy has been changed 
to a preparedness policy. And what could 
preparedness mean except that, if we had the largest 
navy, the Government sooner or later would become more 
proud and arrogant and wish to dictate conditions to 
other nations, and thus plunge us into war? 

From our viewpoint, the United States has a very 
respectable navy, abundantly sufficient for its own home 
defenses— especially when supplemented with the laying 
of ocean mines and with port fortifications, if any of the 
latter be lacking. What has America to fear? Do Great 
Britain and Germany, France, or all of them together, 
wish to destroy their best customer, from whose trade 
they make their largest profits? Nonsense! All the great 
countries of Europe are anxious for our friendship, and 
all of them should have it, with our influence exerted in 
the interests of their peace and welfare. Imagine an army 
of a million men crossing the Atlantic ocean! Imagine 
the number of ships required! Remember that the largest 
vessels can barely carry coal enough to bring them properly 
across the ocean without replenishment. Who can 
imagine the inability of the United States to meet any 
invading army, if we had no navy at all? 

We are not disputing that it would be a policy of reasonable 
worldly wisdom to be prepared for any reasonable 
liability of invasion. We are not disputing that it 
might be, in some respects, a wise policy to enroll the 
youth of the land and to require all to spend two weeks 
every summer in camp life. This would be both a recreation 
and an education, and with the inculcation of the 
thought that they are a peace army, and not an army of 
aggression, the influence might be favorable. 

VIEWS OF BIBLE STUDENTS 

The foregoing is what we might call a worldly view of 
the situation. Bible Students, looking from the standpoint 
of the Word of God, see clearly that the present great 
war in Europe will, according to prophecy, so utterly 
wreck all the participating nations that they will have no 
strength for further combat, no gold reserves, called war-chests, 
for military purposes. 

War-smitten, bankrupted, discouraged, the nations will 
be many years in repairing the terrible losses they are now 
inflicting upon each other. Moreover, the Bible assures 
us that with the crisis of their trouble, coming through 
revolution and anarchy, the world will be saved from its 
own madness by the establishment of Messiah's Kingdom. 
"He shall make war to cease unto the ends of the earth." 
Psalm 46:9". ) The war-mad nations will "beat their 
swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning 
hooks. ..and learn war no more."— v Isa. 2:4 V ; 'Micah 4:3\ 

But of course we cannot expect others than Bible 
Students to see matters from this viewpoint. They must 



wait for the actual experiences which we foresee through 
the telescope of God's Word. 

Failing to see from the Bible standpoint, yet wishing 
to carry forward his policy, which so far has been so very 
successful, our worthy President now seems in great 
danger of being misled by his past successes in the field 
of diplomacy. He is greatly endangering, not only the 
peace of our own land, but the breaking of all restraints 
of war throughout the world by insisting that Germany 
shall declare that she transgressed the laws of warfare in 
destroying the Lusitania. Germany's plea is that the submarines, 
recognized and used by all nations, bring in a 
new question as respects international law in dealing with 
life. To maintain the respect and good will of the 
United States, Germany has offered to pay for the lives 
of American citizens lost on the Lusitania and has given 
assurances of her intention to hereafter abstain from 
sinking passenger vessels, even though they carry munitions 
of war; unless the passengers all be given first a full, 
fair chance of safely leaving the captured vessel. The attainment 
of such a concession is a great honor to President 
Wilson's diplomacy. We greatly fear that he is about 
to wreck the entire matter by insisting that the German 
Empire shall say, "We confess that we were naughty." 

Our President threatens that if Germany does not 
acknowledge that she did wrong, he will undertake to 
punish her by breaking off friendly relations between the 
two governments, etc. We see nothing to be gained by his 
course, but much to be endangered. Germany's friendship 
and willingness to concede to our wishes may be brought to 
the snapping-point. Their friendly relationships sundered, 
what would there be to restrain the Germans from going 
any length they might please in what they recognize as a 
war for their very existence as a nation? The result 
might be to give every submarine commander liberty to 
sink any and every thing bearing the flag of Germany's 
enemies. Moreover, the animosity undoubtedly would extend 
to the American flag. Furthermore, if not resented, 
it would be considered as more or less of an injustice, on 
the part of many Americans whose sympathies must naturally 

R5852 : page 52 

go, to some extent, with their blood toward their 
kinsmen across the water, waging battle for existence 
against a combined world in arms. 

To Bible Students we merely suggest that, if the worst 
should happen, we should remember that God is at the 
helm, and that thus He will allow human pride and wrath 
to further work out the great troubles incident to the 
"Battle of Armageddon" and the inauguration of Messiah's 
Kingdom. Let us remember Jesus' words, applicable 
to the present time, "When these things begin to 
come to pass, then look up, and lift up your heads; for 
your redemption draweth nigh."— "Luke 21:28". 



BITTERNESS AND PASSION INCREASE 

In STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. IV., we have 
clearly pointed out the things now transpiring, and the 
worse conditions yet to come. We have said in so many 
words that this great Time of Trouble will manifest 
fully that the civilization of our day, of which we have so 
greatly boasted, is merely skin deep— merely a veneer. 
Already we have seen manifestations of this in various 
quarters, and our understanding of the Bible teaching is 
that these matters, so deplorable, will grow from bad to 
worse. National animosities will become personal animosities 
until, as the Bible foretold, there will be no 
peace to him that goes out, nor to him that comes in, 
because "every man's hand will be against his neighbor." 
OEzekiel 38:21\) Our Savior, in describing these matters, 
prophetically declares, "Unless those days should be cut 
short, no flesh would survive." ("Matthew 24:22".) But 
we are glad that He also gives us the assurance that because 
of the Elect (Himself and His Church in Kingdom 
power and glory) those days will be cut short— Messiah's 
Kingdom will be set up. 

But we are not to expect the interposition of the 
Lord's power to stop the great Time of Trouble, such as 
never was since there was a nation, until mankind shall 
have been greatly humbled to the dust and shall call upon 
the Lord in great trepidation. We are far from that condition 
of things now. Now the Germans pray to God that 
He will destroy England. And British prayers go up for 
the victory of their armies and the downfall of their foes. 
And so with the other nations participating in the war; 
each praying against its foes; each expecting God's favor 
and blessing. Will it not be a very different story and 
will not very different prayers ascend when all nations 
shall realize their undoing and that the only succor they 
can hope for from any quarter, will be through the interposition 
of Divine power to stay the anarchy of that awful 
time which the Bible symbolically calls a devouring fire, 
and which our creeds have all mistaken to be literal fire? 

RESPONSIBILITY OF THE PREACHERS 

The following extracts from the Methodist Times purport 
to be faithful translations of some German sermons 
recently preached. These sermons remind us of the infatuation 
unto persecution which once was general between 
the various sects. We had hoped that all such 
bitterness and acrimony were things of the past, yet here 
they are in all their evil malignity. Rev. William Burgess, 
the Methodist representative at Rome, furnishes the quotations 
referred to as follows: 

"NO COMPROMISE WITH HELL 

"Pastor Zoebel, speaking in the great Lutheran church 
in Leipsic, said: 'It is this deep consciousness of our 



mission that permits us to congratulate ourselves, and rest 
content with a heart full of gratitude, when our guns beat 
down the children of Satan, and when our marvelous submarines- 
instruments to execute the Divine vengeance- 
send to the bottom of the sea thousands of the non-elect. 
We must fight the wicked with every means in our power; 
their sufferings should give us pleasure; their cries of 
despair should not move German hearts. There ought to 
be no compromise with hell, no mercy for the servants of 
Satan— in other words, no pity for the English, French, 
and Russians, nor indeed for any nation that has sold itself 
to the Devil. They have all been condemned to death 
by a Divine decree.'" 

"A WORK OF CHARITY 

"Professor Rheinold Seeby, who teaches theology in the 
Berlin University, preaching in the cathedral of the city, 

R5853 : page 52 

said: 'We do not hate our enemies. We obey the command 
of God, who tells us to love them. But we believe 
that in killing them, in putting them to suffering, in burning 
their houses, in invading their territories, we simply 
perform a work of charity. Divine love is seen everywhere 
in the world, but men have to suffer for their 
salvation. Human parents love their children, yet they 
chastise them. Germany loves other nations, and when 
she punishes them it is for their good.'" 

"THE DIVINE MISSION OF GERMANY 

"Pastor Fritz Philippi, of Berlin, from his Protestant 
pulpit, among other things, said: As the Almighty allowed 
His Son to be crucified, that the scheme of redemption 
might be accomplished, so Germany is destined to 
crucify humanity, in order that its salvation may be secured. 
The human race can be saved only by blood, by 
fire and sword. German warriors do not shed blood with 
a light heart. They look upon it as a sacred duty imposed 
on them, a duty they cannot neglect without committing 
sin. Our beloved Emperor hates the horrors of war. 
Through long years he labored to maintain the peace of 
the world. Germany has never employed force to menace 
the independence of any nation. It is really because we 
are pure that we have been chosen by the Almighty as His 
instruments to punish the envious, to chastise the wicked, 
and to slay with the sword sinful nations. The Divine 
mission of Germany, oh brethren! is to crucify humanity; 
the duty of German soldiers, therefore is to strike, without 
mercy. They must kill, burn, and destroy; any half 
measures would be wicked. Let it then be a war without 
pity. The immoral and the friends and allies of Satan 
must be destroyed, as an evil plant is uprooted. Satan 
himself, who has come into the world in the form of a 



great Power (England), must be crushed. On Germany 
is laid the Divine command to bring about the destruction 
of those who are the personification of evil. When this 
work is finished, fire and sword will not have been used in 
vain. The redemption of humanity will be achieved. The 
kingdom of righteousness will be established on the earth; 
and the German Empire, which will have created it, will 
remain its protector.'" 

CHRIST'S KINGDOMS AT WAR? 

What a pity that the name of Christ should in any 
sense of the word be associated with such a horrible war, 
the basis of which is commercialism! What a shame to 
see nations immorally balancing the lives of millions with 
the hopes of commercial gain, or territorial gain! Note 
how Italy balanced the question for three months whether 
she would join the Teutons or the Allies, finally deciding 
that the latter offered her greater hopes of an enlarged 
dominion. She was ready to slay and to be slain, and 
ready to embargo with debt coming generations, if only 
she might have more territory. If this same principle 
were applied to individual affairs, it would mean a willingness 
to kill our neighbors in order to enlarge our own 

R5853 : page 53 

properties, just as King Ahab of old slew Naboth in order 
that he might have the vineyard which he coveted. 

Similarly vicious is the attitude of Japan. The dispatches 
told us how she refused for a long time to send 
any soldiers to Europe; and how then she proposed that 
she would send 500,000 soldiers to kill and be killed if, as 
her reward, the French would turn over to her the control 
of Kozan, China— French China— a portion of Chinese 
territory which the French stole years ago as a part of 
their commercial warfare. France is not yet ready to give 
up her Chinese dependency; and Japan is still waiting for 
the blood-money before she enters upon her side of the 
killing program. 

But how came we to think of the kingdoms of Europe 
as Christendom— Christ's Kingdom? How came the 
various great nations of Europe to put upon their coins 
the declaration that their kings reign by the grace of 
God? Many perhaps have forgotten where the matter 
started. Let us remind our readers: 

These kingdoms of God had their start A.D. 800, and 
are therefore eleven hundred years old. The beginning was 
with Papacy, which perceived its own great power over 
the peoples of Europe, all of whom at that time ignorantly 
and blindly acknowledged the Roman Catholic faith. While 
the kings of Europe were comparatively weak, the suggestion 
came, "Now it must be God's time for setting up 
the Messianic Kingdom, because now we have the power." 
The answer of others was, "Not so. The Bible teaches 
that Jesus will set up His own Kingdom at His Second 



Advent in power and great glory, and that the Church 
will become His Bride and Joint-heir by the power of the 
First Resurrection." The answer to this was, "So once 
we thought. But we have waited for the coming of 
Messiah for over 800 years; and now we have the new 
thought that He probably wishes us to set up His Kingdom 
for Him, and in His name to reign over the kings of 
the earth and to convert the world." 

They acted upon this suggestion. The Church, that is, 
the hierarchy, was set up in dignity and power and claimed 
authority. The rulers of the nations were informed that 
their continuance in power depended upon their obedience 
to Papacy— that it was Christ's spiritual Kingdom, and 
had all power to crown and uncrown kings, and to rule 
the world with a rod of iron. It was publicly claimed that 
the Popes in succession were Christ's vicegerent, which 
signifies that they reigned instead of Him upon His 
Throne. Our Catholic friends still claim this, denying not 
one jot of it. They hold that all the kingdoms of the 
world should bow to the Pope's authority as supreme— as 
God's authority, Christ's authority. 

It was at that time that the kings of Europe were told 
that, through accepting their honors and dignities as rulers 
from the Papacy, their kingdoms were kingdoms of God, 
and that all of these together were Christendom— Christ's 
Kingdom, under Christ's vicegerent— representative. 

Of course we dispute the whole matter. We deny that 
anybody has ever had the right to set up Christ's Kingdom; 
and that we still properly pray the Master's prayer, 
"Thy Kingdom come; Thy will be done on earth, even as 
in Heaven." We are not charging our Catholic friends 
with fraud, but believe that they were deceived, as St. 
Paul prophesied. (~ I Timothy 4: 1,2".) Surely the things 
which the Bible foretold respecting Messiah's Kingdom 
have not come to pass during the eleven centuries of the 
Papal vicegerency. We read, "Of the increase of His 
Government and peace there shall be no end." ("Isaiah 9:7\) 
This has not been fulfilled. We read, "He shall 
have dominion from sea to sea and from the river unto the 
ends of the earth." ("Psalm 72:8".) This has not been fulfilled. 
We read, "In His day the righteous shall flourish," 
and "evil doers shall be cut off." ("Psalm 72:7"; "37:9".) 
This has not been fulfilled. The wicked have flourished 
instead of being cut off; and it is the righteous that have 
had the narrow way from Jesus' day until now— a way of 
self-sacrifice, and not a path of glory. 

PROTESTANT KINGDOMS OF GOD 

Germany and Great Britain are Protestant kingdoms 
of God, while Austro-Hungary is the only one engaged 
in this great war which holds its commission and approval 
entirely from the Papacy. How is this? 

We answer that these kingdoms, once recognized by 
Papacy, broke away— protested. Great Britain withdrew 
from Papal control in the days of King Henry VIII., who 



renounced allegiance to Papacy, but accepted the Catholic 
Bishops of Great Britain, made them members of the 
House of Lords— Lord Bishops— and appointed himself to 
be the head of the Church of England, as the Pope was 
the head of the Church of Rome. Thus he attempted to 
set up a new kingdom of Christ, making himself Christ's 
vicegerent. All succeeding kings of England hold title 
to being the head of Christ's spiritual Kingdom, the 
Church of England, and the head of His earthly kingdom, 
the British Empire. This is the title of King 
George V. now reigning. 

In Germany it is a little different. German princes and 
kings fostered Luther until his teachings had made a deep 
impression upon the most educated Germans at that time. 
Then they exalted the Church of Luther to be the State 
Church, and the Lutheran Church recognized the rule of 
the kings of Germany as kingdoms of God. 

Surely we need not dispute with any one the error of 
these claims. This accounts for the false position in 
which all the kingdoms of Europe stand today, claiming 
to be kingdoms of God, while really they are kingdoms of 
men— earthly kingdoms— Gentile kingdoms. Jesus declares 
that Satan is the Prince of this world, and that all 
these are kingdoms of this world— therefore under Satan's 
princeship. ("John 14:30"; "Revelation 11:15".) Not that 
they realize this, but rather, as the Apostle explains, they 
are deceived. ("2 Corinthians 4:4".) Not that God gave 
Satan any authority to rule these kingdoms, but that he is 
ruling through human weakness; as the Apostle says, 
Satan "worketh in the children of disobedience" as God 
works in the hearts of His children of obedience. 
("Ephesians 2:2".) The latter are the Little Flock to whom 
the Father will give the Kingdom in due time. The children 
of disobedience are, in the great majority, absolutely 
ignorant of the fact that they serve Satan. Nevertheless, 
"His servants ye are to whom ye render service." 

TRUTHS UNTAUGHT-ERROR ENTRENCHED 

With the coming of clearer light, did the ministers of 
Germany and Great Britain, Austro-Hungary and the 
other countries tell the people the truth about the Kingdom 
of God and about what mistakes have been made? 
Nay, verily! They allowed the question to go by default. 
Hence, today the people of these various countries are 
impressed still with the thoughts of the Dark Ages respecting 
a Divine appointment of their churches and 
their governments, and are not therefore looking to the 
Kingdom of God's dear Son to bring its proper blessing. 
Hence prayers are going up from each side of these professed 
kingdoms of God— sophistries upon the Truth. 

How we long for the time when the true knowledge 
of God shall fill the earth; when the Kingdom of Messiah 
will have really come, and the Church of Christ will be 
with Him as His Bride and Joint-heir; when the Reign 



R5854 : page 54 

of Righteousness will fill the earth with blessings, physical, 
mental, moral, uplifting, resurrecting! The world cannot 
understand these things yet, but will learn them soon. 
We who have the knowledge of God's Word should lose 
no opportunity for showing forth the praises of our God 
and for explaining His great Divine Plan of the Ages 
for the "blessing of all the families of the earth." Let us 
be of good courage. Let us be sympathetic with the whole 
world on all sides of these troublesome questions, realizing 
that very few have eyes to see, and hearts to appreciate 
the true condition of things; and glad that ere long the 
glorious Kingdom of Messiah will bring light, knowledge 
and blessing to every creature. 

OUR FAIR LAND. 

Daniel's Image of Gentile governments ('Daniel 2:3 P), 
pictures Babylonia, Medo-Persia, Grecia, Rome— the ten 
toes being represented in the present divisions of the 
Roman Empire in Europe. It is upon the feet of this 
Image that the Armageddon crash of God's Kingdom is 
pictured as falling— grinding the entire image to powder. 
America is apparently not included in this picture directly, 
but of course is represented indirectly, because our population 
is from all the countries represented in the Image. 
The winds of strife are not needed here to weaken the 
kingdoms, preparatory to their fall, for we have no kingdoms. 

However, we cannot suppose that America is more 
ready for the great Kingdom of Messiah than the remainder 
of the world. Americans have much of the same 
spirit as Europeans— the Spirit of the Lord in His saints, 
the spirit of the world in the others. Here, too, the 
children of disobedience are so much more numerous than 
the children of obedience that Satan and not Christ is the 
Prince.— 'Ephesians 2:2". 

America's first share of the trouble may be in its secondary 
stage, i.e., revolution; or in its third stage, anarchy. 
Notwithstanding our blessings and great prosperity in 
many ways, there is a spirit of discontent— a selfish grasping 
for future blessings and an impatience at their delay. 
This is far from the Spirit of the Lord— the spirit of 
meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, brotherly-kindness, 
faith, hope and love. 

Who can tell that revolution or anarchy may not come 
just as soon in America as in Europe; as we write, there 
are rumblings of discontent heard from two quarters; the 
coal miners are threatening a strike which might quickly 
disarrange the entire social structure. The railroad employees 
have formed a union of their various departments 
—engineers, firemen, conductors, trainmen and switchmen, 
such as they have never before had. We learn that 
they are determined to have a strike unless their latest 
requirements are met by the railroads. And they admit 
that the railroads are not likely to meet their requirements 



without a strike. They declare themselves financially prepared 
for the strike, and that it will take place in the spring 
—March 1st, say some, others say later. In any event, 
God's people are to remember the words of the Savior, 
especially applicable now, "When these things begin to 
come to pass, then look up, and lift up your heads; for 
your redemption draweth nigh." ("Luke 21:28".) The 
course of the Lord's people and their counsel to others 
should always be along the lines of peace and righteousness, 
justice and love— even though we know that these 
are not now to prevail. But oh! what comfort and 
serenity of soul it gives to have the knowledge which the 
Bible affords in respect to the present times and the grand 
outcome of the trouble— Messiah's Kingdom. 

We remind our readers of the suggestion previously 
made in these columns, i.e., that they keep a good stock 
of coal on hand always, and a little reserve of something 
like beans, wheat, corn, or other staples of food. "The 
wise man foreseeth the trouble and protecteth himself." 
—"Proverbs 22:3". 



R5854 : page 54 

HOW WE OUTWORK OUR GREAT SALVATION 

"Beloved, work out your own salvation with fear and trembling 
for it is God which worketh in you both to will and to 
do of His good pleasure."— "Philippians 2:12,13". 

IN THIS chapter from which our text is 
taken, the Apostle Paul pays a beautiful 
tribute to the Church at Philippi. He refers 
in tender and loving terms to their obedience 
always to his instruction and counsel, 
not only when he was present with them, 
but likewise in his absence. He urges them 
to continued faithfulness and earnestness in 
this good way. He desires that they make 
still further progress in the Master's likeness, 
working out in themselves through humility and 
obedience the character-development necessary, with fear 
and trembling, doing their own part in the attainment of 
the salvation to which they had been called in Christ. 
This exhortation of St. Paul is designed likewise for 
the sanctified in Christ Jesus of today. He reminds us, 
as he did the Philippian Church, that we are to work out 
our salvation. Elsewhere the Scriptures inform us that 
our salvation is by grace— that "not by works of righteousness 
which we have done, but by His mercy He saved 
us, by the washing of regeneration and renewing of the 
Holy Spirit." ("Titus 3:5".) These Scriptures are not 
contradictory. Our salvation is "not of ourselves, lest 
any man should boast." The Father has appointed the 
Lord Jesus to be our Savior; and it is through Him that 



our salvation is to be accomplished. 

We cannot work out our own justification; but being 
justified by the blood of Christ and being called with the 
Heavenly Calling, we can do our share in this great work 
of our own preparation for our future station and glory. 
We do this by giving heed to the instructions of our Lord, 
by following the example which He has set us. We can 
never attain perfection in the flesh; but from the beginning 
our heart, our intention, must be wholly loyal, and 
day by day this heart intention must become more and 
more crystallized, fixed, in the way of righteousness. We 
must continue the work of bringing our body into subjection, 
and enlisting in the service of the Lord. 

HOW WE BECOME SONS OF GOD 

It is encouraging for us to know that this warfare is 
not one which we must wage alone. All the powers of 
Heaven are enlisted on our behalf. Our God has led us 
thus far in the willing and the doing of His good 
pleasure, and He will continue thus to lead and help us 
and work in us by His Word of Truth, if we continue to 
give heed to His counsel. The Gospel is the "power of 
God unto salvation unto every one" who accepts it; and 
no greater stimulus can be found than the exceeding 
great and precious promises given unto us, that by these 
we might become "partakers of the Divine nature." 

Our salvation is a salvation from death to life, from 
sin to righteousness. Moreover, it is a transformation 

R5854 : page 55 

from human nature to Divine— our "so great salvation!" 

The initiatory step to our salvation was the work accomplished 

by our Lord Jesus at Calvary. "He died for our 

sins." This dying for our sins was first necessary; for 

there was no one on earth who could pay the penalty of 

Adam's sin. The Law of God required "an eye for an 

eye, a tooth for a tooth, a man's life for a man's life." 

There was no man perfect; hence God arranged that His 

Only Begotten Son should meet this death penalty upon 

man. The Father could have arranged it otherwise, but 

He did not; therefore we know that this was the best way. 

The death of Christ, however, was not all that was 
necessary. "He rose again for our justification." His 
death was for the cancelation of our sins; but it could 
not effect our justification while He was still in the bonds 
of death— not until He had risen— and more, not until 
He had ascended up on High— and more, not until He 
had presented His merit on our behalf— on behalf of the 
Church. Still more than this, our justification is not accomplished 
until, in each individual case, the necessary 
steps of faith and full consecration have been taken, as a 
result of which the merit of our Redeemer is imputed. 

This merit of Christ has not as yet been presented for 
the world, because their time has not yet come. Thus 



far it has been presented only for the Church— those who 
are called to be joint-heirs with Christ, and who accept 
the Call. When Jesus appeared in the presence of God 
for us, there was an arrangement then effected by which 
we might become justified. There are certain inflexible 
conditions upon which God is willing to impute this merit 
of Christ's death. It is those only who wish to turn 
away from sin, to be justified from sin, and to serve God, 
to whom this favor is offered. Only these can now 
become sons of God. 

Whether these steps take years or days or a few 
minutes, all these steps must be taken before we are in 
the place where we can be accepted of Christ and presented 
by Him to the Father. When our Redeemer imputes 
to us His merit, covering our blemishes, this brings 
us to the place of vital justification. We have done 
nothing to accomplish this justification. We have merely 
presented ourselves that we might become servants of 

R5855 : page 55 

righteousness. We have merely placed ourselves in the 
position of readiness to receive the blessing. When our 
Savior's merit was thus imputed, all our past was forgiven, 
our blemishes covered, the Father accepted the 
offering, and our High Priest sacrificed us as justified 
human beings. At that moment we were begotten of the 
Father by His Holy Spirit, "to an inheritance incorruptible, 
and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in 
Heaven for us." ("I Peter 1:4\) We became embryo 
New Creatures, who were then to grow and develop day 
by day until, in due time, we would be born as spirit 
beings on the Divine plane, if faithful unto death. 

THE MARVELOUS GRACE OF GOD! 

This is a wonderful work, a marvelous transformation! 
Selected from a race of bondslaves of sin, beings 
of a fleshly nature, depraved, death-stricken, sin-cursed, 
we are lifted out of the miry clay; we are washed, 
cleansed, from our pollution, our soiled rags of unrighteousness, 
and a new nature has been begun in us. Then 
our earthward tendencies are gradually bent Heavenward. 
We are transformed day by day, rising up, UP, 
until, our resurrection completed, the work of transformation 
fully accomplished, we are exalted to heights unimaginable- 
passing the nature and rank of angels, of 
cherubim, of seraphim, and every name that is named, 
and seated upon Messiah's Throne, beside the Infinite Son 
of God, partakers of His glorious nature— the nature of 
Jehovah Himself— the Divine nature! 

Can mortal man conceive so marvelous a glory? The 
very thought of such a Calling should cause us to bow 
our hearts in the dust before our God, realizing our great 
unworthiness of such stupendous grace— of bliss so transcendent! 
What can we render unto the Lord that can 



fittingly demonstrate our gratitude, our thankfulness, for 
so unspeakable a favor? Surely, the most faithful service 
we can give is but a very feeble return to Him who 
has so loved us, so blessed us, so honored us! 

We are joint-heirs with the Lord of Glory to this 
wonderful inheritance, if only we are faithful unto death 
and keep our garments white. To us "old things have 
passed away, and all things have become new." As old 
creatures we had no standing with God; we were feeding 
on the beggarly elements of the world. We were dead 
in trespasses and in sins. It is only as New Creatures 
that we have any standing, that we can please God, that 
we can work for Him. It is this New Creature that the 
Apostle is addressing in our text. 

OUR GREAT RESPONSIBILITY 

As we have made a consecration of ourselves to God, 
our sins are all under the blood, and the new life has 
begun in us. We are under a solemn contract to see that 
the work of transformation steadily progresses. When 
the Father accepted our offering and our vows to Him, 
and granted us His Holy Spirit. He did not give us the 
full consummation of our hopes, but merely an "earnest 
of our inheritance." Our agreement was to be dead to 
the world, dead to earthly things, and alive toward God. 
It is therefore for each of us to demonstrate in our 
words, in our actions, in our thoughts, that everything in 
this contract is bona fide on our part— that we meant 
every word of it. When we become children of God, 
our one ambition should be to prove our loyalty to God, 
our loyalty to our Covenant of Sacrifice. Was it not so 
with our Lord Jesus? 

Our Lord came into the world to be our Redeemer. 
But He was not the Redeemer when He was born, nor 
when He was thirty years of age, until He made His 
consecration. He was called the Savior from His birth, 
only in a prospective sense. He became our Redeemer in 
the real, the official, sense when He was baptized of John 
in Jordan, and the Holy Spirit came upon Him in begetting 
power. Then it remained for Him during the three 
and a half years of His active service to work out that 
consecration. Every act of life during that crucial 
period was the fulfilling of His Covenant of Sacrifice. 
He had covenanted to sacrifice His human nature with 
all its conditions and possibilities, in order that He might 
carry out the Father's purpose. For this cause He came 
into the world, and He faithfully fulfilled His Covenant. 
His glorious reward was the Divine nature and the authority 
to execute all the Father's great Program. 

OUR COVENANT IDENTICAL WITH CHRIST'S 

And so it is to be with us. His followers. We come in 
under the same arrangement, our weaknesses and imperfections 
being covered by our Redeemer's robe of righteousness. 



which constitutes our "wedding garment." 
Thus we stand before the Father complete in the Beloved. 
And His Word to us is, "My grace is sufficient for thee; 
for My strength is made perfect in weakness." ( v 2 Corinthians 12:9.) 
All the children of God who are true to 
their covenant are working out their salvation from day 
to day. It is a work of sacrifice, a daily work of crucifixion 
of the flesh. From the beginning of our consecrated 
life we are reckoned as being fully "crucified with 
Christ"; but the actual crucifixion is a slow, painful, 
lingering process, and ends only with the completion of 
our sacrifice in death. 
"Gather my saints together unto Me, those who have 

R5855 : page 56 

made a covenant with Me by sacrifice," is the command 

of Jehovah. ('Psalm 50:5\) To what extent are we performing 

this work of sacrifice in ourselves? And to 

what extent are we seeking to assist in the work of 

gathering the saints of God unto Him? Are we faithful 

to the extent of our ability and opportunity? Are we 

sure that we are careful to note the opportunities, great 

or small, that are within our reach? If we do not see 

our opportunities, the Lord will use another to do the 

work that might have been ours; and we shall lose the 

blessing and the reward of the service that we might 

have rendered. How careful, then, we should be! 

"PAY THAT WHICH THOU HAST VOWED" 

But this is not a matter in which we are to judge one 
another. It is not for me to say to you that you are not 
sufficiently earnest in your sacrificing. Neither can you 
properly say to me that I am not faithfully fulfilling my 
sacrifice. To his own Master each one stands or falls. 
It is for the Lord and ourselves to settle this important 
matter in our individual cases. And we may not fully 
judge even ourselves. We are to strive to do our best, 
and then leave the results for the Lord's determining. 
The Father will apportion to each faithful member of 
our Lord's Body his own place in the glorious Temple. 

The brethren may give a word of suggestion to each 
other along these lines, but that is all. The Lord alone 
is to decide whether or not we are each living up to the 
terms of our covenant. He expects faithfulness in each 
one who has taken His Covenant upon him. It were far 
better that we never covenant to sacrifice our earthly life 
and its interests than that we take this vow upon us and 
then fail to pay that which we have vowed. ('Ecclesiastes 5:4-6" .) 
This is a most solemn matter, and the Lord will 
certainly require of us the fulfilment of our vows. If 
death is not voluntary. He will destroy our flesh. If we 
resist this, it will mean the hopeless death of our being. 

OUR FAITHFUL, UNCHANGEABLE GOD 



"It is God who worketh in you," declares the Apostle 
Paul. We did not begin this work ourselves. It would 
never have occurred to us, uninvited, to endeavor to 
obtain a share in the glory, honor and immortality of the 
Lord Jesus. It would have been the height of presumption 
for us so to do without an express invitation. It is 
God who planned the whole matter. He has been working 
in us by His promises, by His providences in our daily 
experiences, and by all the instructions, warnings and 
counsels of His Word, and we rejoice in this. There is 
no changeableness with God; and when once He made 
this proposition. He meant it to the full. It would never 
mean anything else. He never makes an arrangement 
which He would wish to abrogate or amend. 

We are assured by the Apostle Paul that "He who 
has begun the good work in us will complete it, unto the 
Day of Jesus Christ." The only condition is our own 
faithfulness. God will never fail. "We are His workmanship." 
He is really doing the work. We are submitting 
ourselves that God may work in us both to will and 
to do of His good pleasure. He is the great Master 
Workman. Thus the work of grace goes on in our 
hearts and lives, making us ready for the exalted position 
to which we are called. And it is only if we are negligent 
of these great privileges granted to us that God will take 
them from us and give them to others. 

Those who are constructing a fine building need special 
power to accomplish the work— to hoist the great 
steel frames, the blocks of stone, the brick, etc. Now God 
purposes to furnish the power by which we may accomplish 
the work on our character-building, this wonderful 
structure we are setting up. But the Lord will not accomplish 
this great work in us unless we diligently 
cooperate with Him. He gave us the calling, the inspiration, 
and furnishes all the necessary assistance day by 
day; so we are to persevere in the building of this character 
which is essential and which He purposes shall be 
in all those whom He will make joint-heirs with His Son. 

"DO ALL THINGS WITHOUT MURMURINGS" 

In following in the footsteps of our Lord Jesus, we 
are not to murmur by the way, finding fault with its 
difficulties and its narrowness; nor are we to dispute how 
or where we are to be led, nor to seek to have any other 
way than that which Divine providence marks out for 
us, realizing and trusting that the Lord knows exactly 

R5856 : page 56 

what experiences are necessary to our development in 
the character-likeness of Christ. We should realize also 
that if obedience were possible while our mouths are full 
of complaints and dissatisfaction with the Lord and with 
our lot, which He has permitted, it would indicate that we 



are out of sympathy with the spirit of His arrangement. 
Such an obedience, if it were possible— and it is not— 
would not meet the Divine approval nor gain us the prize. 
Hence, as the Apostle exhorts, we should "do all things 
without murmurings and disputings, that we may be the 
sons of God without rebuke in the midst of a crooked 
and perverse generation, among whom we shine as lights 
in the world, holding forth the Word of Life." 

HOW WE ARE TO FEAR AND TREMBLE 

In the expression of our text— "Work out your own 
salvation with fear and trembling"— we are not to understand 
that the Lord wishes His children literally to 
tremble with fear before Him. We should exercise the 
same judgment in interpreting the words and expressions 
of Scripture that we would in reading any other book, 
or in understanding the words of our friends. One called 
to a position of great responsibility will sometimes say 
afterwards, "I accepted that position with fear and 
trembling." He would not mean that he actually quaked 
with fear; but this is an expression used to indicate that 
one feels the need of great carefulness— that he realizes 
his great responsibility and his liability to fail to meet 
all the requirements without the most earnest attention. 
It means that one realizes that the matter is not one to 
be taken up lightly, as if it were a mere bagatelle, but that 
failure in it would bring serious consequences. 

Just so when we read this Scripture, we are not to 
think that we should tremble with fear before our God; 
but we believe the Apostle's thought to be that in this 
great work that we have undertaken— of walking in the 
footsteps of Jesus that we may attain the prize of our 
High Calling— so much depends upon our faithfulness, 
our diligence. We have not undertaken a light thing. It 
is a very heavy responsibility. Our eternal interests are 
in the balance— the issue of life or death. Those who win 
the prize will be heirs of God to the highest honors and 
glories which have ever been offered— to a glory and 
honor beyond human power to imagine ! We believe that 
no such offer will ever again be made. 

The Son of God holds the position next to Jehovah, 
and can never have but one Bride. Surely, then, there 
is need that we work out our salvation with fear and 
trembling— with great carefulness, with great earnestness, 
in respect to everything in connection with it! We 
should be keenly appreciative of the fact that it is the 
most wonderful thing in all the Universe of God! We 
believe that if we do not make our calling and election 
sure and win in this fight within a very brief time now, 
the opportunity will be gone forever. No amount of 

R5856 : page 57 

wailing and gnashing of teeth will then avail. When 
the door is shut, it will never open again. Like Esau, 



those who fail will find "no place for repentance," though 
they seek it "carefully with tears." The glorious birthright 
will have slipped from their grasp forever. 

But, beloved fellow-laborers, who are earnestly striving 
day by day to "so run as to obtain," "we are persuaded 
better things of you, though we thus speak." But it is 
well that we have our "pure minds stirred up by way of 
remembrance," that we may keep our eyes upon the 
Heavenly City and the prize set before us. The wearisome 
march will, we believe, soon be ended. At most it 
is only a little while. And so, with steadfast hearts, let 
us run with patience and perseverance to the end of 
our course. 

"Joyful through hope, thy motto still must be— 

The Dawn is here! 
What glories does that Dawn unfold to thee! 

Be of good cheer! 
Gird up thy loins; bind sandals on thy feet! 
The way was dark and long; the end is sweet." 



R5856 : page 57 

THE MANY COLD-THE FEW FAITHFUL 

"Because iniquity shall be multiplied the love of 
the many shall wax cold."— "Matthew 24:12". R. V. 

IT IS evident that our Lord is not here speaking 

of the world, for the world does not 

have this love. It is the Church of whom 

Jesus is speaking; it is only the Church 

with whom God is now dealing. As New 

Creatures, God's children have seen a great 

Light, Christ Jesus. Through this Light 

we have ourselves become illuminated, and 

we seek to let our light shine before men. 

We are not lighted candles to shed light 

upon others until we have become the Lord's, until we 

have received of His light. 

The Bible declares that all men are by nature sinners, 
unworthy of God's notice. But He has made a provision 
of everlasting life for the perfect. How, then, will any 
member of our sinner race ever get everlasting life? 
Surely none of the children of Adam are worthy of everlasting 
life! The Lord, however, has provided for this 
emergency through the death of Christ. During the 
Gospel Age God has been delivering from death a certain 
class. During the incoming Millennial Age, He will lift 
up and make perfect the world of mankind. But only at 
the close of that Age, after they have been finally tested, 
will God grant them, if worthy, everlasting life. If they 
fail to attain perfection. He will not give them everlasting 
life at all, but will destroy them. 



UNIQUE ARRANGEMENT FOR THE PRESENT AGE 

The Church is an especially called-out class. "Ye are 
not of the world, even as I am not of the world," said 
the Master. "I have chosen you out of the world." Mankind 
in general are in a different heart attitude from 
those who come into the Church. It is only the minority 
who now hunger and thirst after righteousness. God in 
mercy keeps back the Truth from those to whom it would 
not in the present time be a blessing. This class 
that the Lord is now calling out from the world are 
"called to be saints." 

The word saint stands for one who is holy. The word 
holy has the significance of the word whole— that which 
is entire, lacking nothing. God, who is holy, calls His 
children to be holy, saying, "Be ye holy, for I am holy." 
1 Peter 1:16\) But we were by nature unholy; hence 
His arrangement for our justification, our being made 
right, whole. The world in general will be made right 
during the Millennium. None is made right now in the 
actual sense. 

In what way, then, does God make the Church right 
now? Ah, there is the beauty of God's Plan! They are 
made right reckonedly, by the counting to each of them 
of the perfect merit of Christ. This is a unique arrangement, 
peculiar to the present Age alone. God says, "My 
Call at this time is an invitation to a new nature. I am 
not inviting any now to Restitution; if so it would not be 
necessary to issue this special Call. I want a certain 
class for a specific purpose, to be used later in blessing 
the whole world. I know of some who will be glad to 
respond. So I am sending My Message, that those able 
to hear may hear." 

WIRELESS TELEGRAPHY ILLUSTRATES GREAT TRUTH 

We all know something of the wireless system of 
telegraphy. This is one of the blessings of this "day of 
the Lord's preparation" for the incoming New Age. It 
may serve as an illustration of how God has been sending 
out His Truth during the Gospel Age. If we would 
hear the Lord's Call, we must have co-hearers. If we 
do not have co-hearers, we cannot hear His Message at 
all. We need to have responsive hearts, ready to receive 
with gladness the Message of God's love and mercy. 

If your heart is not rightly in tune, you cannot understand; 
but as you get it in tune with the Lord, the 
Message enters, and you can hear the wave tones. God 
speaks to us in tones of a certain character. We recognize 
those tones and respond, if our heart is in the proper 
attitude. We had a wrong tone given us by the Adversary— 
that God had damned the world, had made a 
place to eternally torture the majority of mankind. With 
that wrong tone given us, we were not in a position to 
get the true Message. God's true Message is a glorious 



tune, a marvelous melody. 

Finally we got the right tune from the Word of God. 
"I can hear better now," we said. "Yes, yes; God is 
Love!" "God so loved the world that He gave His Only 
Begotten Son"; "Like as a Father pitieth His children, 
so the Lord pitieth!" Yes, I now understand something 
of the lengths and breadths and heights and depths of the 
love of God! It is too wonderful a symphony to fully 
comprehend, I cannot take it all in, but it is there. I am 
hearing it more and more clearly! 

Only those who get their hearts in tune with God can 
hear it all, and the more fully in tune you get your heart 
the better you can hear. If your instrument is out of 
tune, if something happens to get you out of touch with 
the Heavenly electric wave, then you cannot hear the 
wonderful melody. If you do not keep in close touch 
with the Lord, you will fail to catch the harmony. You 
are out of tune with the Infinite One. 

R5857 : page 57 

JUSTICE THE BASIC QUALITY OF CHARACTER 

What is the character of God that we are learning 
more about as we study His Word? We find that the 
very basis of God's character is Justice, absolute Justice. 
If God were an unjust God, we could never depend upon 
Him. He might make some term or condition today and 
then alter it tomorrow. But He is absolutely just; "Justice 
and judgment are the foundation of His Throne." 
("Psalm 89:14".) He changes not; "I am Jehovah, I 
change not." ("Malachi 3:6".) He is "the same yesterday, 
and today, and forever." He will never fail us. He 
will never deceive. Whoever desires to be in proper 
tune with God must practice upon that string of JUSTICE. 
Justice must come into our heart and into our 

R5857 : page 58 

life. The nearer we come in line with justice, the better 
we shall understand and enter into the spirit of God's 
great Plan. We trust that is what we are striving to do. 

But there are many ways of being unjust. We may 
say unjust things about our neighbors; we may make 
trifling faults appear to be great faults; we may color 
things unjustly. We may use words with a certain intonation 
or emphasis, with a shrug of the shoulders, giving 
a wrong impression which might be detrimental to 
the reputation of another. Although we might not really 
mean to wrong another, yet this course would be wrong, 
and might do incalculable harm. When you say. "I 
would not wish to be seen in that man's company," you 
might not mean to do wrong, and yet be guilty of slander. 
Your co-hearer is out of tune with God. 

Then in the mind one might be unjust. Many people 
seem to become prejudiced against certain things or persons 



without just reason. To that extent they are out of 
harmony with justice. What we need to do is to think 
righteously, soberly, kindly, along the lines of the Golden 
Rule, to let our words and deeds be in harmony with the 
principles of righteousness. Thus we shall be greatly assisted 
in the development of the sterling Christian character 
which is absolutely essential if we would have our 
Father's approval. 

Justice, then, is the basis, the first thing necessary, in 
building character. From this basis we are to go on to 
the attainment of sympathy, benevolence, forgiveness, 
love. God has been very loving and sympathetic with us. 
He has provided us a Redeemer. He has covered our 
many blemishes from His sight. Then, as we seek to 
copy God, we shall wish to be kind and forbearing and 
helpful toward all. But we must be just first. If we 
have an unjust twist in our mind, it will interfere with 
our communion with God, and we shall be in danger of 
failing to make our calling and election sure. 

We are continually surrounded by the spirit of the 
world— hatred, envy, malice, strife. So we must keep 
very close to the Lord to counteract this spirit. The 
world and the things of the fallen nature are so close to 
us that we can with difficulty avoid being contaminated 
by them. One can hardly pass through a vile neighborhood 
without carrying away vile odors. But the Lord 
has furnished us with a most effective disinfectant in 
His Word. All the cleansing we need is derived from 
the Message which God has given us, with its explicit 
instructions. This wireless Message from Him tells of 
His love for us, speaks peace through Jesus Christ our 
Lord, makes known to us our privilege of becoming heirs 
of God and joint-heirs with our Lord Jesus. 

Having been called with this Heavenly Calling, we 
can readily understand that God would not have us in 
this class unless we have the right spirit. The selection 
is not according to a whim of Divine preference. On 
the contrary, God chooses according to character, according 
to natural qualifications of honesty and the desire 
to be just, to be right, whatever may be the fleshly 
weaknesses. Justice is the very basis of God's Throne, 
the foundation of His Government. 

WORLDLINESS AMONG PROFESSED CHRISTIANS 

In our text the Lord Jesus declares that at a certain 
time in the Gospel Age. and apparently pointing down 
to our day, "because iniquity shall abound, the love of 
many shall wax cold." The Revised Version given here 
is stronger than our Common Version rendering. It is 
not only many who will grow cold, but the many, the 
majority, of professed followers of Christ. How truly 
the Master's words have been fulfilled! Iniquity is inequity, 
injustice, unrighteousness. Our text might properly 
read, "Because unrighteousness shall abound, the 
love of the many shall grow cold." We are in the time 



against which the Lord sought to especially guard us. 
How few comparatively have heeded the warning! 

The STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES point out that in 
God's arrangement the Prophet Elijah was a type of The 
Christ in the flesh— Jesus being the Head of the antitypical 
Elijah and the Church being His Body. The 
three and a half years, 1260 days, of Elijah's experiences 
while hiding in the wilderness from Queen Jezebel were 
symbolic, and corresponded to the 1260 years of the true 
Church in the wilderness condition, where she had fled 
from the antitypical Jezebel. ("Revelation 12:6,14"; 
"Daniel 7:24,25".) Elijah's coming out of the wilderness 
prefigured the coming out of the true Church of God 
from her wilderness hiding after the year 1799 A. D., 
when Jezebel's power was broken, and the copious rains 
following represented the wide circulation of the Bible 
since that date. 

The Church of Christ, the watching ones, are now in 
a particular time of waiting. The Elijah class is soon to 
be taken beyond the veil. The Elisha class will be left 
until later, to wash their soiled robes in the blood of the 
Lamb in the "Great Tribulation" just before the world. 
It seems that the Lord is now especially testing His 
people. Among many of the people of God love has 
waxed cold, because unrighteousness is abounding everywhere. 
Many today profess to believe things that they do 
not believe. Empty forms of godliness prevail. Love of 
pleasure is rampant. As a result many professed Christians 
are lukewarm or cold. They say, "Look at what 
the church systems are doing. What is right for our 
church leaders is right for me." Thus many are taking 
a very wavering course. 

There is much injustice practiced everywhere. We 
find great neglect of the Golden Rule. Christian parents, 
too, are leaving the religious training of their children too 
frequently to the Sunday School, where the teachers are 
often wholly incompetent to instruct them in the Word 
of God. Christian parents should be the priests of their 
own family. They have a great responsibility. Because 
iniquity prevails, the temptation is strong with many to 
follow the multitude. But the Lord's children should 
not follow a multitude to do evil. We must learn quickly 
now all God's will concerning us. The end of the 
Church's probation is drawing near. We have not much 
time left in the School of Christ. The saints are soon to 
be judges of the world. Shall we be among those judges? 

PROPER ATTITUDE OF CHRISTIANS 

Let each child of God bestir himself. Let him encourage 
the brethren to faithfulness. Let us give close 
attention to God's Word, that we may become more and 
more like our Father in Heaven. Let us love the things 
which are true, right, noble. Godlike. Let us renounce 
all else for the Heavenly things. We cannot stand for 
our own rights in the world. We gave up our human 



rights when we gave ourselves to the Lord. There are 
times perhaps when we might offer a protest, as Jesus 
did when He was smitten. But He did not retaliate nor 
try to render evil for evil. And we are to walk as He 
walked. Let us not allow the inequity of others to cause 
our hearts to grow cold. 

The One whom we are to please, the One with whom 
we have to do, the One whom we love above every human 
tie, is our Lord. We desire to do His will. As for the 
brethren, let us do the best we know how for them. Let 
Heavenly wisdom be our guide. Let us faithfully follow 
Jesus in the Narrow way, whatever others about us 
may do; and soon we shall hear His sweet "Well done!" 



R5857 : page 59 

THE FIRST CHRISTIAN MARTYR 

-MARCH 5.- ACTS 6:9*-* 8:3\-- 

FAITHFUL ST. STEPHEN-HIS ELOQUENCE AND ZEAL FOR GOD 
AND TRUTH STIRRED HIS ENEMIES-THEY HATED HIM FOR 
THE QUALITIES THEY SHOULD HAVE ADMIRED-BECAUSE 
BLINDED BY ERROR -HIS FIRST BATTLE IN THE SYNAGOGUE- 
HIS SECOND BATTLE BEFORE THE SANHEDRIN- 
HIS VICTORY IN DEATH. 

"Be thou faithful unto death, and I will 

give thee a crown of life."— "Revelation 2: 10*. 

STRICTLY speaking, our Lord Jesus was the 
first Christian martyr; but the first of His 
followers to endure death because of 
loyalty in preaching the Gospel of Jesus 
was St. Stephen, one of the seven elected 
Deacons, appointed to the distribution of 
the Church's charities. The Apostles had 
sought to give themselves entirely to the 
Master's work, and doubtless expected little 
of special service from the Deacons appointed. 
Nevertheless, by God's providence one of these, 
Stephen, because of his love and zeal was given much of 
the Lord's grace and blessing and permitted to lay down 
his life faithfully for the Truth. 
Seemingly St. Stephen was a man of great power and 

R5858 : page 59 

a lover of the Truth. His choice as one of these special 
Deacons indicates that those who knew him best highly 
estimated his purity of character and life. His eloquence 
in defense of the Master and His Gospel is well evidenced 
by this lesson. 
History says that at that time there were four hundred 



and sixty synagogues in Jerusalem. Some of these 
were Hebraic; that is, those attending worship there were 
accustomed to the Hebrew tongue, and it was used in 
these. Others of the synagogues were called Hellenist; 
that is to say, Greek. The Greek was the cultured language 
of that time in the outside world; and some Jews 
and proselytes living in outside places and in Jerusalem 
preferred to have the books of the Law and the Prophets 
in the Greek language. 

It is supposed that St. Stephen had been attached to 
one of these synagogues, and that this fact accounted for 
his going thither to urge upon his associates the message 
that Jesus was the Messiah. It has been assumed, with 
apparently good reason, that Saul of Tarsus attended the 
same synagogue; and that he was one of the disputants 
over whom St. Stephen, by the Lord's grace, seemed to 
have an advantage in these debates. Thus a bitter feeling 
was aroused. 

It seemed to the Jewish rulers that this message 
respecting Jesus as the Messiah and a Jewish responsibility 
for His death, and respecting God's favor in raising 
Him from the dead, was a gross error which, being set 
before the people in masterly fashion, was likely to 
arouse a spirit of resentment against the rulers of the 
Jews and to be subversive of all law and government in 
Palestine. Indeed, these Christians claimed that because 
of this rejection of Jesus the Jewish nation had been 
rejected from God's favor, and that dire calamities were 
coming. Those committed to the old order of things 
refused to believe these prophecies of coming disaster. 

St. Stephen's second battle was the one which preceded 
his death. The Sanhedrin, angry against him, 
suborned witnesses; that is to say, they bribed certain 
men to make complaint, charging St. Stephen with having 
blasphemed— with having declared Moses and the 
Law obsolete, with declaring that the Temple was no 
longer God's Temple. These witnesses put together certain 
isolated sayings of St. Stephen, which thus patched 
up, made the Truth to appear false and blasphemous. So 
it is with any matter. The form in which a statement 
is made has much to do with the impression which it 
makes. St. Stephen had said the very things that they 
charged; but by putting his statements together as they 
did, they misrepresented the essence of his teaching. 

ST. STEPHEN'S DEFENSE 

After these paid witnesses had given their testimony 
before the Sanhedrin, charging blasphemy— the penalty 
for which was death by stoning— the Sanhedrin, with a 
show of fairness, permitted St. Stephen to reply in his 
own defense. This he did in a masterly way, by taking 
up the thread of Jewish history and reciting it, showing 
his implicit faith in God's dealings with Abraham and in 
the promises there made. In orderly manner he brought 
the thought of his hearers down to the time of Moses 



and the giving of the Law. and reminded them that 
Moses had said that in due time God would raise up a 
greater Prophet than he. ("Deuteronomy 18:18,19".) 
This great Prophet, St. Stephen allowed them to infer, 
was Jesus; and since Moses had particularly referred to 
Jesus thus as greater, it could be no disloyalty to Moses 
now to accept that greater Prophet. Thus one feature 
of the charge against St. Stephen was overthrown. He 
was not disloyal to Moses, but contrariwise. 

As for the Temple, St. Stephen reminded his hearers 
that God first established the Tabernacle in the wilderness; 
and that by and by, in its stead, God provided the 
Temple at Jerusalem. It was no disrespect to the 
Tabernacle for them to believe in the Temple that Solomon 
built. God had now provided that a still higher 
Temple should take the place of the building made with 
hands. The higher Temple was the spiritual one, to be 
composed of the people of God who, as living stones, 
would be builded together for a habitation of God 
through the Spirit. As it was not blasphemy to accept 
the Temple of Solomon instead of the Tabernacle of 
Moses, neither should it be considered blasphemous to 
accept this higher, spiritual Temple, of which Jesus is 
the Head, or Foundation, instead of the typical Temple, 
built of wood and stone. 

VICTORY IN DEATH! 

So able, so logical, so convincing, were the words of 
St. Stephen that his hearers "were cut to the heart," not 
in a penitent sense, but with a realization that their cause 
was coming out second best. It is assumed that Saul of 
Tarsus was a member of that Sanhedrin. They no longer 
had any hope of justly charging St. Stephen with blasphemy. 
Their only hope now was that they could fasten 
upon something that he would say as being blasphemous, 
and on the spot rush him to his death. 

The moment came. St. Stephen, full of his subject, 
preaching Christ and the blessings yet to come through 
Him upon Israel and the world, was radiant in face- 
like an angel of the Lord. And looking up toward 
Heaven he exclaimed, "Behold, I see the heavens opened, 
and the Son of Man standing on the right hand of God!" 
This was the signal for the Sanhedrin to raise a cry of 
blasphemy and rush upon God's messenger. 

Just what he did mean by those words, we may not 
too surely say. Remembering that our best sight is with 
the eyes of our understanding, we might use the same 
words— not referring to anything seen by our natural 
sight, but merely to our mental view and our positiveness 
of its truth. Thus a blind man, catching the point of an 
argument, might truthfully say, "Oh, yes, I see now!" 

R5858 : page 60 

We may be sure that a mob was ready to follow the 



suggestion of the Sanhedrin. Mobs now, as then, seem 

ready for any kind of violence if they have a leader and 

a pretext, especially if the pretext and the leadership be 

along religious lines and from those recognized as authorities. 

There is in the fallen nature a ferocious, 

bestial disposition which seems blood-thirsty and only 

awaiting opportunity. 

Pushing the minister of Jesus outside of their gates 
—for no execution was allowed on the inside— the crowd 
threw their clothing at the feet of the young man Saul 
of Tarsus. Thus he became their authority for the 
stoning. Then they stoned Stephen to death, he crying 
at the time, "Lord Jesus, receive my spirit"— my life — 
and also, "Lord, lay not this sin to their charge!" This 
was St. Stephen's climax of victory— faithfulness unto 
death, and, withal, the loving spirit in which he received 
death through his enemies— the spirit of the Master, the 
same spirit which we should cultivate and manifest. 

HEROISM IN THE TRENCHES 

St. Stephen has set us an example. Indeed, examples 
are not difficult to find, showing what manner of persons 
we ought to be. The difficulty seems to be that none but 
those of fervent spirit and well instructed of the Lord 
profit by the examples. For instance, the world is today 
giving the Church a wonderful lesson in respect to faithfulness 
unto death. When the followers of Jesus look 
across the water and behold millions of men leaving 
home, family, business, pleasure and every consideration 
to obey the rulers of their lands— to go into the trenches 
and suffer the hardships and exposure and wounds and 
death, it seems truly marvelous. 

We say to ourselves, "What manner of persons ought 
we Christians to be!" We have not been called to kill 
our fellowmen, but to do them good. We have not been 
called for a few cents per day of wage or possibly an 
iron cross or a name on some roll of honor, but have 
been promised glory, honor, immortality, joint-heirship 
with our Lord in His Kingdom. Moreover, ours is not 
only the privilege of helping men now instead of destroying 
them, but the blessed privilege also of helping them 
in the coming Age, from imperfections up to the image 
and likeness of God. Oh, what manner of persons ought 
we Christians to be! How faithful, how loyal! 

Our Golden Text is impressive. Our enlistment is 
not for a few days, but undertaken with a full understanding 
that in order to gain the great prize we must 
lay down our lives in the Lord's service— faithfully, 
loyally. How many Christians have rightly understood 
what was signified by consecration of their heart to the 
Lord and by taking up their cross to be His followers 
through evil report or through good report? It is not 
too late yet to learn our lessons more thoroughly and to 
determine that by the grace of God we will be faithful 
unto death to Him who hath called us out of darkness 



into His marvelous light. 



R5859 : page 60 

TWO BANDS OF GOD'S HEROES 

-MARCH 12.- HEBREWS 11:1*-* 12:2*.-- 

FAITH HEROES OF THE JEWISH AGE-FAITH HEROES OF THE 
GOSPEL AGE-THE HOUSE OF SERVANTS-THE HOUSE OF 
SONS-EARTHLY PROMISES-HEAVENLY PROMISES- 
RESURRECTION TO PERFECT HUMAN NATURE-RESURRECTION TO 
DIVINE NATURE-THE CHRISTIAN RACE COURSE. 

"Let us run with patience the race that is set before 
us, looking unto Jesus, the Author and Perfector of 
our faith. "—'Hebrews 12:2*. 

THE Bible puts faith before works, because no 

works can be acceptable to God unless inspired 

by faith. Thus it is written, "Without 

faith it is impossible to please God." 

The Bible brings to our attention two distinct 

classes of Faith Heroes, both pleasing 

to God and both to be highly rewarded by 

Him. One of these classes preceded Jesus' 

day; the other class follows His day. The 

first class of Faith Heroes are therefore 

known as the Ancient Worthies; the latter class, with 

Jesus as their Head, are styled the sons of God. This 

distinction or division of God's servants, although clearly 

marked in the Scriptures, has been overlooked by the 

Lord's people until recent years. 

No matter how faithful or loyal Enoch, Abraham, 
David, Jeremiah and others were, they could not be 
recognized by God as members of the House of Sons, 
because they lived before Jesus' day— before Jesus tasted 
death for every man. The Bible points out that the first 
man Adam was recognized as a son of God. (*Luke 3:38\) 
From the time that sin entered the world through 
Adam's disobedience, God recognized none of the human 
family as His sons— all were sinners— until Jesus came 
and died, the Just for the unjust, that He might bring 
us back to God and open to us the door of sonship. It is 
in harmony with this that St. Paul declares, "Moses 
verily was faithful as a servant over all his House [the 
House of Servants], but Christ as a Son over His own 
House [the House of Sons]."— * Hebrews 3:5,6*. 

Thus the distinction is clearly marked between the 
noble brethren before the Cross, the last one of whom 
was John the Baptist, and the noble brethren since the 
Cross, the first of whom were the Apostles. That John 
the Baptist was the last of the Ancient Worthies is attested 
by the Master's words, "There hath not arisen a 



greater Prophet than John the Baptist; and yet I say unto 
you, that he that is least in the Kingdom of God is 
greater than he."— 'Luke 7:28". 

St. Paul makes this distinction between the Ancient 
Worthies and the Christian Worthies in today's lesson. 
He first of all recites the names of the prominent ones 
of the past— Enoch, Abraham, David, Jeremiah, etc. He 
declares their faith, and says that they were pleasing to 
God, noble, praiseworthy. Then he calls attention to the 
fact that they never received the promises which God 
made to them. 

It should be remembered that God did not promise 
Heavenly things prior to Jesus' day. The promises to 
the Ancient Worthies, which inspired their zeal and devotion, 
were all earthly promises; for instance, the 
one made to Abraham— "Lift up now thine eyes, and look 
from the place where thou art northward, and southward, 
and eastward, and westward; for all the land 
which thou seest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed 
forever."— "Genesis 13:14,15"; "17:8". 

St. Stephen calls our attention to the fact that this 
promise to Abraham is still secure and still unfulfilled. 
He declares that Abraham never received enough of that 
land to set his foot upon. On this promise he predicates 
the resurrection of Abraham, that in God's due time he 
may inherit the land, and that his faithful seed, or posterity, 
will inherit it after him. 

On the other hand, the promises in the New Testament 

R5859:page61 

are only spiritual— Heavenly promises, "things 
above." The Christian Worthies are promised a share 
with Jesus in the Heavenly Kingdom which He is to 
establish at His Second Coming. They are to be His 
joint-heirs, "if so be that they suffer with Him that they 
may be also glorified together." ("Romans 8:17".) The 
promise to these is that they shall be a Kingdom of 
Priests, or a Royal Priesthood; while the promise to the 
Ancient Worthies is that they shall be made "princes in 
all the earth."-" 1 Peter 2:9"; "Rev. 20:6"; "Psalm 45: 16". 

The Christian heroes are to have a change of nature 
from human to Divine, the beginning of this change being 
the begetting of the Holy Spirit in the present time, 
and the completing of the change being that of the resurrection- 
"changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an 
eye"— "sown in weakness, raised in power; sown in dishonor, 
raised in glory; sown an animal body, raised a 
spiritual body." But the Ancient Worthies, not having 
the begetting of the Holy Spirit to a new nature, will have 
a different resurrection; namely, to human perfection. 

Contrasting these two classes of Faith Heroes, the 
Apostle in "verses 39 and 40" declares that the Ancient 
Worthies, "having obtained a good report through faith, 
received not the Promise [the things promised to them]. 
God having promised some better thing for us [Christian 



heroes, followers in the footsteps of Jesus], that they 
without us should not be made perfect." In other words, 
God from the beginning arranged that Christ should be 
first— Jesus the Head, then the Church, His Body; and 
after the perfecting of these, styled the First Resurrection, 
the Divine promises will begin to fulfil to the 
Ancient Worthies, and extend ultimately to "all the families 
of the earth."— 'Genesis 12:3"; s Galatians 3:29\ 

THE CHRISTIAN RACE COURSE 

God has great blessings in store for every member of 
the human family willing to accept the same on the 
Divine terms. But the chiefest of all the blessings 
brought to our attention in the Bible are those found to 
be provided for the Church class— the Little Flock, to 
whom it is the Father's good pleasure to give the Kingdom, 
and the glory and the honor of association with 
Jesus in the work of blessing the world during His 
Millennial Reign. 

The Apostle addresses this class in the two closing 
verses of today's Study. He urges us, saying, "Wherefore, 
seeing we also are compassed about with so great 
a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and 
the sin that doth so easily beset us, and let us run with 
patience the race that is set before us, looking unto 
Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our faith, who for 
the joy that was set before Him, endured the cross, 
despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand 
of the Throne of God." 

The Apostle is a forceful reasoner; for in these words 
he exhorts to look backwards at the list of Ancient 
Worthies and to consider what they endured and how 
faithful and loyal to God they were. Then he would 
have us consider them as though they were a cloud of 
witnesses watching us, to whom has been given this still 
greater blessing and privilege of becoming sons of God 
on the Divine plane, of attaining "the Divine nature."— 
Mohn 1:12V2 Peter 1:4\ 

He pictures before our minds a great race-course, in 
which we are runners. He pictures Jesus as the Leader 
gone before, the One who has become the Author of our 
faith, the One through whom we are privileged to enter 
this race, and the One who has promised us grace sufficient 
for every time of need. He pictures to us how 
Jesus ran in this race and by faith looked forward to the 
joy that was set before Him by the Father. He pictures 
to us how loyal Jesus was, and what He endured— the 
cross and its shame. He pictures the Father's faithfulness 
in highly rewarding Jesus, seating Him at His own 
right hand of Divine Majesty. Then comes the exhortation, 
"Let us lay aside every weight," every hindrance, 
everything that would prevent our running grandly and 
successfully the race for this great prize which Jesus has 
obtained, and to which we are invited through the merit 
of His sacrifice. 



The Apostle reminds us also that one of the greatest 
hindrances to our running this race is sin; that we are 
beset by inherited sin in our members; and that we need 
to run in the race not only perseveringly, but also patiently; 
for whoever would obtain so great a prize will 
need patience, will need to be proven and tested in all 
points as respects his loyalty and devotion to the 
Heavenly Father, to the Truth, and to the brethren. 
Only such as attain the character-likeness of their Leader 
in this narrow way may hope to be with Him and like 
Him, and share His glory; for God has predestinated that 
these shall all be conformed to the image of His Son. 
- Romans 8:29\ 



R5860: page 61 

"LET YOUR LIGHT SO SHINE" 

"Be thou an example of the believers, in word, in conversation, 
in charity, in faith, in purity."— s 1 Timothy 4:12\ 

WE RECALL that St. Paul was the writer of 

these words, that they constitute a part of 

his first Epistle to Timothy, a promising 

young Elder in the Church, one who had 

labored much with the Apostle in his work 

of the ministry. On one occasion Timothy 

was referred to by the Apostle as "my son 

Timothy." This was due no doubt to the 

fact that it was through St. Paul's instrumentality 

that the Truth had reached 

Timothy. On account of his youth he may not have 

realized his responsibility. He might have felt that many 

others in the Church were older than himself and would 

therefore be better examples to the brethren and better 

representatives of the Lord before men. 

But the Apostle here exhorts Timothy to be an example 
of what a true believer should be. He urged him 
to "flee youthful lusts," to "stir up the gift of God" which 
was in him. Timothy was to make a special use of the 
talents and opportunities which were his. And in so 
doing he would be a worthy example— not only to believers, 
but of believers, so that not only might the Church 
see his life and general course, but others, those of the 
world, might also see this, and thus have greater interest 
in the Lord's Cause. 

This example was not to be the wearing of a particular 
shape of coat or a particular cut of collar, nor was it in 
manifesting to the world eccentricities of life and manner— 
not so. His example was to be in his Christlike 
character. He was to glorify the Lord in his words— in 
what he would say, in how he would say it— in wisdom of 
speech. "Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth 
speaketh." Whoever would be careless in his language 



would reveal a careless heart. If Timothy had been careless 
in his words, others might have said, "You see that 
he thinks that he knows everything. See how he is always 
intruding himself." This would be especially unbecoming 
in one who was young. Thus he would have 

R5860 : page 62 

been despised as an example of believers, and others 
would be offended rather than helped. 

Not only in word, but in his entire conversation was 
he to be an example. The word conversation, at the time 
our common version was translated, had the significance 
of conduct, manner of life. This advice is the counsel of 
wisdom in reference to us all as children of the Lord! 
The Apostle admonished Timothy with regard to his intercourse 
with the Church and with the world— Whether 
you eat or drink, whether you buy or sell, whatever you 
do, be a worthy exponent of the doctrine of Christ and 
of the effect of His Spirit in the heart. 

In his charity, his love. Timothy was to be an example. 
This would include the ordinary thought of the 
word as now generally used, in the sense of dispensing 
largess. We do not know that Timothy had very much of 
this world's goods to distribute; but he could have charity 
in the sense of love, which is the comprehensive sense, 
the Bible sense, of the word. Love would not wish any 
harm to his neighbor, but would manifest interest in 
everybody, and even in the brute creation— wishing to 
do right, to be kind. 

Love would serve the interests of others in spirit; it 
would come from the heart, from the inward disposition, 
not be merely in word or in outward conduct. Kindness 
and good-will would not be feigned from a sense of duty 
or to appear polite and thoughtful. It would be genuine. 
The spirit in which a thing is said or done has a great 
deal to do with its effect upon others. One who had 
wounded another might say, "There was not a word in 
what I said to which you could object." Ah, well! but it 
was the spirit in which it was said or done— the animus 
of it. This is an important matter to all the Lord's people. 
We are to remember the spirit of the Master— the spirit 
of consideration, of self-sacrifice, of righteousness, of love. 

In faith, also, Timothy was to be an example to all 
with whom he came in contact. Of course the Apostle 
would mean here his manifestation of faith. One must 
have faith before he can manifest it. We have known 
Christians who, if they have a doubt about a certain 
feature of Truth or a weakness of faith, would discuss 
their doubts in the presence of those who were weak in 
the faith or who were of the world. This is a great mistake 
and productive of much harm. One never knows 
when a weak one may be present who might be greatly 
injured by words of doubt or distrust. Whoever is 
troubled by such doubts should go promptly to the Lord 
for help, that his faith may be firmly established; he 



should not discuss his doubts and fears with others unless 
as mentioned above, with the One who alone can help him. 
The Lord's people should not boast of how much faith 
they have— not so— but we should manifest our faith to 
others, our confidence in the Lord, by our peace under 
trial and difficulty. We should not merely say that we 
have faith, but should manifest it in our lives. 

Timothy was counseled to be an example in purity. 
"Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord." ( v Isaiah 52: 1 V.) 
As the typical priests and Levites were instructed 
to wash and keep themselves continually clean, so the 
people of the Lord today, the spiritual Priests, the spiritual 
Levites, should be pure, clean, in word, in action, in 
thought. Whoever is not pure in his thoughts is very apt 
to be impure, unclean, in his actions, his words. Out of 
the heart proceeds the impurity. One person of impure 
mind might poison the minds of many. 

Impurity may be given a broad or a narrow view, as 
circumstances may indicate. In the broad sense, it would 
be uncleanness, dishonesty, insincerity, in general. But 
in every sense St. Paul would have Timothy be a worthy 
example, so that all who took note of him would see how 
they ought to deport themselves. The Apostle expressed 
the same desire concerning Timothy that he expressed 
concerning all the Church— that he walk as the Apostle 
himself walked, that he be as self-sacrificing as he saw 
St. Paul to be. This was not a Pharisaical attitude— "I 
am holier than thou." But the Apostle demonstrated those 
principles of righteousness in the life that he lived, and 
he wished that Timothy should do the same. 

Those qualities of character here enumerated by the 
Apostle should be shown forth— not merely by the Elders 
and the teachers of the Ecclesia, but by all who have made 
the same profession of being disciples of Christ. So far 
as our standing with God is concerned, we are all brethren 
one of another; and each of these brethren should seek 
to copy the Elder Brother, our Lord Jesus. Each one 
should seek to be a pattern to the whole flock of God. 



R5860 : page 62 

MILITIA LAWS OF CANADA 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

With reference to letter in THE WATCH TOWER of November 
15th last, giving excerpt from the Canada Militia Act, in 
connection with classes of persons entitled to exemption 
from military service under same, no mention was made of 
clause reading as follows: 

"No person shall be entitled to exemption unless he has, 
at least one month before he claims such exemption, filed with 
the Commanding Officer within the limits whereof he resides, 
his affidavit, made before some Justice of the Peace, of the 
facts on which he rests his claim." 



We have procured an authorized copy of said Act, further 
copies of which may be obtained from the King's Printer, 
Ottawa, Ont., or possibly from any stationer, and enclose same 
for your information. 

From the clause quoted above it would appear that no 
claim for exemption will be considered unless affidavits have 
been filed in accordance therewith, and you will notice from 
a perusal of the Act that all males, between the ages of 
eighteen and sixty are liable to be called out for military service, 
at home or abroad, at any time under same, no further 
Act or amendment being necessary. 

In view of the fact that every effort is now being made 
to obtain recruits here, we being approached on the streets 
and in every conceivable manner, with a view to having us 
enlist, and, as the authorities propose to raise 70,000 additional 
men in the provinces of Manitoba and Saskatchewan during 
the next few months, they may deem it advisable to put this 
Act in force at any date. We would, therefore, be glad if you 
will kindly advise as to our methods of procedure in this respect, 
and, if you deem it advisable for us to file affidavits immediately 
(it being our opinion at present that we should do 
this as soon as possible), we would appreciate advice as to 
suitable wording of same, so as to give the necessary facts 
upon which to base our claims for exemption. 

Perhaps you may also think it advisable to acquaint other 
Canadian brethren of the terms under which exemptions may 
be obtained, if desired, as it does not appear to be very generally 
known what has to be done in such cases. 

Praying the Lord's richest blessing upon you, and trusting 
you will be able to visit us here ere long, I am. 

Your brother by His Grace, W. T. HOOPER. 

WHAT BIBLE STUDENTS SHOULD DO 

The above letter is of great importance to members of the 
International Bible Students' Association residing in Canada. 
The full text of the law respecting militia and defense of 
Canada— Chapter 41 R.S. 1916— is published by S. E. Dawson, 
Ottawa. It could be ordered direct for, probably, five cents, 
or possibly could be obtained from any Canadian stationer. 
Its Eleventh Article enumerates exemption from service and 
includes "persons who, from the doctrines of their religion, 
are averse to bearing arms and rendering personal military 
service, under such conditions as are prescribed." 4 E. VII. 
c. 23, s. 12. 

Paragraph twelve declares, as is pointed out in the foregoing 
letter, that "No person shall be entitled to exemption 
unless he has, at least one month before he claims such exemption, 
filed with the commanding officer within the limits 
whereof he resides his affidavit made before some Justice of 

R5861 : page 63 

the Peace of the facts on which he rests his claim. When 
exemption is claimed on any ground the burden of proof shall 
always rest on the person claiming it." 



In harmony with the above requirement we advise that all 
Canadian members of the I. B. S. A., between the ages of 17 1/2 
and 60 years, at once write out the following statement, drawn 
up by the Hon. J. F. Rutherford, make affidavit to it before a 
Justice of the Peace, and forward it, as directed, to "the commanding 
officer within the limits whereof he resides": 

Dated at 1916. 

To the Honorable 

Commanding Officer of 

Honorable Sir: — 

In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 41 of "AN 
ACT RESPECTING THE MILITIA AND DEFENSE OF CANADA," and 
known as "MILITIA ACT 4 E VII.," and particularly sections 
1 1 and 12 thereof, I herewith hand you, to be filed as required 
by said Act, my affidavit setting forth the facts on which I 
rest my claim for exemption from liability to service in the 
Militia, and respectfully request that you cause the same to 
be filed as provided by said law. 

Respectfully, (Signed) 

AFFIDAVIT. 

Province of }ss. 

Dominion of Canada } 

I, (name of affiant), being duly sworn, upon my 

oath state: That I am a male citizen of Canada, and am 

years of age; that I reside at ; that I am averse 

to bearing arms or rendering personal military service under 

the conditions as prescribed by "Militia Act 4 E VII.," and I 

make this affidavit, as provided by section 12, subdivision 2 

of said Act and of Chapter 41 of "AN ACT RESPECTING THE 

MILITIA AND DEFENSE OF CANADA," for the purpose of obtaining 

exemption from liability to service in the Militia, and 

the facts upon which I rest my claim for such exemption are 

as follows, to wit: 

I am a Christian and the religious doctrines which I 
believe and hold preclude me from bearing arms or rendering 
personal military service; I am a member of the International 
Bible Students Association, a religions Association organized 
under the laws of Great Britain, with its chief office at No. 
34 Craven Terrace, Paddington, London, England, and also 
with offices at No. 124 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, N. Y., 
U. S. A., and which has classes or congregations throughout 
the Dominion of Canada; I subscribe to and am in harmony 
with the religious doctrines taught by said International Bible 
Students Association, which are, to wit, that all members 
thereof avow a full consecration of will, heart and life to 
God's service— as footstep followers of the Lord Jesus Christ 
and the doctrines and teachings concerning His Kingdom of 
Peace and good will; I am obligated by my conscience and 
by engagements with said Bible Students Association to "follow 
peace with all men," and to do violence or injury to 
none; that such is in harmony with the teachings of the 
Master, Christ Jesus, that His followers practise non-resistance; 
that the requirements of the International Bible Students 
Association are that its members be obedient to the "powers 
that be" in so far as their laws and requirements do not 



conflict with the teachings of Jesus Christ; that the provisions 
of said "Militia Act 4E VII." are in conflict with 
the teachings of the Lord Jesus Christ, as I understand and 
believe the same. 

Dated at 

1916. (Sign here) 



Subscribed and sworn to before 
me, a Justice of the Peace within 

and for , this day of 

A. D. 1916. 

Justice of the Peace. 

Every WATCH TOWER subscriber is recognized as a member 
of the International Bible Students' Association. The 
WATCH TOWER being the official organ of the Association its 
yearly subscription price includes annual membership fee of 
all Associated Bible Students. 



R5861 : page 63 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
WELCOME BACK, DEAR BRETHREN! 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

You are the first person I have acquainted with the 
fact of my return home to fellowship with the brethren here 
at Victoria, B. C. I find myself, through my Heavenly 
Father's grace, brought back into the most blessed fellowship 
on earth, after being severed from that same fellowship for 
now six years. 

You will doubtless remember me at Manchester, England, 
and how I, with some others there, saw cause to secede from 
the brethren on the subject of the Sin Offering. Well, I am 
happy to state that I now see that that action of mine was 
not justifiable and that I did wrong. I now wish to express 
my heartfelt shame for all the sorrow and pain such action 
caused to so many of my brothers and sisters in the Truth 
in England and Scotland, and most especially to yourself, for 
I am so much indebted to you for the Truth, on which I stand 
and in which I rejoice. 

By God's grace, and abiding in Him, I will re-devote myself 
to Him and His Cause, show Him my love, live up more 
and more to Jesus and "toe the mark" for the Prize. Meditating 
on the "thirteenth of 1 Corinthians" brought me to see 
the error of my way— together with God's providential dealings 
with me. Oh, that all, like myself, would or could see 
their mistake and come back again; what rejoicing there 
would be in many hearts and what gladness to the heart of 
our Heavenly Father and our dear Lord and Savior and to all 
of like precious faith! 

May the grace of Him who called you, dear Brother, and 
of our most precious Lord, abundantly sustain you to the end! 
Sorrowfully and gratefully. 



Your brother in Christ, J. T. HODGE.-B. C. 

CALLED AGAIN TO TENT-MAKING 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

In terminating my services with the Society, I wish to 
express my thankfulness to the dear Lord, and to you His 
servant, for the blessed privilege which has been mine during 
the past two years, of engaging in the Pilgrim work. 

In this period I have had many blessings, and learned many 
lessons, not the least important of which is to more humbly 
value my few talents. The responsibilities of a "teacher" have 
frequently weighed very heavily upon my heart, lest by careless 
word or thoughtless act I stumble one of the Lord's little 
ones. I feel that I have not at all times acted or counseled as 
wisely as, under the circumstances, I might have done. But 
He whose eye sleepeth not will overrule. 

Knowing of your care for all the churches, and how 
heavily their spiritual interest weighs upon your heart, I am 
prompted to call your attention once more to the flood of 
literature and "sermonizing" now being forced upon the attention 
of the brethren. Some of this literature is advancing 
very subtle error; much of it is of doubtful value and considerable 
calculated to confuse or discourage the friends. The 
SCRIPTURE STUDIES and WATCH TOWER articles, in my judgment, 
could serve far better the issues in question. 

While some slackness respecting faithfulness to their 
Vows and the systematic reading of the SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
can be noted since October, 1914, yet on the whole, I am glad 
to say that the general spiritual condition of the brethren is 
much improved. 

The WATCH TOWER for Jan. 1st is very encouraging. 
May the Lord continue to bless you His servant, as you faithfully 
sacrifice of your time and comfort in ministering to our 
spiritual needs. With sincere Christian love to yourself and 
the Bethel family, I am 

Your servant in the best of bonds, WM. A. BAKER. 

THE MINISTRY OF SORROW 

BELOVED PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

In THE WATCH TOWER of November 15 there appeared that 
most beautiful setting forth of "The Ministry of Sorrow." 
I want to impose on your most valuable time to tell how 
much I appreciated and do appreciate the article. Not that 
each TOWER does not contain most helpful and precious food, 
but as contrasted with the many things I have read along 
this line, the "Ministry of Sorrow," referred to above, is 
incomparably sweet. It has opened my eyes to a field of 
service I had not heretofore seen. 

One Class that I visited have what they call their "Up-to-Date 
Meeting," which is given to careful study and 
analysis of such WATCH TOWER articles. Thus the application 
of doctrine to personal experience is more thoroughly 
impressed. I am sure from my own experience that many 
of the good things appearing in THE TOWER can be reread 



and studied with much profit. 

We are sure, beloved Brother, that none could minister 
such things except he had the experience of such a ministry. 

Thanking you for your ministry of love, and praying the 
Father's continued blessing upon you in such a ministry, I 
remain with much love. 

Your Brother by His grace, W. M. BATTERSON. 



page 64 

International Bible Students Association Classes 
STUDIES AND LECTURES BY MEMBERS OF THE PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 65 

VOL. XXXVII. MARCH 1 No. 5 
A. D. 1916-A.M. 6044 



CONTENTS 

"Ye are Bought With a Price" ... 67 

Divine Paradox— Liberty Through 

Bondage 68 

Treasures Laid Up in Heaven ... 69 

Balm of Gilead for Broken Hearts . . 69 

Incentives to Faithfulness ... 70 

Heavenly Pilgrims Nearing Home . . 70 
Second Epistle of St. Peter . . . .71 

The Fire a Needful Kingdom Preparation 71 
Philip and the Ethiopian .... 

An Earnest Truth-Seeker . . 
The Great Multitude 

Two Companies— Two Rewards 
Expecting a Personal Anti-Christ 

The Editor's View is Different . 
The Truth in South Africa . . . 
Interesting Letters 78 

Blessed Australasian Convention 

Do Not Take Anybody's Say-So 
The Daily Cup (Poem) 79 

page 66 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agenciesr-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



72 


.72 


75 


. .76 


. .76 


.77 


.78 

> 


i . .78 


. .79 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as FolIows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



P. O. CHANGES-RENEW IN SAME NAME 



Hundreds of Post Offices are dropped in favor of new 
ones every year. Any change in yours should be immediately 
reported. Sisters renewing WATCH TOWER subscriptions 
should give the same initials as at first or mention the change, 
and thus save us and themselves much trouble. 



R5868 : page 66 

ENTERTAINMENT OF THE PILGRIMS 

All friends of the Truth properly feel it an honor and a 
privilege to entertain the Pilgrim Brethren during their brief 
stays. However, the interests of the Truth and the comfort 
of the Pilgrims should also be considered. The Elders, or, 
under their direction, the Class Secretary, should see to it 
that Pilgrims are entertained in homes where they will not 
be a burden and where they will be comfortable. Those who 
travel and preach continuously are more or less under a nervous 
strain and need comfort, proper rest, and some degree of 
privacy for meditation. All having the interests of the work 
at heart should, therefore, cheerfully cooperate that the 
Pilgrim may be entertained in a home where accommodations 
are suitable. 

The entire Class would surely be disgraced if the 
Society's representative were otherwise treated. We are sure 
that only thoughtlessness on the part of some has made this 
suggestion necessary. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR APRIL 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
April follow: (1) 5; (2) 196; (3) 263; (4) 46; (5) 102; (6) 37; 
(7) 114; (8) 145; (9) 99; (10) 214; (11) 191; (12) Vow; (13) 
7; (14) 182; (15) 290; (16) 14; (17) 279; (18) 198; (19) 154; 
(20) 273; (21) 221; (22) 324; (23) 8; (24) 261; (25) 166; (26) 
72; (27) 195; (28) 272; (29) 1; (30) 286. 



R5859 : page 67 



"YE ARE BOUGHT WITH A PRICE" 

"Ye are not your own, for ye are bought with a price. Therefore 
glorify God in your body."— 1 Corinthians 6: 19,20. 

WHAT different sentiments these inspired expressions 

of the great Apostle awaken in 

different hearts! To the heart of the fallen 

natural man these statements are very objectionable; 

but to the heart fully in harmony 

with God and His glorious Plan they 

are precious words, full of comfort and joy. 

The proud, unregenerate heart convinces 

itself that it did not need to be bought; that 

it needed no redemption; that it has no very 

serious ailment of sin. It may be ready to admit— and 

indeed could surely not dispute— that it is imperfect; that 

tried in the balances of justice, it would be found wanting. 

But to itself these lacks are very slight and insignificant, 

and deserve but trivial punishment; and it 

expects to bear that punishment, and believes that it does 

bear it to the full in the troubles and trials of life. 

The natural heart believes in a great First Cause of 
some kind, which it calls God, or sometimes merely the 
principle of Good. It believes in certain laws of nature, 
which it holds are unalterable and irrevocable. That 
there is such a thing as forgiveness for sin, it denies. It 
is therefore wholly out of harmony with the Gospel proposition 
of a Sin-offering, "a Ransom for all," an opportunity 
for reconciliation to God through the merits of a 
Redeemer. It denies any need for reconciliation. This 
class of unbelievers are in many respects the most hopeless; 
for they have a sort of worldly-wise philosophy 
which so fills their minds that it hinders them from seeing 
the force and beauty of the true philosophy of the Bible. 
They are usually blind to the simplest logic that could 
touch this subject, as presented in the Scriptural declarations, 
"The wages of sin is death," and, "The soul that 
sinneth, it shall die."— Romans 6:23; Ezekiel 18:4,20. 

While these cannot and do not claim perfection, it 
seems never to have occurred to them that all imperfection 
is unrighteousness, sin; that the judgment of a perfect, 
righteous God would properly and naturally be that 
what He cannot approve must be destroyed; and that only 
that which His righteousness approves, only that which 
is perfect, will receive His blessing and be granted perpetuation 
of life. Not until this view is grasped are any 
prepared for the Message of the Gospel— the Message 
that God is operating in Christ for the reconciliation of 
the world to Himself. Only as the natural man comes to 
see that "the wages of sin is death" is he able to see that 
"the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our 
Lord." Only then can he realize that "he that hath the 
Son hath life, and he that hath not the Son of God hath 
not life" eternal. Not until then will he realize that "he 



that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life, and he 
that believeth not the Son shall not see life, but the 
wrath of God abideth on him."— Romans 6:23; 1 John 5: 12; 
John 3:36; 1 Corinthians 15:21,22. 

"THE MEEK WILL HE TEACH HIS WAY" 

But our inspired text gives offense in another respect 
to the natural man, or to the man who has fallen from 
grace; it hurts his pride. It implies that he is being 
treated as a mere slave, or chattel, to be bought or sold. 
What could be more galling to the proud, unregenerate 
heart than such a thought? Nevertheless, the thought 
that we are purchased, and hence are by right the bond-slaves 
of Him who purchased us, is everywhere held 
forth in the Scriptures; and the meek, the humble-minded, 
alone are able to receive it and appreciate it. 

These hear the Apostle's statement that all were "sold 
under sin" (Romans 7: 14), and they realize the truthfulness 
of the declaration. They find abundant evidence in 
themselves and in the entire human family that all mankind 
are "slaves to sin"; they find the "law of sin in 
their members" and in all others. They find the power 
of sin so strong that it cannot be fully broken by any; 
that, although it may be fought against, nevertheless it 
holds over the whole race of man a mastery that the 
enslaved ones cannot fully overcome, even with their 
most earnest efforts. They thus see in the Apostle's 
words (Romans 5:12-21) representing Sin as a great 
task master ruling the world, a very grim, but very truthful 
picture of the facts. 

Such inquire of the Word of God, How comes it that 
God, who is Himself the embodiment of all that is good, 
pure and lovely, all that is perfect, has brought into 
existence human offspring under such bondage to sin 
through imperfection? They ask. Does not the Bible 
declare of God, "All His work is perfect"? (Deuteronomy 32:4.) 
Why, then, this universal imperfection, this 
general subjection of mankind to the power of sin? The 
true answer can come from one source only— the Word of 
God; and that gives the only satisfactory answer, the 
only one that meets all the requirements of the conditions 
as they are known to man. 

The Word declares that God's work was perfect in 
the creation of man in His own image in the beginning; 
but that the creature, being endowed with free moral 
agency, rebelled against the law of his Creator, and thus 
by self-will, self-gratification, brought himself under the 

R5859 : page 68 

penalty previously threatened if he proved disobedient to 
his Creator's just command. The sentence was, "Dying, 
thou shalt die." This deliberate act of disobedience on 
the part of our first parent, Adam, not only brought 
himself under this death-penalty, but his posterity all 



shared in his subjection to death, and in the slavery to 
sin consequent upon his alienation from God and his 
failing powers as he more and more passed under the 
power of death. 

So then the fact that Adam sold himself and his 
posterity yet in his loins to Sin, for a momentary gratification 
of self, meant not only his own enslavement, but 
also that of all his progeny who should afterward be 
born. These are the facts of the case. All of Adam's 
children can say with the Psalmist of old, "Behold, I was 
shapen in iniquity, in sin did my mother conceive me." 

DOCTRINE OF TOTAL DEPRAVITY UNSCRIPTURAL 

Here we come to the thought which was evidently in 
the minds of some of the early reformers when they 
propagated the doctrine of Total Depravity, which is 
held by many at the present time— at least theoretically— 
but from which we must dissent. We hold with the 
Scriptures that as a result of Adamic transgression there 
is a general depravity which extends to every member 
of the human family, so that "there is none righteous, 
no not one." (Psalm 14:3; Romans 3: 10.) But we 
deny that this depravity is total depravity; we deny that 
any individual of the human race is totally, hopelessly. 
in every particular, depraved, without anything that is 
good or commendable. The only sample of total depravity 
of which we have any knowledge is Satan himself, 
the father of lies and of every wicked work. 

But general depravity is bad enough; and being so 
general, no man should have any difficulty in finding, to 
some extent at least, the portion of it which he has himself 
inherited and cultivated, as well as discerning it in 
his fellows. Some are more depraved than others; some 
have the original likeness of God less blurred and defaced 
in their nature and character. In harmony with 
the Scriptural statements that we were "shapen in iniquity," 
that the heart of man is "deceitful above all 
things and desperately wicked," every discerning person 
whose eyes have been opened to recognize depravity can 
note the evidence of it everywhere, even in young children. 
Self-will, passionate obstinacy and ill-temper are often to 
be noted in infants but a few weeks old. And very 
patient should be the parent, as well as very attentive and 
thorough in the correction of the child, when he remembers 
that the very traits which need correction have come 
down to the child from himself. Thus the Christian 
parent should be not only the most thorough in the matter 
of training up his child in the way that it should go, 
but also the most kind, loving and patient in giving this 
correction and training. 

FALLEN HUMANITY'S ONLY HELP IN GOD 

We have then before our minds the fact and the general 
prevalence of sin and know whence it comes. Thus 



we see the force of the Apostle's words when he personifies 
sin as a tyrant-master, and represents mankind as 
Sin's slaves, to whom he pays his wages— death. We 
have seen that God is not blamable for man's enslavement 
to Sin. While only the extreme wages of sin are 
mentioned in the pronouncement of the death-penalty, 
yet before the full payment of the wages of sin, we receive, 
incidentally, many of the aches and pains and 
difficulties, mental, moral and physical, which the great 
taskmaster. Sin, imposes. And as a groaning creation 
travailing together in pain under this hard master and 
suffering from his cruel lashes, all long for deliverance; 
and some of us have cried out to God for help— for salvation 
from sin and death to righteousness and life; and 
our prayers have been heard. 

God wishes us to learn very thoroughly the lesson of 
the "exceeding sinfulness of sin," of its gall and bitterness, 
and of the hopelessness of any deliverance except 
that which He provides. Personal experience has proved 
to us that we are powerless to deliver ourselves from this 
slavery; that in order to overcome the Wicked One and 
his arts and wiles, which take firm hold upon us because 
of the weaknesses of our flesh through the fall, we need 
a power that we do not by nature possess. Finding that 
we are powerless to help ourselves, we at first naturally 
look to one another for aid, and indeed might get some 
aid from others. But we soon learn how little real 
assistance can be given or received from natural sources. 
And when we have learned the lesson which the Scriptures 
teach, that all are born slaves to sin, then we see 
the utter helplessness of our condition as a race. 

All who come to realize the true situation, and to feel 
the bondage and need for deliverance, may thus see that 
the only hope is in God. If they reflect that it was God 
Himself who pronounced the sentence of death, and that 
He could not annul His own sentence nor transgress His 
own laws, let them reflect also that as He has infinitely 
superior power to ours, He has also superior wisdom; 
and that He may know how to accomplish that which to 
us would seem an impossibility. And this is the case. 
He has provided the way, which all mankind will see in 
Jehovah's own good time, now very near. The price has 
been furnished for man's full deliverance; and although 
thus far this price has been made applicable to only the 
few, yet its application for all is soon to be made. 

DIVINE PARADOX-LIBERTY THROUGH BONDAGE 

A realization of personal responsibility to the Redeemer 
who purchased them, and to the Heavenly Father 
who provided the arrangement for salvation from Sin 
and Death, lies at the foundation of all true consecration 
to God through Christ. As soon as the grateful, believing, 
ransomed one hears of the blessing which is offered 
him, he properly inquires, "Lord, what wilt Thou have 
me to do?" Then he learns that the new Master does 



not wish any but voluntary servants; and that, having 
provided for his release from the bondage of sin. He will 
nevertheless permit him to go back again if he chooses 
to his former service of Sin, and to continue to receive 
its wages of death. He learns the terms upon which he 
may be received. He learns that to be a servant of the 
new Master, Christ, is a very great privilege. He learns 
the blessedness of the Divine paradox, that to be a bond-slave 
to Christ is liberty in the truest and most real sense; 
that he becomes at once Christ's bond-servant and His 
"free man." (1 Corinthians 7:22.) So all along through 
this Gospel Age there have been some who have gladly 
owned themselves the bond-slaves of the Father and of 
the Lord Jesus Christ. 

These precious souls rejoice to acknowledge and to 
avail themselves of God's gracious and loving arrangement 
through His Only Begotten Son— the Ransom given 
on Calvary. They are glad to recognize that they are 
"bought with a price," and are "not their own." And as 
they learn of their unspeakable privilege of joining with 
our Lord Jesus in His sacrifice, of following in His footsteps 
even unto death, they accept His terms with rejoicing 

R5859 : page 69 

and thankfulness. These leave the world and all 
to follow Jesus, and if they abide faithful unto death, 
they shall share with their Lord in all His glorious 
spiritual inheritance. But we have now come down to 
the end of the present Order, and severe and subtle are 
the temptations and testings which must be undergone 
to prove our entire loyalty to the Lord and to the Covenant 
which we have made with Him. 

"Jesus, loving Savior, only Thou dost know 
All that may befall us as we onward go; 
So we humbly pray Thee, take us by the hand. 
Lead us ever upward to the Better Land." 



R5862 : page 69 

TREASURES LAID UP IN HEAVEN 

"Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth 

and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and 

steal; but lay up for yourselves treasures in Heaven, 

where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and 

where thieves do not break through nor steal; 

for where your treasure is there 

will your heart be also."— Matthew 6:19-21. 

PLEASURE, delight, joy, comfort-all these 
sentiments are suggested to us by the word 
treasure. Our thoughts, our hopes, our 



plans, center there. Our treasure is the inspiration 

of our lives, the incentive to 

energy, perseverance and endurance, for the 

hope which it enkindles. Most people have 

treasures, but they are generally such as 

yield slight satisfaction, because they are 

transitory and disappointing. How many 

have built their hopes upon earthly things only to find 

them but illusive baubles, mocking delusions, leaving the 

heart at last broken, crushed and barren! The treasures 

of wealth, fame, social distinction, of houses and lands, 

of friends and home and family, of power and influence, 

are subject to change and decay! And if the heart be 

centered in them, they are liable in a moment to be swept 

away, leaving the life desolate and despairing, all the more 

so because of the high hopes which they had inspired. 

The wealth, laboriously gathered and husbanded with 
great care, may vanish in a night. The fame so dearly 
won may change to censure and reproach at the caprice 
of fickle public sentiment. The social prestige which 
bade you to the uppermost seats may a little later relegate 
you to the lowest seat, and your name may be cast 
out as evil and you be ostracized. Houses and lands 
and carefully hoarded belongings may disappear under 
the sheriffs hammer. Friends long trusted may suddenly 
grow cold and turn their backs upon you, and even become 
your enemies. The home you love must some time 
break up, the family be scattered or invaded by death. 
The love that glows upon the home altar may flicker and 
become dim or extinct. How many have found the high 
hopes of youth and early life turn to ashes in a few 
short years or months! 

THE BALM OF GILEAD FOR BROKEN HEARTS 

To all of these the Word of the Lord should appear 
with special force, when calling them to come to Him with 
their burdens and their broken hearts. "The Lord is nigh 
unto them that are of a broken heart, and saveth such as 
be of a contrite spirit." (Psalm 34: 18.) His love and 
His precious promises come like the sweet balm of Gilead 
to those who, sad and disappointed in the struggle of life, 
come to Christ for rest and comfort, for life and healing. 
Many storm-tossed mariners upon life's ocean, discouraged 
and despairing, bereft of all hope, have found that 
these very experiences were the means of leading them 
to the Haven of eternal Refuge. There alone true blessing 
and safety can be found; there alone is the real treasure, 
far exceeding the choicest treasures of earth. 

We think of the experience of a dear brother who recently 
found the Lord, when his earthly treasures had 
been swept away from him, all the savings of years, 
through conditions brought about because of the European 
war. He had lost all hope and was about to end his 
life by his own hand, when Present Truth was brought to 
his attention. He listened, then embraced it with joy. 



securing the SCRIPTURE STUDIES. Afterward he stated 

that he now knew why the Lord had permitted him to 

meet with such reverses— it was to lead him to Himself. 

How this dear one can now rejoice in his sorrowful experiences 

and realize that he has gained in exchange the 

"Pearl of great price," beside which all other treasures 

pale into insignificance! 

Truly, in this our day, as never before perhaps, would 
all who have the spirit of a sound mind to any degree be 
longing for a treasure which will be secure, a rock upon 
which they may plant their feet, one which will securely 
hold in these days of stress and uncertainty, when men 
feel that everything is slipping from beneath their feet, 
when nothing earthly is sure, when fear with distress is 
on every hand. At such a time as this, how blest are we 
who are safe-sheltered in the cleft of the Rock of Ages, 
which cannot be shaken by the mightiest earthquake 
shock! How unspeakably precious is the treasure which 
we have laid up in Heaven; for we know our treasure is 
safe, where no storms nor billows can touch it. 

THE TREASURES WE LAY UP IN HEAVEN 

The all-important question for those who seek this 
great treasure then is. How can we lay up treasure in 
Heaven, and what kind of treasures are those which are 
to be stored up in the Heavenly depository? We have 
the assurance of the Divine Word that everything that is 
pure, holy and good is acceptable there. The very 
chiefest of all treasures is the personal love and friendship 
of God and of Christ. Jesus becomes to us "the 
fairest among ten thousand, the One altogether lovely." 
He is an unfailing Refuge in every time of need, our 
daily Joy and Solace and Comfort. 

When we have gained this Treasure, we have gained 
the One that never changes. One whose love never grows 
cold, One from whom nothing can separate us— "neither 
death," which to His loved ones will now mean our blessed 
"change"; "nor life," which means further opportunities 
for suffering with Him that we may also share His glory, 
and which permits further works of loving service for 
Him whom we love; "nor angels, nor principalities, nor 
powers," for these cannot harm us who are sheltered in 
Christ; "nor things present, nor things to come"; for "all 
things shall work together for our good," and in every 
trial He will direct the issue that we may be able to bear 
it; "nor height" of temporary exaltation; "nor depth" of 
trouble or sorrow, for our Refuge and Strength is ever 
near; "nor any other thing" in creation, for He has 
promised to "keep the feet of His saints," and that nothing 
shall touch them as New Creatures in Christ, and that 
His presence shall go with them wherever they may be.— 
Romans 8:35-39; 1 Samuel 2:9; Luke 10:19; Exodus 33:14. 

Nor will any other creatures either in Heaven or in 
earth receive such marks of special favor as are and ever 
will be the portion of the beloved Bride of Christ. Although 



the whole family in Heaven and in earth will be 
blessed through Him, His Wife, cooperating with Him in 
His work, will alone be His companion. His confidante, 

R5862 : page 70 

His treasure. Hear the Lord's exhortation to the Bride 
class: "Hearken, O daughter, and consider, and incline 
thine ear. Forget also thine own people and thy father's 
house [the ambitions, hopes and aims of the children of 
Adam]; so shall the King [Jehovah's Anointed] greatly 
desire thy beauty [beauty of character, of heart-loyalty]; 
for He is thy Lord, and worship thou Him." (Psalm 45:10,1 1; 
Canticles 4.) How unworthy we feel of so 
great honor and love from our beloved Bridegroom! And 
no wonder! When we look at all our imperfections, it 
seems that there is little in us to call forth such love and 
admiration. To think that the angels with all their purity 
and faithfulness should have been passed by; and that 
we poor, blemished mortals, should be chosen instead! 

Is there not some mistake? Ah, no! We have the infallible 
words of inspiration to assure us that it is even 
so. This Bride of Jehovah's Son is to reign with Him in 
the future over a fallen race; and who could so well 
sympathize with them in all their weaknesses and frailties 
as those who have themselves partaken of the same? And 
who could bear the infinite heights of glory to which the 
Lamb's Wife will be raised, with such humility as those 
who realize that it was not through any worthiness of 
their own that they were chosen to so high an exaltation, 
but that it was all of Divine grace? Clad in the glorious 
Robe of our Bridegroom's furnishing, we can stand all 
complete, even now, in the eyes of Jehovah. And possessing 
the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, the faith 
that trusts under every condition, the love that delights 
to do the Father's will, we are lovely in the eyes of our 
Beloved, our Bridegroom and our King. 

Having this confidence, we can with unspeakable joy 
and gratitude lay hold of the exceeding great and precious 
promises which are ours through Christ, and without presumption 
press along the line toward the prize of our 
High Calling, humbly trusting that He who has begun 
the good work in us will complete it unto the day of our 
glorification with our Bridegroom in the Heavenly Kingdom, 
when we shall be presented before the Father "without 

R5863 : page 70 

spot or wrinkle or any such thing," gloriously complete 
and perfect, in the most absolute sense, fitted and 
prepared for the wonderful work which we shall share 
with our blessed Lord and King. 

INCENTIVES TO FAITHFULNESS 

Listen to some of the blessed and inspiring promises 



with which the Father and the Son cheer the Bride: 
"Thine eyes shall see the King in His beauty." Ye "shall 
be Mine, in that Day when I make up My jewels." "I 
will give thee to eat of the hidden manna, and I will give 
thee a white stone [a precious token of love], and in the 
stone a new name written [the name of our Bridegroom, 
henceforth to be our name] which no man knoweth saving 
he that receiveth it." "Lo, I am with you alway." 
"And if I go away, I will come again, and receive you unto 
Myself, that where I am, there ye may be also [and He 
has come. He is even now present, and will soon receive 
us unto Himself forevermore]." "Ye have not chosen 
Me, but I have chosen you." "Be thou faithful unto 
death, and I will give thee a crown of life." "To Him 
that overcometh will I grant to sit with Me in My 
Throne. "-Isaiah 33:17; Malachi 3:17; Revelation 2:17; 
Matthew 28:20; John 14:3; 15: 16; Revelation 2: 10; 3:21. 

Precious promises are these, wonderful words of life! 
Let us count them over and over again, that all their 
sweet significance may sink deep into our hearts and 
bring forth their blessed fruitage in our lives. May they 
cheer us in every dark and trying hour and reinforce our 
waning powers with renewed vigor, courage and zeal, that 
we may press along the narrow way until indeed our "eyes 
shall see the King in His beauty." What wondrous treasures 
do we thus find laid up in Heaven for us, because we 
have left the world and all its delusive fancies and aspirations 
and have laid hold upon the things eternal! And 
while this glorious inheritance is to be the possession of 
all the faithful, the Apostle intimates clearly that our 
Heavenly treasure may be augmented by special zeal and 
faithfulness under the peculiar trials of the present time. 

One of the treasures which we may lay up in Heaven 
will be the marks of just approval and distinction among 
the good and holy beyond the veil, which patient endurance 
of affliction, unwavering trust under crucial trials 
and testings, diligence in the King's business, will secure 
to us. Treasures of mind and character, too, we shall find 
laid up in Heaven; for nothing that is good and true and 
worthy of preservation shall be lost to those who have 
committed their investments to the Lord. These are incorruptible 
treasures, which neither the lapse of time nor 
the exigencies of circumstances will ever wrest from us. 

Other treasures will be all the true and noble friendships 
which have been founded in truth and righteousness 
here on earth, whether they be on the spiritual or on the 
natural plane. For instance, one on the spiritual plane 
will not be disposed to forget or ignore the loving loyalty 
of a former friend, who from time to time administered 
the cup of cold water to the thirsty soul battling with the 
heat and dust of life's desert way, and who did this because 
the one ministered to was a disciple of Christ. 

But especially sweet will be the spiritual friendships 
begun and cherished here, which will bloom and blossom 
in still greater vigor when transplanted into Heavenly 
soil and atmosphere. And what a treasure we shall find in 



the gratitude and love of those to whom we have ministered 
here in times of special need, and to whom we 
have carried the Living water and broken the Bread of 
Life! Who can measure the joy unspeakable that shall 
be the heritage of the faithful when we shall find all these 
precious treasures beyond the veil! When we view these 
treasures with unclouded eyes, and realize that they are 
ours forever, shall we not feel infinitely repaid for any 
sufferings and hardships we have borne in our brief 
earthly pilgrimage? 

HEAVENLY PILGRIMS NEARING HOME 

Then, dear brethren and sisters in Christ, let us keep 
our eyes steadfastly set upon the Heavenly, eternal things. 
Let us more and more lay up treasures where "moth and 
rust cannot corrupt and where thieves cannot break 
through and steal." (Matthew 6:20.) If our hearts are 
upon the Heavenly treasures, then the disappointments 
and afflictions of the present life cannot overwhelm us. 
Whatsoever things are worthy the aspiration of the spiritual 
sons of God are our real treasures, and they are the 
only things that are worth while. What care we for the 
illusive bubbles of this poor life, so soon to burst and disappear? 
Then, as sings the poet: 

"Let us touch lightly the things of this earth. 
Esteeming them only of trifling worth," 

not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be 
revealed in us, if we faint not by the way, but with our 
pilgrim's staff in hand shall press along the Heavenly road 
until we reach the goal of our hopes. 

As the sun sinks at the close of each day, and the 
shadows gather around us, how sweet to sing, "I'm one 
day nearer Home!" We have nearly reached the mountain-top, 
and every day multiplies the evidences that the 
journey is nearing its end. Just how long it will be we 
cannot know; probably it is best that we do not know. 
But we believe that it will not be very long. 



R5863:page71 

THE SECOND EPISTLE OF ST. PETER 

"The Day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night; in the 
which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and 
the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth 
also and the works that are therein shall be 
burned up."— 2 Peter 3: 10. 

WHILE those of our number who have been for 
some time familiar with Present Truth well 
know the presentations which St. Peter gives 



in this general letter to the Church, it is 
well that we frequently have our pure minds 
stirred up by way of remembrance concerning 
these important things, "lest at any time 
we should let them slip."— 2 Peter 3:1,2; 
Hebrews 2: 1 . 

In this Epistle the Apostle is urging upon 
the whole Church the importance of developing the fruits 
of the Holy Spirit. Then he reminds them of the vision 
of the coming Kingdom which he himself and St. James 
and St. John saw in the holy mount. He points out the 
need that careful attention be given to the study of 
prophecy. He warns them of the false teachers who will 
be manifested among them. He reminds them of the 
condemnation and overthrow that came to the angels who 
turned from obedience to God, of the catastrophe that 
befell Sodom and Gomorrah because of their corruption, 
of the destruction of the ungodly in the great Deluge, of 
the perverse and wicked course of Balaam the prophet, 
and its consequences. Then he charges that some of 
them were following his course, and next he discusses 
the fact that things will not always continue as they have 
been; that evil shall not always triumph; but that a great 
change impends, which will be the introduction of a new 
feature of the Divine Plan; namely, the establishment of 
God's Kingdom upon earth. 

St. Peter indicates that this great change will come 
very suddenly— a radical change such as came in the days 
of Noah, a very sudden catastrophe, the coming of which 
will be scoffed at by those having a form of godliness 
without its power. (2 Peter 3:3,4.) This catastrophe 
he pictures as a great conflagration. The "heavens" will 
take fire and be consumed. Then the "earth" will take 
fire and be burned up. The "elements" will all dissolve 
with the fervency of the heat. 

THE FIRE A NEEDFUL PREPARATION FOR THE KINGDOM 

In reading this prophecy the majority of Christian 
people seem to think that there will be a literal burning 
up of the material heavens and earth. But, as we have 
pointed out for many years, we think that there is a 
more logical explanation of this prophecy, and that its 
fulfilment has already begun. This great Time of 
Trouble, which follows closely the Second Coming of 
Christ, will be an experience the like of which never 
was since there was a nation. (Daniel 12:1.) In one 
figure the Scriptures liken it to a great tidal wave, carrying 
the mountains into the midst of the sea. (Psalm 46.) 
This pictures the governments of earth as being overwhelmed, 
swallowed up, by the raging sea of human 
passion when the masses become fully aroused. In another 
figure it is depicted as a mighty "whirlwind" sweeping 
everything before it. In a third figure it is compared 
to the letting loose of the "four winds of the 
earth," "the four winds of the heavens"; in still another 



picture it is a great "fire." (Isaiah 66:15; Jeremiah 4:13; 
23:19,20; 30:23,24; 1 Kings 19:11,12; Revelation 7:1-3; 
Daniel 7:2; Zephaniah 3:8; etc.) The whole earth is to 
be devoured by the fire of God's jealousy, the fire of 
God's righteous anger. The fire of God's anger no more 
means a literal fire than does the expression a fiery horse. 
It is the fire of God's wrath against sin that is being manifested 
at this time and will continue. 

We are to remember that the Second Coming of our 
Lord is to bring a time of refreshing and of restitution to 
all mankind (Acts 3:19-21); and we must interpret these 

R5864:page71 

symbols denoting trouble in harmony with this Scriptural 
declaration. The word "heavens" is a figurative term for 
the present religious institutions— ecclesiasticism. The 
fire will extend to the social structure, the social order of 
things. The social, political, financial and ecclesiastical 
systems together make up our present order. The ecclesiastical 
systems will, we believe, go into destruction 
first, according to the Bible. The fire will next affect the 
social and industrial organization— merchandise, capital 
and labor, society, etc. It will devour the capitalistic 
elements, the banking elements, the political elements, the 
religious elements, the industrial elements. All these will 
be "melted," "dissolved"— they will separate, part company, 
fail to keep together, and will be swept away. 

If this great cataclysm of trouble were all we had to 
which to look forward, we would think it the course of 
wisdom to say nothing about it. We would say. Do not 
think about it or speak of it; for it will be bad enough 
when it comes. But when the Bible tells us that the great 
trouble is designed merely to sweep away these outgrown 
religious systems, social systems, political systems, etc., 
and that God will on the wreck of all these things establish 
the Kingdom of Messiah for the world's blessing, then 
we are glad of the trouble, and see that it is the necessary 
thing. This knowledge would be a great comfort and 
relief of mind to many bewildered ones who see the 
trouble coming on with increasing momentum, yet who 
cannot see the ultimate good to result, who feel that revolution 
and anarchy are confronting the entire world, but 
see not the golden lining to the black clouds of trouble. 

The principle of disintegration and reconstruction is 
constantly operating in nature. The rocks are disintegrating; 
and this process keeps the soil enriched and promotes 
vegetable growth. Animal and vegetable organisms 
are continually disintegrating, and furnishing elements 
for new formations, new organisms. There will 
have to be a thorough breaking up of the fallow ground 
of men's hearts, and a thorough disintegration of present 
arrangements before the seed of Truth can be planted 
that will bring forth the fruitage of the New Dispensation. 
During this Gospel Age God has been guiding those 
who have already been disintegrated, and who are yielding 



themselves to His reconstructive processes. The 
world will need this great Time of Trouble. They are 
not in the attitude of the class who are now seeking God 
and endeavoring to do His will. If we had the power to 
shield any of our worldly friends from this trouble, we 
believe that by so shielding them we would be doing them 
a real injury instead of good. 

PROPER ATTITUDE OF THE SAINTS 

God's dealings with the world in this time will be the 
work of a skillful surgeon, who wounds to heal, whose 
knife must go down to the depths of the abscess that 
would otherwise hike the life of the patient. The Lord 
intimates that during this Time of Trouble those who 
shall seek righteousness and meekness may have at least 
a measure of protection granted them. (Zephaniah 2:2,3.) 
But as for those who are not seeking after 
righteousness and meekness, it will be better for them to 
go through the trouble, in order to prepare them for the 
great blessing to come later. The Apostle's argument is 
that the present order of things is not satisfactory to 
anybody who has the right attitude of heart. 

The long foretold Time of Trouble, such as never was 

R5864 : page 72 

and never will be again (Daniel 12:1; Matthew 24:21,22), 

has begun. Daily the heat of human passion is 

growing more intense. In view of this approaching dissolution, 

now at the very door, what should be our attitude 

of heart? What should be the course of those who 

are prospective citizens of the great Government about to 

be established, which will control the affairs of earth 

under the headship of Christ Jesus, earth's rightful King? 

We should remember that in order to become of the 

Kingdom class which is to have the rulership of earth 

for a thousand years, we must be separate from the aims, 

ambitions and policy of the present order. One of the 

essentials is that we recognize the vast difference between 

the present order of things and the New Order now at 

hand, and that we take our stand accordingly. In the 

meantime, we should do good unto all men as we have 

opportunity, especially to the Household of Faith, our 

brethren in Christ. 

As loyal children of the Great King of the Universe, 
who is now about to inaugurate His Kingdom in the hands 
of His Son, we pray, "Thy Kingdom come; Thy will be 
done on earth, as it is done in Heaven." We rejoice in 
the evidences which we see all about us that our prayers 
for this Kingdom are now to be answered. Meantime 
we must live in harmony with this prayer. As St. Peter 
reminds us, "What manner of persons ought we to be," 
in all holiness of life, in separateness from the world! 
The Apostle puts this solemn question right home to us. 
It is applicable now as never before. 



Let us lay these precious words to heart; for we stand 
in the very presence of the Great Judge of all the earth. 
These exhortations and encouragements, which were 
primarily addressed to the Church who lived over eighteen 
hundred years ago, and which have served a purpose of 
good all along down this Gospel Age, are especially meant 
by the Spirit for those of the Church who are living in 
this very Day of God. How favored are these above all 
the people of the world and above the masses of professed 
followers of Christ, who have not this knowledge! 

The Apostle's words near the close of his Epistle, 
should be of special comfort and cheer to us now, in this 
brief waiting time since the close of Gentile Times. He 
says, "And account that the longsuffering of our Lord is 
salvation." (2 Peter 3:15.) How glad of this little extended 
time some of the Lord's dear ones are, who have 
come into the knowledge of Present Truth and consecrated 
themselves to God since October 1914! And how 
glad are many of Christ's followers who have longer 
known of these precious truths, that the Lord has mercifully 
granted them a little further time to make their calling 
and election sure! Perhaps some of these were not 
ready when the Gentile Times closed. 

"Wherefore, brethren, seeing that ye look for these 
things [the overthrow of the existing order and the establishment 
of the glorious Kingdom of God's dear Son], 
be diligent that ye may be found of Him in peace, without 
spot, and blameless"; for our Lord "is able to keep you 
from falling, and to present you faultless before the presence 
of His glory with exceeding joy. ...Amen."— 
2 Peter 3: 14; Jude 24,25. 



R5864 : page 72 

PHILIP AND THE ETHIOPIAN 

-MARCH 19.-ACTS 8:26-40.- 

ANOTHER FAITHFUL DEACON IN THE EARLY CHURCH-A GENTILE 
FEELING AFTER GOD-COORDINATION OF DIVINE PROVIDENCES 
BRINGING THESE MEN TOGETHER-DEACON PHILIP'S 
SKILLFUL USE OF TACT-DIVINE BLESSING UPON HIS 
EFFORTS-THE GOSPEL ONLY TO THE MEEK-THEY WILL 
BE TAUGHT OF GOD-LESSONS FOR TODAY. 

"Understandest thou what thou readest?"— Acts 8:30. 

DEACON PHILIP, the instrument of Divine 
providence in starting the Ethiopian eunuch 
in the narrow way of discipleship— and 
through him probably introducing the "good 
tidings" into Africa— was just such a man 
as the Lord is pleased to use as His mouthpiece 
in the service of the Truth. Having 



proven himself faithful in the inferior work 
of serving tables, he had been advanced, and 
been made an ambassador for God in the 
preaching of the Gospel at Samaria; and the present 
lesson shows him still further guided and used of the Lord 
in His blessed service. There is an encouraging lesson 
here for all who have the same spirit— the same desire to 
serve the Lord and His cause. Faithfulness in little 
things is sure to bring larger opportunities. 

We are not informed by what means the Lord "spake 
to Philip," sending him to the road in which he would find 
the eunuch's chariot. We may be sure, however, that the 
indication was sufficiently clear to Philip to be more than 
a mere guess or impression. We are to remember, too, 
that it was at a time when the Lord used miraculous 
means of communication, more than at present— doubtless 
for the very purpose of establishing the faith of His 
servants as well as their work. Today we walk more by 
faith, less by sight and miracle. Yet so bright is the light 
shining upon the Divine Plan and Word that we may 
safely say that we have much advantage every way, even 
over those of that time. We are to remember that up to 
the time of this lesson there were no New Testament writings; 
nothing, therefore to guide the Apostles and early 
Evangelists except the more or less miraculous interpositions 
of God's providence. 

Even after we have learned of God's particular care 
for all of His people, we are inclined to surprise that a 
solitary individual should be so particularly cared for as 
was this eunuch— that a special messenger should be sent 
to him for his instruction in righteousness. Very evidently 
Divine providence does not regard the going of all 
mankind to this same degree. Very evidently there was 
something in the character of this eunuch, something in 
his heart-attitude toward God, that was pleasing and acceptable 
to the Lord, and caused the working of this 
miracle on his behalf— that he might have needed instruction 
in the Truth. 

AN EARNEST TRUTH-SEEKER 

The eunuch belonged to the kingdom of Meroe, which 
lay on the right bank of the Nile River, from its junction 
with the Atbara as far south as Khartoum, and thence 
to the east of the Blue Nile, to the mountains of Abyssinia. 
He was a court officer, evidently deeply religious, who had 
come in contact with, and been impressed by, the Jewish 
religion; and in his religious fervor he had gone up to 
Jerusalem to worship, and to gain additional knowledge 
of the true God. His case, like that of the Samaritans 
and of Cornelius, indicates that this occurrence was after 
the close of Israel's "seventy weeks," of special favor; 
for this eunuch was not a Jew in the fullest sense- 
eunuchs not being fully accepted as proselytes, nor granted 
the privileges of the congregation.— Deuteronomy 23:1. 

Up to this time the eunuch, like Cornelius and the believing 



Samaritans, had been a part of the Lazarus class, 

R5864 : page 73 

lying at the gate of Dives, desiring to be fed with some 
crumbs from the bountiful table of blessing and promises 
which God had spread for Israel. Now the change had 
come. The House of Israel had been cast off; the end 
of Israel's special favor as respects the Gospel had come; 
and the time to receive the Lazarus class to Abraham's 
bosom had arrived. Philip as an angel, or messenger, of 
the Lord was sent to carry this representative of the 
Lazarus class to the arms of Father Abraham, as a true 
child of Abraham, through faith. 

The eunuch had been at the head center of the religion 
which he esteemed to be the true one. He had come away 
from Jerusalem with a manuscript copy of one of the holy 
Prophets— Isaiah— a treasure in those times, very costly. 
That this manuscript was written in the Greek language, 
and not in the Hebrew, seems to be indicated by the word 
Esaias, which is the Greek form of Isaiah. He was hungering 
and thirsting for the Truth, and making his best 
possible endeavor to obtain it, as is evidenced by his purchase 
of the manuscript, and his long journey, and his 
reading. That he was doing more than simply reading— 
that he was studying— is evidenced by his language to 
Philip. Can we wonder that God's special providences 
would be manifested toward such an one— toward a person 
of such a condition of heart, hungering and thirsting 
for the Truth? We cannot wonder at it. It is in full 
accord with the Lord's promise, that such shall be filled; 
that such seekers shall find; that such knockers shall have 
the door of Truth opened unto them. Let us remember 
that we are under the care of the same God, and that He 
changes not; and let us learn the lesson that He is as 
well able today as ever to assist the sincere Truth-seeker. 

Another lesson connected with this matter pertains to 
times and seasons. God could have directed the eunuch 
to the meeting of the Church at Jerusalem, and to the instructions 
of the Apostles there. But this probably would 
not have been so favorable for the eunuch. After receiving 
the Apostolic instruction he might have referred 
the matter to the Scribes and Pharisees, and have received 
in return explanations more or less confusing. In the 
Lord's providence he quite likely heard something of the 
Christians, and their claims that Messiah had come and 
had been crucified, and he quite probably knew the other 
side of the story— that the chief priests and teachers 
claimed that the whole matter was a fraud, an imposition. 
Possibly these very thoughts had led him to procure the 
manuscript he was reading, and had brought him into the 
attitude of mind favorable for the reception of the Truth 
when Philip expounded it. 

A HELPING HAND 



Let us learn from this, not only in respect to our own 
affairs, but also in respect to the general service of the 
Truth, to trust implicitly in Divine Wisdom and Power- 
to remember that "The Lord knoweth them that are His," 
and that He knoweth best how to bring them in contact 
with the Truth. Properly learned, this lesson will not 
slack our hands in the Divine service— for true servants 
will still be anxious and ready to serve, as was Philip — 
but it will serve to strengthen our hearts and to take from 
us that fearfulness that is a hindrance to the peace of 
many of God's children. Let us not fear for the Lord's 
Word, but remember His declaration through the Prophet, 
"My Word, that goeth forth out of My mouth, shall not 
return unto Me void; it shall accomplish that which I 
please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it." 

The chariot probably overtook and passed Philip in 
the road, the eunuch driving leisurely, in order that he 
might read. He was reading aloud, after the custom of 
that time and country, and according to the injunctions 
laid upon the people by the Jewish teachers. Indeed, it 
was one of the Jewish rules that the faithful, in traveling, 
should read if they had no companionship. We are not 
informed how the Spirit told Philip to hail the eunuch. 
Possibly in the same miraculous way in which he was sent 
to this road, or possibly having been sent to this road, he 
was on the look-out for the object of his mission; and 
hearing the eunuch reading from the prophecy, Philip may 
have understood at once that this was the favored person, 
and a favorable time for the message to the service of 
which he had been consecrated. 

This gives us a suggestion— all of the Lord's people, in 
proportion as they desire to be the servants of the Truth, 
should be continually on the alert to note opportunities for 
service, and should expect to be guided and used of the 
Lord. All of the Lord's people are ministers, servants of 
the Truth; and each should seek to use every opportunity 
presenting itself, knowing not which may be specially 
prospered of the Lord. Wherever we see evidences of 
devotion to the Lord and to His Word, we should be continually 
on the alert to extend a helping hand. We should, 
as Philip did, seek an opportunity for conversing with 
such, with a view to giving them the help which they need, 
the very assistance which the Lord has extended to us 
through some channel. We are to be on the alert to pass 
along the blessing which we have received, and to esteem 
that this is the chief business of life with those who have 
consecrated themselves to the service of the King of kings. 

Philip's inquiry, "Understandest thou what thou readest?" 
may not always be well received; but it was a very 
direct way of approaching his errand. It is well to use 
tact; but we have the thought that many of the Lord's 
people are inclined to use too much tact, and are not 
sufficiently direct in their endeavors to present the Gospel 
Message. Had Philip been too much under the control 
of this wrong sentiment respecting tact, he might have 
talked to the eunuch quite a while about the weather, the 



crops, his home in Ethiopia, the peace and prosperity of 
that country, its exports and imports, the religious status 
of the people, etc. Thus he might gradually have gotten 
his hearer's mind quite off the most important of all subjects. 
Considering that he heard him and knew the subject 
of his study, we cannot think of a better introduction 
to his message than the method and language which Philip 
adopted: "Understandest thou what thou readest?" 

This was a test question, so to speak. If the eunuch 
did have an understanding of what he was reading he 
would take no offense at this, but would gladly have said, 
"Yes, friend, I thank God that I do; and the knowledge is 
very precious to me. Do you also understand it?" But 
had he been of the wrong condition of heart his answer 
might have been, with more or less manifestation of offense, 
"What is that to you? Mind your own business!" 
Or had he been of a hypocritical cast of mind, like the 
Pharisees to whom Jesus spoke, he would have professed 
a knowledge of the subject; and then to cover his own 
ignorance of it, he would have made some general remarks 
and have turned the conversation into another channel. 

We are not to expect those who are in a Pharisaical 
condition to receive the Truth from us, any more than 
from the Lord. We are to know, according to the Lord's 
Word, that the Truth is purposely hidden from all not in 
the right attitude of heart to receive it— that it is indefinite, 
indistinct, unintelligible to them. This is one difficulty 
with the teachers of churchianity today. Like the 
Pharisees and Scribes and chief priests of old, they say, 
"Are we blind also?" They claim to know; but we know 

R5864 : page 74 

that they know that they don't know. Therefore, as our 
Lord said to their prototypes, their blindness continues; 
for no one can expect to be taught of God while in that 
self-sufficient and dishonest condition of mind which 
boasts of knowledge and of the faith which it lacks. 

A MEEK, TEACHABLE SPIRIT 

All those to whom the Lord specially sends the Message 
of His grace during this Gospel Age are in considerable 
degree like this eunuch of our lesson— earnest, honest. 
Truth-seekers, not afraid to acknowledge that they do not 
know, and neither afraid nor ashamed to receive whatever 
assistance the Lord may provide. The eunuch did not 
stop to inquire of Philip, "Are you a priest? or a Pharisee? 
or a Doctor of the Law?" It was sufficient to him that he 
held in his hand what he believed to be a Message from 
God; and that he knew it contained various statements, 
promises, etc., which he did not understand. He believed 
that the God who gave this prophecy was both able and 
willing to furnish an interpretation of it, and he was 
seeking that interpretation; and whoever could give such 
an interpretation as would shed light upon his questions 



would by that means be proven a teacher of God, a servant 
of the Truth, a light-bearer. 

The eunuch's answer implied this, when he said, "How 
can I understand, unless some man should guide me?" So 
earnest was he in his quest of the Truth that the bare suggestion 
of assistance implied in Philip's question was sufficient 
to arouse fully his interest; and he entreated Philip 
to have a seat with him in his chariot, and thus grant 
him the benefit of whatever information could be given. 
We are not surprised that a heart so noble, and yet so 
humble and teachable, should be specially favored of the 
Lord, and have a messenger sent specially to him for his 
instruction, while others by the million were passed by— 
not esteemed worthy. It is the same today; and while 
the Lord does not generally direct His people in such a 
miraculous manner as He directed Philip to the eunuch, 
we nevertheless have general instructions along the same 
line; viz., "Preach the Gospel to the meek." "He that 
hath an ear, let him hear."— Isaiah 61:1; Matthew 13:9; 
Revelation 2:7. 

Our Message, as the Prophet declares, is to bind up 
broken hearts, and not to break hearts; we are to preach 
to the meek, and not to the froward, the Gospel of Christ. 
The hard hearts and the froward, God will deal with in 
another way. He will break them upon the anvil of 
affliction, trouble and discipline in His own due time and 
manner. Meantime, in this Gospel Age, He is seeking for 
the Bride amongst those who are already broken and already 
to some extent meek and teachable. We should not 
waste our time in futile efforts, contrary to this Scriptural 
rule. Let those who have not the Gospel, but who have 
merely a message of reformation, preach political reforms, 
social reforms, moral reforms. The Lord's Word 
to His consecrated, the Royal Priesthood, is, "Preach the 
Good Tidings to the meek, bind up the broken-hearted!" 

THE GOSPEL TO THE MEEK 

It was evidently not of chance, but of providence, that 
the eunuch had under consideration the particular part of 
Isaiah's prophecy which refers to our Lord Jesus as the 
Lamb before His shearers opening not His mouth in protest; 
telling about His humiliation, and how His life 
would be taken from the earth; and instituting a query 
respecting His posterity. (Isaiah 53:8.) No wonder the 
poor eunuch was mystified! No wonder the Jews were 
all mystified! Unquestionably this prophecy, like the 
majority of prophecies, could be but imperfectly comprehended 
until fulfilled— could be understood only in the 
light of its fulfilment, and then only by those in a proper 
attitude of heart and under the instruction, the guidance 
of the Holy Spirit. 

We should notice in this connection: (1) that while 
the Scriptures are "the Sword of the Spirit, the Word of 
God," able to make wise, they cannot be understood until 
the Lord's due time; (2) that they can be understood only 



under the leading and instruction of the Holy Spirit; (3) 
and yet, the Holy Spirit was not exercised upon the 
Truth-seeker either through the Scriptures or through 
any mental process, but through the living representative 
of the Spirit— through the Gospel Message delivered by a 
fellow servant. The true child of God, the real Truth-seeker, 
following the proper lines, and properly trusting 
to the Lord, according to His Word, will neither ignore 
nor reject the assistance which God has been pleased to 
render through teachers in the Church. He will merely 
seek to find such teachers as God shall raise up, and the 
distinction between these and sectarian teachers; and one 
of his best, safest and surest methods of knowing the 
teachers whom the Lord will raise up, will be by their 
ability to make simple, clear, plain, the Word of God— 
"written aforetime for our admonition." 

This was the only credential offered by Philip in his 
ministry of the Truth. He had been taught of God 
through the Apostles, and was now able, in turn, to communicate 
to the hearing ear of the eunuch the simple 
story of how Christ had come into the world to redeem 
the world, had died for man's sins, had arisen, and ascended 
up to glory; that now, meantime, before blessing 
the world through Christ according to promise, God was 
calling out an elect Little Flock to be joint-heirs with 
Jesus in the Kingdom; and that just as soon as this election 
should be completed the Messiah (Jesus the Head, 
and the Church, His Body) would be manifested in glory 
and in ruling and blessing power to the world of mankind 
—the long-looked-for Messiah, whose work had been foretold 
by "all the holy Prophets since the world began." 

Philip undoubtedly further explained to the eunuch, 
that those who accepted Christ as their Savior, and who 
desired to become His disciples, taking up their cross to 
follow Him, should give their assent to this matter by 
baptism. Apparently it did not take the eunuch long to 
decide what his course should be; and his readiness of 
heart to follow the Lamb whithersoever He would lead, 
is indicated by his promptness to be baptized. 

Philip was ready to receive him as a fellow-member 
of the Church of Christ, and ready to give him the symbol 
of introduction into the Body of Christ— baptism— as 
soon as he gave evidence of having accepted the Lord, 
and having made consecration to Him. He made no request 
that the eunuch learn the catechism, nor that he confess 
something else such as well-meaning but mistaken 
men in the Dark Ages promulgated as necessary and as 
explanatory of the Bible. Neither did he say, "Now I 
will write your name; and you will be considered a member 
of the Church on that account, and I will procure for 
you some authority to preach the Gospel in Ethiopia." 
No; at that time the subject had not been confused and 
befogged as it is now. Philip preached the Gospel in its 
simplicity, and the eunuch received it in like manner; and 
with the Gospel itself went the right and authority to declare 
it. "He that hath My Word, let him speak My 



Word." (Jeremiah 23:28.) All who have received the 
anointing of the Spirit, the unction from the Holy One. 
are thus recognized as members of the Royal Priesthood, 
and fully commissioned to tell forth the good tidings, as 
opportunity and circumstances may properly admit. 



R5864 : page 75 

THE GREAT MULTITUDE 
-MARCH 26. -REVELATION 7:9-1 V.- 
CHRISTIANS OF THREE KINDS-'TARES," OR FALSE CHRISTIANS- 
SAINTS, A LITTLE FLOCK OF SELF-SACRIFICERS-AVERAGE 
CHRISTIANS, A GREAT MULTITUDE-THEIR DESTINY SHOWN 
IN THIS LESSON-HOW THEY WILL BE CONQUERORS- 
THE OTHERS WHO WILL BE "MORE THAN CONQUERORS"- 
CONTRASTS OF THE PRESENT AND THE FUTURE-PRIESTS 
AND LEVITES FOR THE COMING AGE-THE NUMBER OF 
THE FORMER KNOWN, THAT OF THE LATTER NOT KNOWN. 

"They shall hunger no more;. ..and God shall wipe 
away all tears from their eyes."— Revelation 7:16,17. 

ACCORDING to the Bible those professing the 

name of Christ are of three general classes. 

It is not ours to read their hearts; but it is 

ours, as Jesus said, to know them by their 

fruits. Yet even here we might deceive 

ourselves. The only safe way for us, therefore, 

in respect to persons who claim to be 

Christians and who live an upright and 

moral life is to take them for what they 

profess to be. One of these classes Jesus 

styles Tares— "children of the Wicked One"— because 

their presence in the Church is the result of false doctrines, 

false teachings, sown by the Adversary, Satan. 

(Matthew 13:24-30,36-43.) Many tares, we understand, 

are very talented, very honorable, and very wealthy. They 

really, however, have neither part nor lot with the true 

Church of Christ, all of whose members are spirit-begotten 

through the Word of Truth. 

In the sense that the consecrated are all called in the 
one hope of their calling and all begotten of the one Spirit 
through the one Word of Truth, they are one class, one 
Church, under one Lord, one faith, one baptism. (Ephesians 4:4,5.) 
Their division into two classes is the result 
of coldness, lukewarmness, fear to perform the sacrifice 
contracted, fear of death, on the part of some— the "great 
multitude" referred to in this lesson. The Apostle describes 
them, saying, "Through fear of death they are all 
their lifetime subject to bondage." (Hebrews 2:15.) 
Some of them fear also loss of business or name or 
fame or social standing. Therefore they compromise with 



the world and its spirit. They do not deny the Lord. 
Indeed, many of them would die rather than directly deny 
Him. Yet by their works they do deny Him— ashamed 
of the Truth because it is not popular, or ashamed of the 
Lord's brethren because of their humble position or their 
unpopularity among the worldly. 

While this class do not deny the Lord's name, yet they 
fail to walk closely in His footsteps, and therefore will 

R5864 : page 75 

fail to get the glorious prize of this Gospel Age; namely, 

glory, honor, immortality, joint-heirship with Jesus in His 

Millennial Kingdom, etc. Those great blessings and 

favors are to be granted only to the "more than conquerors"— 

the Little Flock, to whom it is the Father's 

good pleasure to give the Kingdom— those who "follow 

the Lamb whithersoever He goeth," rejoicing in tribulation, 

esteeming it an honor to be counted worthy to suffer 

for Christ, His Cause, His Word, His Brethren. And 

yet this Little Flock, styled in the Bible the Lord's jewels, 

are described by the poet, who says: 

"Those whom God makes His kings and priests 
Are mean in human eyes." 

THE TWO CLASSES CONTRASTED 

The Great Company described in our lesson will be 
overcomers; else they would never get any part in the 
everlasting blessings which the Lord is about to dispense 
now, at His Second Advent, when all of His faithful will 
be received to the Heavenly Home, the Father's House. 
They will be overcomers, or conquerors, in the end because 
the Lord will help them through by forcing those 
of this class who will be living in the end of the present 
Age to come to a positive decision— to banish their fears 
and courageously count not their lives dear unto them in 
the great tribulation with which this Age will end. The 
fact that when the test does come, when the crisis is 
reached, these will die rather than deny the Lord will constitute 
them overcomers and secure for them the blessing 
described in our text. 

Nevertheless, there is a still higher position that will 
be attained by some. As it was not necessary for Jesus 
to be forced by tribulation either to acknowledge the 
Heavenly Father and stand for Truth or else to die the 
Second Death, so there is a class in the Church who are 
like the Master and who will have similar experiences to 
His. These are styled "more than conquerors" because 
they not only do the right thing— stand for Truth, righteousness 
and the Divine arrangement— but they do it as 
Jesus did— voluntarily, with hearty good will, as soon as 
it is shown to them. 

Here, then, we see the difference between two classes 
in the Church, all of whom are spirit-begotten, all of 
whom are called with the same High Calling, all of whom 



had similar opportunities for attaining the great prize. 
The "more than overcomers," copies of God's dear Son, 
faithful unto death in their voluntary laying down of their 
lives in God's service and in behalf of the brethren— 
these will be the Little Flock to inherit the Kingdom— 
these will be the Royal Priesthood— these will constitute 
the Bride, the Lamb's Wife and Joint-heir. 

SCRIPTURES RELATING TO THE SECOND CLASS 

The Great Company of this lesson are to be found 
everywhere. They fail to become members of the Body 
of Christ, fail to get the great reward, fail to become 
kings and priests. They will be granted a blessing, however, 
but an inferior position, which will correspond to 
that of the Levites of old, who were not priests, but of 
the priestly tribe— servants to their brethren the priesthood. 
Again, they are represented in the Bible as not 
being worthy to be of the Bride class, but as being granted 
the great honor of being "the virgins, her companions, 
who follow her"— bridesmaids.— Psalm 45: 14, 15. 

This class is also represented in the Lord's parable as 
the Foolish Virgins. (Matthew 25:1-13.) They were 
virgins— pure, justified; hence they were fully consecrated 
to the Lord. But they were foolish in that they permitted 
the things of the present life to balance against 
the things of the life to come, to which they had made a 
full consecration. The Wise Virgins go in with the 
Bridegroom, become the Bride class, when the marriage 
of the Lamb takes place at the Second Coming of Christ. 
But the Foolish Virgins do not gain admittance, and they 
hear the Master's words, "I do not recognize you." But 
although they cannot be recognized as the Bride class, we 
praise God for His mercy in indicating that they all belong 
to the company of virgins, the Bride's companions who 
follow after her. 

A beautiful picture of this is given us in Revelation 19:6-9. 
There also we are told of the Great Company 
who will praise God eventually that the Marriage of the 
Lamb is come and His Wife hath made herself ready- 
even though they will not be part of that Bride class. 
Awakened from their slumber and stupor, and separated 
from Babylon the Great by its fire, these finally recognize 

R5865 : page 76 

what they have missed; but they thank God that His Plan, 
so full of blessings, will still be carried out, though the 
true Bride class have gone before. Then the Lord gives 
to them the precious message, "Blessed are they who are 
called to the Marriage Supper of the Lamb." But they 
can go to that Marriage Supper only through much tribulation, 
which will test to the last their full devotion to 
the Lord— even unto death. 

In Psalm 45 we have a picture of the Heavenly Father 
as the Great King, the Lord Jesus as the King's Son, the 



Church as the Bride, and the Great Company as the 
virgins, the Bride's companions, following after her. It 
is not only a beautiful picture, but one full of comfort 
and encouragement to all. 

TWO COMPANIES-TWO REWARDS 

In the account of today's lesson these are spoken of as 
a "great multitude whom no man can number"— a poor 
translation, better rendered, "a great company whose number 
no man knows." We do know the number of the 
Elect, the "more than conquerors." It is stated to be one 
hundred and forty-four thousand of those who follow 
the Lamb whithersoever He goeth— a Little Flock indeed, 
as compared with the millions of earth for eighteen centuries, 
but a very choice company. The Great Company 
is not a foreordained number. No one can say what their 
number is; for they are castaways from the High Calling, 
rescued by the mercy of God through Christ, because they 
have not denied His name, because at heart they were 
loyal, even though they failed to manifest a sufficiency of 
zeal in performing the Covenant of Sacrifice which they 
covenanted and on the terms of which they had been accepted 
into the Lord's family. 

St. John says that theirs is a position of glory and 
honor, not in the Throne with the Bride, but before the 
Throne, as those who are subject. He sees them not 
wearing crowns, the highest insignia of victory, which 
goes only to the "more than conquerors." But he sees 
them victors, nevertheless, with palm branches. Then he 
heard the statement that they were not members of the 
Temple class, but servants of the Temple, who serve God 
in His Temple. Great will be their blessing. The Lord 
will lead them to the waters of life. But they will not be, 
like the Bride, possessed of immortality— which the Lord 
describes as water of life springing up in His people. 
(John 4: 14; 7:37-39.) The water of life which Jesus 
will give the second class will be everlasting life on the 
spirit plane like unto the angels— but not on the Divine 
plane, not immortality, not the Divine nature. 

Seeing these things set forth so clearly in the Word of 
God, shall we not be the more earnest hereafter, the more 
loyal, the more faithful, that we may obtain the highest 
reward, even that to which the Lord has invited us— to 
become members of the Body of Christ, members of the 
Royal Priesthood? 



R5865 : page 76 

EXPECTING A PERSONAL ANTI-CHRIST 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

In harmony with the spirit of a sound mind I prefer to 
think and speak of the things we know, the things for which 



we have such a clear. Scriptural basis as to make our position 
most assuredly correct. However, this letter is being written 
in order to have your expression upon matters which I do not 
know, but which seem to be within the range of possibilities, 
quite a number of passages in the Lord's Word seeming to 
make them reasonable inferences. 

I have presented these suggestions in several discourses: 
and the brethren have been so stirred to greater diligence by 
them that, while desirous of saying more that might prove 
helpful to the various Classes, yet my confidence in your consecrated 
judgment prompts me to present the same for your 
criticism before making them too conspicuous in my ministry. 
Whenever given, emphasis has been laid on the point that I 
was not sure these ideas were correct, being merely inferential, 
but even if not right, a consideration of the possibility 
of such happenings could not fail to put us more effectually 
on our guard than before. 

In the twenty-fourth chapter of Matthew we find two 
separate references to false Christs. Verse 5 says, "For many 
shall come in my name saying. I am Christ; and shall deceive 
many." This evidently refers to pseudo-Christs who have 
arisen during the Gospel Age, but before the closing part of 
the Age, for in the next verse He says, "For all these things 
must come to pass, but the end is not yet." 

But when we come to verses 23 to 26 we read of another 
class of false Christs who would appear in the end of the 
Age. In verses 21 and 22 He speaks of the coming of the 
great "Time of Trouble such as was not since the beginning 
of the world, no, nor ever shall be," and after stating that 
unless those days were shortened no flesh would be saved. 
He continues: 

"THEN, if any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, 

R5866 : page 76 

or there; believe it not. For there shall arise false Christs," 
etc. The adverb "then" is emphatic by position (similar to 
Matt. 25:1) and would connect the appearance of these false 
Christs with the time when the great tribulation was due. 

It goes on further to inform us that these false Christs 
would show such signs and wonders that, if possible, even 
the Very Elect would be deceived. Would we not be justified 
in thinking that nothing has yet occurred which would warrant 
such a remarkably strong declaration? In such a case 
this sweeping deception must be still future, and as it has to 
do with this make-believe Christ, therefore the greatest of 
the false Christs must be yet to come. 

Verse 26 offers additional clues to the meaning of this 
prophecy. It rather intimates there will be two kinds of 
manifestations of these counterfeit Christs. One is mentioned 
as occurring in the desert, the other in the secret chambers. 
You have clearly pointed out the secret chambers as designating 
the darkened rooms where Spiritism works her mysteries, 
and for some time past the fallen angels have impersonated 
our Lord, in addition to masquerading as the departed spirits 
of some of those present. 



But when and where has the "behold He is in the desert" 
part of the prophecy had such a fulfilment as we might expect? 
May it not be just before us? Note that "the secret 
chambers" is in the plural, as though pointing out a deception 
oft-repeated, as has been the case; whereas "the desert" is in 
the singular, as if to teach us there would be but one occurrence 
of this sort— no more. 

Can we assume that if the secret-chamber Christs have 
been the fallen angels, then the Christ who will appear in the 
desert will be Satan, whose final effort to transform himself 
into an angel of light will culminate in his appearing as an 
impersonation of the Lord Jesus? 

The hosts of Christendom have been taught that at some 
time Christ will return, but lacking a knowledge of the manner 
of the Second Advent, they have expected Him to come in 
the flesh, accompanied by a multitude of visible angels. 

Furthermore, we find a widespread opinion that this event 
is near. Misinterpreting certain prophecies, the Seventh Day 
Adventists are proclaiming extensively the thought that when 
Constantinople falls Christ will come. Various denominational 
commentaries which give Mohammedanism an unreasonably 
prominent place in the prophetic portions of the Bible 
have expressed the same idea. Through internal anarchy or 
through outside influence the fall of Constantinople may not 
be very distant; and think of what would result if, coincident 
with that event, what looked like the long-expected return of 
Christ should take place on some desert out near Palestine! 

It would not be our Lord, but the Evil One impersonating 
our Redeemer. Imagine the wicked angels appearing with 
him as though they were the holy angels whom many expect 
to come with Christ! Suppose other demons would impersonate 
a few of the dead, as if to indicate a beginning of the 
resurrection! Think of the signs and wonders they may work 
as evidence to further deceive the human race into believing 
Jesus has come! 

That this could be done if the Lord would allow it seems 
a reasonable premise, and that it may be done seems a reasonable 
inference from certain Scriptures. I find there have been 
various Bible Students— even centuries ago— who thought they 
saw in the Word a suggestion that Satan was to appear as a 

R5866 : page 77 

man in the last days. The passage in Isaiah 14:16, where 
Lucifer is spoken of as a man, is probably the most direct of 
such references. 

There also exists a secondary reason why Satan wishes to 
be as a man. The True Christ has already returned, but with 
our natural sight we cannot see Him; however, spirit beings, 
like the Devil and his angels, can see Him, and as they behold 
our Lord doing successfully the preparatory work of the 
Kingdom, while they are helpless to thwart the same, it must 
make them hate that holy Son of God more than ever! How 
they must envy the human race, who cannot see that present 
Lord, and must wish they were human also, that they might 
not behold any longer the One they detest! Thus in permitting 



them to take on human nature the Lord simply grants 
them their wish. 

Should it be this way, we can readily discern how fully it 
would, "it" possible, deceive the very elect." Catholics. Protestants. 
Adventists, Mormons and every sect in Christendom 
would welcome this one as Christ, for isn't this the very way 
they have looked for Him? This would seem like convincing 
evidence to every infidel on earth, and they would hasten to 
acknowledge Him. Even the hosts of heathendom, unable to 
gainsay such a demonstration, would fall before Him. And 
those among us who had listened to discourses, etc., but never 
really made these things their own by a consecrated application 
of them, would hastily denounce us, and renounce our 
teachings, to bow their hearts to this spurious Christ. 

Then we would discern why God had granted us so much 
light upon the manner of the Second Advent, and we would 
need it all. Think of what blasphemy they would consider us 
guilty as we insisted that this one they called Christ was 
really the Devil! The charge against us would resemble that 
against our Lord, and the indignation of the mob might 
quickly terminate the militant part of our experience. 

But still other results would follow the appearance of such 
a pretended Christ: The Bible foretells a great confederacy 
of the two main divisions of Babylon. For several years the 
signs of that confederacy were everywhere discernible; but 
of late there has sprung up a bitter feeling between the two 
sides, being fanned by anti-Catholic publications, etc., until 
there seems no likelihood of their drawing any closer together. 

Suppose this impersonator of Christ uses his usual 
subtlety, appointing the Pope prime-minister, Billy Sunday 
minister of war, etc., or making some such recognition of both 
Catholics and Protestants; what would more effectively remove 
the partition separating the sects? How they would 
throw their arms around each other's necks, and only we 
would be disfellowshiped! 

This would also make the prophecy of the anti-Christ and 
Man of Sin have a double application, even as you have 
shown in the instance of other prophecies. The coming of 
the Elijah had a double application— individually John the 
Baptist, collectively the Church. The Christ has likewise— 
individually our Lord, but collectively The Christ includes 
both Head and Body. So the collective anti-Christ was the 
papal system, the individual anti-Christ Satan. As the individual 
Christ is the Head of the greater Christ, so the individual 
anti-Christ would be the head of the greater anti-Christ. 

May it be just possible that we have been so impressed 
with the wonderful application of the anti-Christian prophecies 
to the system that we have overlooked their coming 
individual fulfilment? 

But we know that Satan could not impersonate our Lord 
for long with any measure of character-likeness to Him. 
With the awful wickedness of his heart, only a few days 
would suffice to reveal his true spirit, and he would plunge 
this world into worse than it ever saw before. 

Out of reverence and fear for the one whom they supposed 
was Christ, the world would lay aside its swords only 



long enough to put us away, then would resume the conflict 
with renewed fury. The hopes of the nominal church and the 
world had been lifted high only to be dashed to pieces as 
they perceived the wickedness of the one whose appearing 
they had hailed. 

It has been suggested that the Lord might use His power 
in some way to prevent Satan from leaving the body of flesh, 
and thus it would become his prison throughout the Millennium. 
This would compel him to swallow his own teaching 
that the body was only a prison in which the real man was 
confined until liberated by death. He would be forced to 
experience the very thing he had so untruthfully taught. This 
gives great force to Isaiah 14:16-19. 

There are other points I was going to mention, but probably 
the letter is already too lengthy; but before closing I wish to 
mention one advantage of considering these things. 

Some of the friends seem to be saying, "The time may be 
many years off before the Church is all glorified, there is so 
much yet to be accomplished; let us go into business," etc. 
I have pointed them to these things with the remark, "If this 
conjecture should be correct, everything yet to be fulfilled 
before the glorification of the saints might be accomplished 
in a month." The time may be two weeks or ten years. 

Friends have asked me, "But don't you expect the Seventh 
Volume first? and it will take months to write, publish and 
assimilate it." My answer has been this: How do we know 
but that it may simply be an issue of THE WATCH TOWER? 

An ordinary looking copy of THE TOWER arrives, and 
the brother who has learned to value its message takes 
advantage of the first opportunity to read it. There in the 
middle of one article he finds a point which proves a key to 
many passages of Scripture in Revelation; on another page 
is another such point; and as he reads, it begins to dawn on 
his mind that he has the Seventh Volume! What comfort 
and help and assurance it brings, and he is ready for the 
trial time just ahead! 

Another, less appreciative of the light he has been getting, 
lays that same TOWER aside for a more convenient time, 
unwilling to have it crowd out his pleasures or intrude on his 
comfort, little realizing what that TOWER contains or what he 
is soon to face, unprepared for it because of a failure to 
walk in the light already received. 

R5867 : page 77 

I meant to make this letter a query, but it sounds almost 
like a sermon. However, I am sure you will understand the 
spirit which prompts it. Do you think of any Scripture which 
would seem to disprove it, or do you believe such ideas might 
in any way prove detrimental to the Lord's people? 

Like a younger brother I have ever valued the privilege of 
looking up to you as an elder brother, and the God of Wisdom 
has directed you, for in so many ways you have been a blessing 
to me. The Lord guide you to the very end of the way! 

Yours with much Christian Love, B. H. BARTON. 



THE EDITOR'S VIEW IS DIFFERENT 

We think it not unwise to lay before THE WATCH TOWER 
readers the above article from the pen of our dear Brother 
Barton. It may do no harm for us to have the thought 
before our minds. To some others, as well as to Brother 
Barton, it may seem to be the Truth. 

But the view presented does not appeal to the Editor as 
the correct one. He still believes in harmony with the 
presentations in STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. The particular 
passage in question from our Lord's great prophecy in 
Matthew 24 is treated in detail in STUDIES, Volume IV. He 
still believes that to be the proper interpretation. However, 
we claim no infallibility. We claim that there is no direct 
inspiration from God since the days of the Apostles. 

It should be remembered that each church organization 
claims to be the Ecclesia, or Body of Christ, of which He is 
the Head; and that each regular organization has an executive 
person or committee that really serves as the head of 
such organization— as Christ's representative in His Body. 
This thought had its origin in the Eighth Century, when our 
Roman Catholic friends declared that they set up the Kingdom 
of God, and from which date they count that His reign has 
been continuous, and that the popes have been His Vicegerents 
—reigning instead of Him. Protestant sects have not gone to 
the same extreme to claim one of their number as substituting 
for the Lord; but very generally they do claim that Christ's 
Kingdom has been set up and is in operation. The original 
thought in the organization of various denominations of 
Protestants was that it was the true Church. It is only of 
late years that Protestants have agreed to the thought that 
Christ Jesus has many bodies— many churches. Yet in a confused 
way they will admit with us that the Bible teaches only 
one Church, or Body of Christ; that it is to enter into glory 
with the Lord by resurrection "change" at the Master's 
Second Coming; and that His Church is composed of the 
saints of the Lord, regardless of denominational lines. 

These are the false Christs— false bodies of Christ with 
false heads, or governments not authorized by the Word. 
They have deceived many— practically the whole world. On 
the contrary, the people comparatively more or less deranged 
mentally who have claimed to be Christs have deceived very 
few in comparison with all mankind. We believe that we 
have presented the right thought. The Editor is not expecting 
any personal anti-Christ, nor that Satan will materialize as a 
man and misrepresent the Lord. On the contrary, as the 
great Time of Trouble progresses the spirit of evil will be 
made manifest more and more in all the "children of disobedience"; 

R5867 : page 78 

and more and more they will become vexed and 
angry with the children of obedience, who will be standing 
loyally by the Word of God and the principles of righteousness 
and love. It is from such a division of the people, we 
believe, that the antitypical Elijah class will suffer violence; 



first, represented by the chariot of fiery trouble; secondly, 
by the whirlwind of anarchy. 

However, let us cast our care upon the Lord and wait 
patiently for His time and be fully content therewith. Then 
all will be well with us, whatever way the matter may turn 
out. The time, apparently, is not far distant when these matters 
will be very fully demonstrated. The spirit of anger, 
malice, hatred, envy and strife burns more and more fiercely 
in the hearts of the children of disobedience— in whom the 
works of the flesh and of the Devil will undoubtedly be more 
and more manifested. In other words. Christ will be more 
and more exhibited in His followers, but the spirit of Satan 
will be more manifest in the remainder of the world. 



R5867 : page 78 

THE TRUTH IN SOUTH AFRICA 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

It is with feelings of deep thankfulness to God that at the 
close of another year's activity in the Harvest service, I am 
privileged to forward the Report of our labors in Africa during 
1914-15. In presenting the last Annual Report I expressed 
the hope that the next occasion would find us reporting 
to Headquarters beyond the Veil. That hope has 
not been realized. I feel certain, however, that I am expressing 
the mind of the brethren in Africa, when I say that 
we are deeply grateful to God for the privilege accorded to 
us further, to make our calling and election SURE. The 
past year has been one of continuous testings and trials, both 
to individuals and to Classes, furnishing abundant opportunities 
for the display of the Christian graces laboriously cultivated 
in years gone by, and for the demonstration of that 
faith and patient endurance which is the supreme test of our 
devotion to the Lord.— James 1 :4. 

These very facts assure us that the time of our deliverance 
is at hand, that the Lord is, as it were, putting the finishing 
touches to the living stones, preparatory to their being set in 
the Temple of His Glory in the near future. For many years 
the great Master Workman has been chiseling, dressing and 
polishing these, bringing them into conformity with the 
symmetrical outlines of the Chief Corner Stone, and we are 
grateful to Him for the likeness. Now, while still in the 
quarry. He is fitting them each to the other, and if the 
process develops friction and reveals faults and weaknesses 
hitherto unsuspected, these will be endured all the more 
patiently and we will surrender ourselves the more unreservedly 
into the hands of the Great Master Builder, because 
we know these experiences to be the prelude to the 
speedy establishment of the great Spiritual Temple, so admirably 
designed and accurately fitted as to permit of its 
erection "without the sound of a hammer." 

The year that has gone has been the busiest in the history 
of the Harvest Work in Africa: 



Volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES sold.. 3,141 
Scenarios, Hymnals, Mannas, Diaglotts, etc., 

sold 1,589 

Free literature circulated 75,131 

Meetings held 312 

Miles travelled 4,682 

You will see from above Report that the output of Volumes 
has been well nigh double that of last year, while a 
gratifying increase is also noticeable in all other publications. 

The various Classes are still holding up the banner of 
Present Truth, and the dear Brethren are not only holding 
fast to The Faith, but adding to their numbers as well. Perhaps 
there is more opposition than ever before, but that is 
the natural corollary of growth and a good evidence that the 
Brethren are alive and awake to their privileges and that the 
Truth is doing its separating work, gathering the wheat from 
among the tares in Babylon. 

During the year I have made two pilgrim Tours covering 
nearly five thousand miles. One of these was in connection 
with the EUREKA DRAMA set sent us from Brooklyn. The 
Drama drew large audiences everywhere, but the results 
have not been altogether as anticipated. However, a great 
witness has been borne to the people of South Africa, and 
the outcome is in the hands of the Lord. 

The Newspaper Work in Africa is, in the Lord's providence, 
practically closed. The war has so decreased the 
supply of paper in this Dominion that most of the newspapers 
had to curtail the size of their journals and all had 
to considerably economize their space. We had only two 
native papers publishing the Sermons, and these insisted on 
so abridging them as to render them useless as a means of 
propaganda, so I have withdrawn them. 

The Native Brethren in South Africa still retain their 
interest in the Truth, and are waiting patiently the further 
development of the Lord's Purpose. The progress of the 
war in Nyasaland and South Africa has made reports from 
that region somewhat scarce; but when last heard from, the 
Brethren there were still holding fast to the Truth, living in 
that state of detachment and patient waiting upon God which 
is the attitude of all the Lord's people at the present time. 
Your communication re work in Rhodesia, to Mr. Nodehouse, 
was duly received. I have written that gentleman asking for 
particulars and am awaiting his reply. 

While, therefore, our opportunities are not quite so large 
as formerly, there is not sufficient evidence to warrant the 
view that the door is closed or nearly closed in South Africa, 
and while the Lord permits we shall hold the Fort for Him, 
telling out the Glad Tidings of the coming Kingdom now so 
near at hand, till He says "It is enough." Pray for us, dear 
Brother, as we do for you, that we may be kept faithful 
unto death and may be counted worthy of a place in the 
Kingdom. 

With continued personal devotion, and a large appreciation 
of your ministrations, prayers and loving interest in the 



Harvest Work in South Africa, I am 
Your Brother and Co-Laborer in His Glad Service, 
WM. W. JOHNSTON.-South Africa. 



R5868 : page 78 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
BLESSED AUSTRALASIAN CONVENTION 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Our Convention is over once more, but it has been the 
best yet, in attendance, for food provided and for joy generally. 
Of course, it is only a very small matter compared to 
your large Conventions. We had sessions every day from 
Sunday to Sunday, and attendance ranged from just a little 
over a hundred, to 230. The Testimony Meetings, although 
they were liberally arranged for— as you will see from the 
enclosed program— still seemed too short to let every one 
who desired have an opportunity to speak. On the New 
Year's morning we had a Baptism service, when fourteen 
symbolized their consecration. It is beautiful to see many 
old and young yet coming to rejoice to lay their all on the 
altar of sacrifice and seek to follow the Lamb. 

We unanimously resolved that the time was very opportune 
for you to pay us a visit, and it was proposed by Brother 
Gates, of Sydney, and seconded by Brother Allison, of 
Adelaide, that the following letter be sent to you: 
"Dear Brother Russell:— 

In bringing to a close this Convention which has been a 
great source of blessing and refreshment to all the dear 
friends attending from other States as well as to the local 
Ecclesia, we desire to send a message expressing our love to 
you and all the dear co-laborers in America. It is also suggested 
that we send you a hearty invitation to pay us a visit. 
Our thought is that, owing to the war, it may be that your 
privileges of service in Europe may be curtailed, and also 
your visits to England, and that thus in the Lord's good 
providence your steps may be guided in this direction. We 
assure you that our hearts' affections go out to you; and to 
see and speak with you, would be joy second only to that 
which we hope so soon to have beyond the veil. Earnest 
prayers for your highest welfare." 

Yours in the Service of Christ, 

R. E. B. NICHOLSON, Manager, 
Australasian Branch. 



DEAR BRETHREN:- 

Yours of January 4th is at hand. 

I rejoice in the Lord that you have had such a sweet and 
blessed Convention and that, although the numbers were not 
large, the interest and spirit were what we would expect and 



that great good has been accomplished. 

May the Lord's blessing continue with you all, making 
the present year, 1916, your very best in character-development 
and in effective service for our King. 

R5869 : page 79 

I cannot promise anything definite in respect to a visit to 
Australasia, much as I should desire to greet you all in the 
flesh, to say some words of comfort and encouragement and 
to personally receive assurances of your continued Christian 
love. However, we know not what the Lord's providence may 
indicate, but assure you that we will seek to follow His leading 
in this and in every matter. With much Christian love, 

Your brother and servant in the Lord, C. T. RUSSELL. 



DO NOT TAKE ANYBODY'S SAY-SO 

OUR DEAR PASTOR:- 

I was pleased to receive your loving letter and gift, which 
were much appreciated, the latter of which I intend exchanging 
for renewal of THE WATCH TOWER for another year. Like 
thousands of others of like precious faith, we are indeed 
thankful to our loving Heavenly Father and to you. His servant, 
for its cheering, helpful and inspiring messages of exhortation 
and hope for those seeking to know and do the will 
of God. Its bi-monthly visits are eagerly looked for and its 
spiritual food is soul-satisfying. 

The article in September 1 issue on "Christian Duty and 
the War" was good and to the point; we trust by God's grace 
we shall maintain that attitude, looking to Jesus our Captain, 
who said His Kingdom is not of this world, else would His 
servants fight; and to St. Paul, His mouthpiece, who shows 
that our weapons are not carnal, though mighty to the pulling 
down of strongholds of error. 

I rejoice, by the Lord's favor, at the prospect of further 
opportunities in the Colporteur work this new year. The 
previous eight in this blessed work have been the happiest in 
my life. I am now wondering if our work may not soon be 
cut short since compulsory military service for single men is 
suggested, with the possibility of severe penalties to those 
who refuse. However, 

"My times are in Thy hand; 
My God, I wish them there." 

The Class here have unanimously reelected you as our 
Pastor. I assure you we can never repay the help you are to 
us through the SCRIPTURE STUDIES, THE WATCH TOWER, 
TABERNACLE SHADOWS, etc. We are grateful to our Heavenly 
Father and our Present Lord who have used and are still 
using you to bring forth "Meat in due season for the Household 
of Faith." 

If it will not be troubling you too much we would like 
your advice on the following queries: 



What should be our course if ordered by those in authority 
to cease distributing our Volunteer literature? 

Or that we may no longer sell STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES? 

Or that we may no longer assemble as Classes for the study 
of the Scriptures? 

Praying the Lord's richest blessing upon you in your labor 
of love, I remain, by God's grace. 

Your brother, A. W. SEWTER, COLPORTEUR.-Eng. 

REPLY TO QUERIES: The Lord's people are to govern their 
conduct by the laws of the land in which they reside— except 
such laws as would conflict with God's Word. But we should 
not take anybody's "say-so" re such laws, but should make 
sure that such laws really prevent.— EDITOR. 



RE PRICE OF "MANNA" AND RECIPROCITY 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

In view of the fact that it is so surprisingly easy to sell 
the PHOTO-DRAMA SCENARIOS at 68c and 88c, we would like 
to suggest that you allow the MANNA to be Colporteured at 
68c. We are convinced, after our experience with the 
SCENARIO, that at 68c the MANNA sales would be very materially 
increased. This would be an encouragement, and assist 
in making expenses. 

We find that many of the friends have not yet introduced 
the STUDIES, MANNA, SCENARIO, TOWER, etc., to their tradespeople- 
grocers, butchers, bakers, shoemakers, milkmen, etc. 
We have suggested to many that these people are most 
anxious to retain their trade, giving them profit-sharing 
coupons, trading stamps, premiums, etc., and that they would 
be only too pleased if they had an opportunity to reciprocate 
in return for their custom during the many months or years 
they have dealt with them. What an opening the friends 
have in this way! One Sister here went out the other day 
amongst the people on her street, and took orders for nineteen 
SCENARIOS in about five hours. There is hardly a person 
in the Truth but could do likewise— and their tradespeople 
and neighbors would appreciate the privilege of buying from 
them. With much love, we are 

Yours in the Harvest work, 



R5868 : page 79 

THE DAILY CUP 

"I will take the Cup of Salvation."— Psalm 1 16:13. 

With a tender smile on His loving face. 
My Lord stood holding the Cup of Grace— 
"Wilt thou drink, dear one, today?" 

O loving Bridegroom, I am so weak! 



My enemies even now do seek 
To cause me to shrink away. 

Today the Cup seems a bitter draught 
That cost Thee Thy life, as once Thou quaffed— 
Increase my faith, I pray! 

"My Dove, I will show thee the care I take 
To guard the Cup for thy dear sake. 
That thou mayst drink each day." 

Oh, wondrous vision my Lord revealed! 
I saw my soul's fierce battle-field. 
And the enemies dreaded by me. 

The World, the Flesh and Satan wise 
Were all made plain in their evil guise. 
Plotting adversity. 

"I will fill the Cup with troubles sore. 
Pour them in till they're brimming o'er— 
I'll make it a Poison draught! 

"So bitter 'twill be that its very breath 
Will cause her to shrink from such a death!"— 
Thus Satan in wickedness laughed. 

And the World and the Flesh in blindness lent 
Their aid to his wicked, fell intent: 
My soul felt their power so dire. 

Then I turned and looked at my Bridegroom's face— 
The glory from it filled all the place. 
But His eyes were flames of fire. 

"Begone, ye enemies of My Bride! 
The Cup is MINE!" He sternly cried; 
"I guard this Cup each day. 

"And nothing goes in it beyond the power 
Of My Bride to bear in her weakest hour, 
If she look to Me for grace." 

Then He turned to me with the tenderest mien— 
"My Love, art thou strengthened by what thou hast seen? 
Canst thou now the enemy face?" 

Dear Lord, forgive me, I humbly cried. 
That I should forget that He who died 
To redeem my soul, is by my side 
And holds the Cup in His hand. 

Gladly I take the Loving-Cup, 
Gladly I drink as Thou holdest it up; 
To share it with Thee is grand! 



And if it should be that this is the day 
When the flesh, as I drink, shall pass for aye. 
Then 'twill be the Cup of Joy. 

Oh, wondrous miracle of grace! 
The smile on my loving Bridegroom's face 
As I pressed my lips to the Cup, 

Filled my soul o'erflowing with peace Divine! 
And not alone did this peace I find. 
But my heart with Joy welled up. 

And so each day as I take the Cup 
From my Best Beloved, I meekly look up 
And whisper a prayer for grace. 

And He gives me grace; and Peace Divine, 
And Love and Faith and Joy are mine. 
As I gaze upon His face. 

My hope is in faith the Cup to drain 
That I in His Kingdom with Him may reign; 
The Cup of Joy I then will claim, 
Triumphant by His Grace! 

LILLA S. WARD. 



page 80 

International Bible Students Association Classes 
STUDIES AND LECTURES BY MEMBERS OF THE PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 8 1 

VOL. XXXVII. MARCH 15 No. 6 
A. D. 1916-A.M. 6044 



CONTENTS 

Thoughts of the Memorial Season . . 83 
First-Fruits and After-Fruits . . 83 
Jesus Our Passover Lamb ... 84 
Primary Significance of Bread and Cup 84 
Deeper Significance of Loaf and Cup . 85 
The Celebration in the Kingdom . . 85 
Opposition from Religious World . . 86 

The Ransom and the Sin-Offering ... 87 
Ransom Price and Ransom Work ... 87 
The Sin-Offering is Different . . 88 
The Secondary Sin-Offering ... 88 
Value of Scape Goat's Suffering . . 89 



"Why Persecutest Thou Me?" .... 90 

Conscientious Wrong-Doing ... 90 

St. Paul as a Type 92 

Aeneas and Dorcas 92 

Meaning of the Term Saint ... 92 

Lesson of the Lilies 94 

Passover Proving (Poem) 94 

Interesting Letters 95 

page 82 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agenciesr-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as FolIows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



COLPORTEUR'S SAMPLE CASES 

We have on hand some very neat Colporteur Cases which 
hold a complete set of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, regular edition. 
These Cases are neatly gotten up and much resemble the 
doctor's case. Price, $3; charges collect. 



ARMENIAN STUDIES AND SCENARIO 

We have now the First Volume of SCRIPTURE STUDIES and 
the DRAMA SCENARIO in the Armenian Language. Order as 
needed— usual prices. 



TESCHENDORF NEW TESTAMENTS EXHAUSTED 

Our stock of Tischendorf New Testaments is exhausted. 
We can find none in the United States. We are seeking some 
in Great Britain— thus far without success. The book is published 
in Germany and is not obtainable from there under 
present conditions. 



ANOTHER VOLUNTEER NUMBER OF B. S. M. 

Those who have used the first Volunteer matter of the 
season and who are, therefore, properly ready for our second 
number for 1916 volunteering, will please notice that it will 
be ready for them shortly and that orders may be sent in at 
once. The leading article in it will be "What Is A Christian?" 
This article seems to appeal to a very large number of intelligent, 
conscientious, thinking people, and, we believe, will 
be a means of doing much good. 

Regular Volunteer matter is sent "Collect," thus insuring 
prompt delivery; but the Society reimburses the transportation 
expense on receipt of the bill for same. 



I. B. S. A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR THE MONTH OF APRIL 

Questions from Manual on SERIES THIRD of 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
STUDY IV-V. 

Week of April 2 Q. 40 to 46 Week of April 16 Q. 1 to 8 

Week of April 9 Q.47 to 52 Week of April 23 Q. 9 to 15 

Week of April 16 Q. 1 to 8 

Question Manuals on Vol. III., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 5c. each; 
or 50c. per dozen, postpaid. 



R5869 : page 83 

THOUGHTS ON THE MEMORIAL SEASON 

"For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do 
show the Lord's death till He come."— 1 Corinthians 1 1:26. 

THE Passover season, as celebrated by the 
Jews, is approaching, beginning this year 
on the 17th of April. But the interest of 
Christians in this season centers especially 
in the slaying of the lamb, which preceded 
the Passover Feast, and which typified the 



Lamb of God, Christ Jesus. Our celebration 

of this Passover season, therefore, relates 

to the great Antitype. At this time we 

as Christians commemorate the greatest 

event of all history, the sacrificial death of the Savior of 

the world. Our celebration this year properly begins on 

the evening of April 16th, after six o'clock, which is the 

beginning of the 14th of Nisan. 

We greatly regret that, while millions of professed 
Christians and Jews will in some formal ceremonies and 
in a perfunctory manner celebrate at that season this 
most important event, but few of either religion discern 
the real significance of the celebration. Could their minds 
be thoroughly awakened to its true significance, there 
would be a religious revival such as the world has never 
yet known. But, as St. Paul declares, "The god of this 
world hath blinded the minds" of many; and even some 
whose eyes of understanding are partially opened, St. 
Peter describes as being blind and unable to see afar off. 
They are unable to see the deep things of God in respect 
to these ceremonies, which have been celebrated for now 
more than three thousand years, in type and antitype. 

The Israelites were commanded to celebrate the Passover 
as the first feature of the Law and as one of their 
greatest memorials as a nation. Therefore we find that 
in some degree the Passover is celebrated by Jews in all 
parts of the world, even by those who claim to be 
agnostics. They still have a measure of respect for the 
Passover as an ancient custom. But is it not strange that 
with the bright minds which many of our Jewish friends 
possess, they have never thought it worth while to inquire 
as to the meaning of this celebration? 

Why was the Passover lamb slain and eaten? Why 
was the blood sprinkled upon the door-posts and lintels? 
Of course, God so commanded; but what was the reason, 
the motive, behind the Divine command— what lesson, 
what object? Truly a reasonable God gives reasonable 
commands; and in due time Jehovah will cause His faithful 
people to understand the significance of every requirement. 
If the Jew can realize that his Sabbath day is a 
type of a coming Epoch of rest and blessing, of release 
from toil, sorrow and death, why cannot he see that 
similarly all the features of the Mosaic institution were 
designed of the Lord to be foreshadowings of various 
blessings, to be bestowed "in due time"? 

FIRST-FRUITS AND AFTER-FRUITS 

Blessed are those whose eyes can see that Jesus was 
indeed "the Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of the 
world"; that the cancellation of the world's sin is to be 
effected by the payment of man's penalty, by the application 
of Jesus' sacrificial merit in due time for the sins of 
all mankind. Only the Church have as yet received of 
the merit of Jesus' death. Greatly favored are those who 
can see that as the whole world lost Divine favor and 



came under Divine sentence of death, with its concomitants 

of sorrow and pain, so it was necessary that a 

satisfaction of Justice should be made before this sentence, 

or curse, could be removed; and that therefore, as 

the Apostle declares, "Christ died for our sins"— "the Just 

for the unjust," that He might bring us back to God. 

Thus He opened up a new way— a way to life everlasting. 

R5870 : page 83 

The Scriptures call the Church of Christ "the Church 
of the First-borns," "a kind of First-fruits unto God of 
His creatures," "the First-fruits unto God and the Lamb." 
(Hebrews 12:23; James 1:18; Rev. 14:4.) These expressions 
imply that ultimately there will be others of 
God's family later born; they imply after-fruits. Christian 
people in general seem to have overlooked these 
Scriptures, so far as making application of them is concerned, 
and have generally come to believe that only those 
are ever to be saved who are designated in the Bible as 
the First-fruits— that there will be no after-fruits. 

But the Passover type indicates that it was God's purpose 
to save all Israelites; and that as a nation they represented 
all of mankind that will ever come into harmony 
with God and be granted everlasting life in the Land of 
Promise. Let us note that there were two Passovers— 
the one in which only the first-borns were passed over; 
and another greater one at the Red Sea, when by Divine 
Power the whole nation of Israel was miraculously delivered 
and led across the channel of the Sea especially 
prepared for them by the accentuation of winds and tides. 
These passed over dry-shod and were saved; while the 
hosts of Pharaoh, representing all who eventually will go 
into the Second Death, were overwhelmed in the Sea. 
The passover at the Red Sea pictures the ultimate deliverance 
from the power of sin and death of every 
creature of Adam's race who desires to come into accord 
with the Lord and to render Him worship, all who will 
ever become a part of Israel; for not one Israelite was 
left behind in Egyptian bondage. 

R5870 : page 84 

RESPONSIBILITY OF THE FIRST-BORNS 

But this passover is not the one which we are about to 
celebrate. We are to celebrate the antitype of the passing 
over of the first-borns of Israel by the angel, in the land 
of Egypt. Only the first-born ones of Israel were endangered 
on that night in Egypt, though the deliverance of 
the entire nation depended upon the salvation, the passing 
over, of those first-borns. So only the First-borns of the 
sons of God from the human plane, the Church of Christ, 
are now being passed over during this night of the Gospel 
Age; only these are in danger of the destroying angel. 
These are all under the sprinkled blood. 



We see, in harmony with all the Scriptures, that the 
"Little Flock," "the First-fruits unto God of His 
creatures," "the Church of the First-borns," alone is 
being spared, passed over, during the present Age. We 
see that the remainder of mankind who may desire to follow 
the great antitypical Moses, when in the Age to follow 
this He shall lead the people forth from the bondage 
of Sin and Death, are not now in danger of eternal destruction- 
only the First-borns. 

The Church of the First-borns are those of mankind 
who, in advance of the remainder of the race, have had 
the eyes of their understanding opened to a realization 
of their condition of bondage and their need of deliverance 
and to God's willingness to fulfil to them all of His 
good promises. Furthermore, they are such as have 
responded to the grace of God, have made a full consecration 
of themselves to Him and His service, and in 
return have been begotten of the Holy Spirit. With these 
it is a matter of life or death whether or not they remain 
in the Household of Faith— behind the blood of sprinkling. 

For this class to go forth from under the blood would 
imply a disregard of Divine mercy. It would signify that 
they were doing despite to Divine goodness; and that, 
having enjoyed their share of the mercy of God as represented 
in the blood of the Lamb, they were not appreciative 
of it. For such, the Scriptures declare, "There 
remaineth no more a sacrifice for sins"; "Christ dieth no 
more." They are to be esteemed as adversaries of God, 
whose fate was symbolized in the destruction of the first-borns 
of Egypt. The Church of the First-borns, through 
the begetting of the Holy Spirit and the greater knowledge 
and privileges which they enjoy in every way, have 
a far greater responsibility than has the world; for they 
are the only ones yet in danger of the Second Death. 
This is the lesson of the Passover type, and applies only 
to true Christians. 

By and by the night of sin and death will have passed 
away, the glorious Morn of deliverance will have come, 
and The Christ, the antitypical Moses, will lead forth, 
will deliver, all the people of God— all who, when they 
shall come to know, will be glad to reverence, honor and 
obey the will of God. That Day of Deliverance will be 
the entire Millennial Age, at the close of which all evil and 
evil-doers, symbolized by the hosts of Egypt, will be 
utterly cut off in the Second Death— destruction. 

JESUS OUR PASSOVER LAMB 

The Apostle Paul clearly and positively identifies the 
Passover Lamb with our Lord Jesus, saying, "Christ our 
Passover is sacrificed for us; therefore let us keep the 
feast." He informs us that we all need the blood of 
sprinkling, not upon our houses, but upon our hearts. 
We are to partake of the Lamb; we must appropriate to 
ourselves the merit of Christ, the value of His sacrifice; 
we must also eat of the unleavened bread of Truth, if 



we would be strong and prepared for the deliverance in 
the Morning of the New Dispensation. Thus we put on 
Christ, not merely by faith; but more and more we put on 
His character and are transformed into His glorious image 
in our hearts and lives. 

We are to feed on Christ as the Jews fed on the literal 
lamb. Instead of the bitter herbs, which aided and 
whetted their appetites, we have bitter experiences and 
trials which the Lord prepares for us, and which help to 
wean our affections from earthly things and to give us 
increased appetite to feed upon the Lamb and the unleavened 
Bread of Truth. We, too, are to remember that 
we have here no continuing city; but as pilgrims, 
strangers, staff in hand, we are to gird ourselves for our 
journey to the Heavenly Canaan, to all the glorious things 
which God has in reservation for the Church of the First-borns, 
in association with our Redeemer, as kings and 
priests unto God. 

Our Lord Jesus also fully identified Himself with the 
Passover Lamb. On the same night of His betrayal, just 
preceding His crucifixion. He gathered His Apostles in 
the upper room, saying, "With desire have I desired to 
eat this Passover with you before I suffer." It was necessary 
that as Jews they should celebrate the Passover 
Supper on that night— the night of the anniversary of the 
slaying of the Passover Iamb in Egypt, of the saving of 
the typical first-borns from the typical "prince of this 
world"— Pharaoh— the same date on which the real Passover 
Lamb was to be slain. But as soon as the requirements 
of the type had been fulfilled, our Lord Jesus instituted 
a new Memorial upon the old foundation, saying, 
"Do this in remembrance of Me." 

PRIMARY SIGNIFICATION OF THE BREAD AND THE CUP 

We recall the circumstances of the first Memorial— 
the blessing of the Bread and of the Cup, the fruit of the 
vine; and our Lord's declaration that these represented 
His broken body and shed blood, and that all His followers 
should participate, not only feeding upon Him, but 
being broken with Him; not only partaking of the merit 
of His blood. His sacrifice, but also laying down their 
lives in His service, in cooperating with Him in every 
and any manner, that they might later share all His 
honor and glory in the Kingdom. How precious are these 
thoughts to those who are rightly in tune with our Lord! 

In presenting to the disciples the unleavened bread as 
a memorial, Jesus said, "Take, eat; this is My body." 
The evident meaning of His words is. This symbolizes, or 
represents. My body. The bread was not actually His 
body; for in no sense had His body yet been broken. In 
no sense would it then have been possible for them to 
have partaken of Him actually or antitypically, the sacrifice 
not being as yet finished. But the picture is complete 
when we recognize that the unleavened (pure, 
unfermented) bread represented our Lord's sinless flesh 



—leaven being a symbol of sin under the Law, and especially 
commanded to be put away at the Passover season. 
On another occasion Jesus gave a lesson which 
interprets to us this symbol. He said, "The Bread of 
God is He which cometh down from Heaven, and giveth 
life unto the world." "I am the Bread of Life." "lam 
the living Bread which came down from Heaven; if any 
man eat of this Bread, he shall live forever; and the 
Bread that I will give is My flesh, which I will give for 
the life of the world. "-John 6:33,35,51. 

In order to appreciate how we are to eat, or appropriate, 
this living Bread, it is necessary for us to understand 
just what the bread signifies. According to our 
Lord's explanation of the matter, it was His flesh which 
He sacrificed for us. It was not His prehuman existence 
as a spirit being that was sacrificed, although that was 

R5870 : page 85 

laid down and its glory laid aside, in order that He might 
take our human nature. It was the fact that our Lord 
Jesus was holy, harmless, undefiled and separate from 
sinners— without any contamination from Father Adam, 
and hence free from sin— that enabled Him to become the 
Redeemer of Adam and his race, that permitted Him to 
give His life "a Ransom for all, to be testified in due 
time."— 1 Timothy 2:3-6. 

When we see that it was the pure, spotless nature of 
our Lord Jesus that was laid down on behalf of sinners, 
we see what it is that we are privileged to appropriate. 
The very thing that He laid down for us we are to "eat," 
appropriate to ourselves; that is to say. His perfect human 
life was given to redeem all the race of man from condemnation 
to death, to enable them to return to human 
perfection and everlasting life, if they would; and we are 

R5871 : page 85 

to realize this and accept Him as our Savior from death. 
The Scriptures show us, however, that if God would consider 
all past sins canceled, and should recognize us as 
having a right to human perfection, this still would not 
make us perfect, nor give us the right to eternal life. 

In order that any of the race of Adam might profit by 
the sacrifice of Jesus, it was necessary that He should 
rise from the tomb on the Divine plane of life, that He 
should ascend to the Father and deposit the sacrificial 
merit of His death in the hands of Justice, and receive 
from the Father "all power in Heaven and in earth." As 
relates to the world, it was necessary also that in the 
Father's due time He should come again to earth, a 
glorious Divine Being, then to be to the whole world a 
Mediator, Prophet, Priest and King, to assist back to 
perfection and to harmony with God all who will avail 
themselves of the wonderful privileges then to be offered. 

It is this same blessing that the Gospel Church of this 



Age receive by faith in their Redeemer; namely, justification 
by faith— not justification to a spirit nature, which 
we never had and never lost, and which Christ did not 
redeem; but justification to human nature, which Father 
Adam possessed and lost, and which Christ redeemed by 
giving His own sinless flesh. His perfect human life, as 
our Ransom-sacrifice. The partaking of the unleavened 
bread at the Memorial season, then, means to us primarily 
the appropriation to ourselves, by faith, of justification to 
human life-right— a right to human life— with all its 
privileges, which our Lord at His own cost procured for 
us. Likewise the fruit of the vine symbolizes primarily 
our Savior's life given for us. His human life. His being, 
His soul, poured out unto death on our behalf; and the 
appropriation of this by us also signifies, primarily, our 
acceptance of Restitution rights and privileges secured 
by our Lord's sacrifice of these. 

DEEPER SIGNIFICANCE OF THE LOAF AND THE CUP 

Now let us note that God's object in justifying the 
Church by faith during this Gospel Age, in advance of the 
justification of the world by works of obedience in the 
Millennial Age, is for the very purpose of permitting this 
class who now see and hear, who now appreciate the great 
sacrifice which Love has made on man's behalf, to present 
their bodies a living sacrifice, and thus to have part with 
the Lord Jesus in His sacrifice— as members of His Body. 
This deeper meaning of the Memorial He did not refer to 
directly. It was doubtless one of the things to which He 
referred when He said, "I have yet many things to say 
unto you, but ye cannot bear them now; howbeit, when it, 
the Spirit of Truth, shall come, it will guide you into all 
Truth, and will show you things to come."— John 16:12,13. 

This Spirit of Truth, the power and influence of the 
Father bestowed through Christ, speaking through the 
Apostle Paul, clearly explains the very high import of 
the Memorial; for St. Paul says, writing to the consecrated 
Church, "The Cup of blessing for which we give 
thanks, is it not the participation of the blood of Christ? 
The Loaf which we break, is it not the participation of the 
Body of Christ?"— the sharing with Christ as joint-sacrificers 
with Him even unto death, that thereby we might 
be counted in with Him as sharers of the glory which He 
has received as the reward of His faithfulness?— "For we, 
being many, are one Loaf and one Body."— 1 Corinthians 10:16,17. 
—Emphatic Diaglott. 

Both views of this impressive ordinance are very important. 
It is essential, first of all, that we should see our 
justification through our Lord's sacrifice. It is proper 
then that we should realize that the entire Christ, the entire 
anointed company, is, from the Divine standpoint, a 
composite Body of many members, of which Jesus is 
the Head (1 Corinthians 12:12-14), and that this Body, 
this Church, as a whole must be broken— that each member 
of it must become a copy of the Lord Jesus and must 



walk in the footsteps of His sacrifice. We do this by 
laying down our lives for the brethren, as Jesus laid down 
His life— directly for His Jewish brethren, but really for 
the whole world, according to the Father's purpose. 

It is not our spiritual life that we lay down, even as 
it was not Jesus' spiritual life that He laid down. As He 
sacrificed His actual, perfect being. His humanity, so we 
are to sacrifice our justified selves, reckoned perfect 
through Jesus' merit, but not actually so. Likewise the 
Loaf and the Cup represent suffering. The grains of 
wheat must be crushed and ground before they can become 
bread for man; they cannot retain their life and 
individuality as grains. The grapes must submit to the 
pressure that will extract all their juices, must lose their 
identity as grapes, if they would become the life-giving 
elixir for the world. So it is with the Christ company. 
Head and Body. Thus we see the beauty and force of 
St. Paul's statement that the Lord's children are participants 
in the one Loaf and the one Cup. But it is His 
blood, the virtue of His sacrifice, that counts. Our blood 
has virtue only because of His merit counted to us, only 
because we are members of His Body. 

Our Lord distinctly declares that the Cup, the fruit of 
the vine, represents blood; that is, life— not life retained, 
but life shed, given, yielded up— sacrificed life. He tells 
us that this life poured out was for the remission of 
sins; and that all who would be His must drink of it, must 
accept His sacrifice and appropriate it by faith. They 
must receive life from this source. It will not do for 
any to claim an immortality outside of Christ. It will 
not do to declare that life is the result of obedience to 
the Law. It will not do to claim that faith in some great 
teacher and obedience to his instructions will amount to 
the same thing and bring eternal life. There is no way 
to attain eternal life other than through the blood once 
shed as the Ransom-price for the whole world. "There 
is none other name given under Heaven or amongst men 
whereby we must be saved." (Acts 4: 12.) Likewise 
there is no other way by which we can attain to the new 
nature than by accepting the Lord's invitation to drink 
of His Cup, and to be broken with Him as members of 
the one Loaf, to be buried with Him in baptism into His 
death, and thus to be with Him in His resurrection to 
glory, honor and immortality.— Romans 6:3-5; 2:7. 

THE CELEBRATION IN THE KINGDOM 

On the occasion of the institution of the Memorial 
Supper, our dear Lord, as usual, had something to say 
about the Kingdom, the theme of His every discourse. 

R587 1 : page 86 

Those to whom He had promised a share in the Kingdom 
if faithful, He reminded of His declaration that He would 
go away to receive a Kingdom and to come again and 



receive them to Himself to share in it. He now adds 
that this Memorial which He was instituting would find 
its fulfilment in the Kingdom, that He would no more 
drink of the fruit of the vine until He should drink it 
anew with them in the Father's Kingdom. 

Just what our Lord meant by this statement might be 
difficult to determine positively, but it seems not inconsistent 
to understand Him to mean that as a result of 
the trials and sufferings symbolized in His Cup, there 
will be jubilation in the Kingdom. "He shall see of the 
travail of His soul and shall be satisfied." He will look 
back over the trials and difficulties endured in faithful 
obedience to the Father's will, and will rejoice in these as 
He sees the grand outcome— the blessings which will come 
to all mankind. This jubilation will be shared by all His 
disciples who have drunk of this Cup, first in justification, 
then in consecration and sacrifice with Him. These have 
His promise that they shall reign with Him; and when 
the reign shall have begun, when the Kingdom shall have 
been established, looking back they shall praise the way 
that God has led them day by day, even unto the end of 
their earthly course, and even though it has been a "narrow 
way," a way of self-sacrifice, a way of self-denial. 

Our dear Master's faith stood the test of all these 
trying hours which He knew to be so near the time of 
His apprehension and death. The fact that He rendered 
thanks to the Father for the bread and the cup is indicative 
of a joyful acquiescence in all the sufferings which the 
breaking of the bread and the crushing of the grapes 
implied. Already He was satisfied with the Father's arrangement. 
In line with this spirit was the singing of a 
hymn as they parted, a hymn of praise no doubt, thanksgiving 
to the Father that His course on earth was so 
nearly finished, and that He had found thus far grace 
sufficient for His need. 

In considering the events of those solemn hours which 
followed the Memorial Supper, let us follow the Redeemer 
to Gethsemane, and behold Him "with strong cryings 
and tears" praying "unto Him who was able to save Him 
out of death"— expressive of our Master's fear of 
death lest in some particular He might have failed to 
follow out the Father's Plan, and therefore be thought 
unworthy of a resurrection. We note that our Lord was 
in some way comforted with the assurance that He 
had faithfully kept His consecration vow, and that He 
would surely have a resurrection as promised. 

We behold how calm He was thereafter, when before 
the high priest and Pilate, and Herod and Pilate again. 
"As a Iamb before her shearers is dumb, so He opened 
not His mouth" in self-defense. We see Him faithful, 
courageous to the very last; and we have His assurance 
that He could have asked of the Father and could have 
had more than twelve legions of angels for His protection. 
Bui instead of petitioning for aid to escape His 
sacrifice. He petitioned for help to endure it faithfully. 
What a lesson is here for all His footstep followers! 



On the other hand, we recall that even amongst His 
loyal disciples the most courageous forsook the Master 

R5872 : page 86 

and fled; and that one of them, in his timidity, even denied 
his Lord! What an occasion is this for examining our 
own hearts as respects the degree of our own faith, our 
own courage and our willingness to suffer with Him who 
redeemed us! What an opportunity is thus afforded for 
us to buttress the mind with the resolution that we will 
not deny our Master under any circumstances or conditions— 
that we will confess Him not only with our lips, 
but also by our conduct. 

OUR OPPOSITION TO BE FROM RELIGIOUS WORLD 

We are shocked with the thought that it was Jehovah's 
professed people who crucified the Prince of Life! and 
not only so, but that it was the leaders of their religious 
thought, their chief priests. Scribes and Pharisees and 
Doctors of the Law, rather than the common people, who 
were responsible for this dreadful deed. We remember 
the Master's words, "Marvel not that the world hate you; 
for you know that it hated Me before it hated you." We 
see that He referred to the religious world; and realizing 
this, we know that it will be the religious world that will 
hate us. His followers. We are not to be surprised, then, 
that opposition to the Truth and persecution of the light-bearers 
should come from the most prominent exponents 
of so-called Christianity. This fact, however, should not 
cause us to hate either our own opponents or those who 
persecuted our Lord to the death. Rather we are to remember 
the words of the Apostle Peter respecting this 
matter: "I wot that in ignorance ye did it, as did also 
your rulers."— Acts 3:17. 

Ah, yes! Ignorance and blindness of heart and mind 
is at the bottom of all the sufferings of Christ— both Head 
and Body. The Father permits it to be so now, until the 
members of the Body of Christ shall have filled up that 
which is behind of the afflictions of their Head. (Colossians 1:24.) 
Soon, as our dear Lord declared, those who 
now partake of His broken body and are broken with Him 
in the service of the Truth, those who now participate in 
His Cup of suffering and self-denial, will drink with Him 
the new wine of joy in the Kingdom, beyond the veil. 
With that glorious Morning will begin the great work for 
the world's release from the bonds of sin and death— the 
great work of uplifting, the "Times of Restitution of all 
things spoken by the mouth of all the holy Prophets since 
the world began."— Acts 3:21. 

The thought before the mind of each of those who 
participate in the Memorial service should be that expressed 
in the words of St. Paul, "If we suffer with Him, 
we shall also reign with Him; if we be dead with Him, 
we shall also live with Him"; "for our light afflictions. 



which are but for a moment," "are not worthy to be compared 
with the glory that shall be revealed in us." 
(Rom. 8: 18.) With these thoughts respecting the passing 
over of our sins as the First-borns through the merit of 
the precious blood, and our share with our blessed Lord 
in all His experience of suffering and of glory, we may 
indeed keep the Passover feast with joy, notwithstanding 
the trials and difficulties. So doing, continuing faithful 
as His followers, very soon we shall have the great privilege 
of leading forth the Lord's hosts— all who ultimately 
shall hear and know and obey the great King— out of the 
dominion of sin and death, out of Egypt into Canaan. 

THE COMING ANNIVERSARY 

According to custom, the New York and Brooklyn congregation 
will this year meet to celebrate the great event 
which is so full of precious significance to all the saints 
who have come into an appreciation of Present Truth. We 
recommend that the dear friends in various parts of the 
world neglect not this blessed Memorial. We do not advise 
the leaving of the smaller groups to meet with larger 
companies, but rather that each little company, or band. 
meet together as is its usual custom; for this seems to 
have been the course of the early Church. Let us "keep 
the Feast," with joy of heart, but with due appreciation 
of its solemnity, not only as relates to our Lord's sacrifice 

R5872 : page 87 

for us, but also as relates to our own covenant to be dead 
with Him. We recommend that the leaders of each company 
make arrangements to obtain unleavened bread, and 
either unfermented grape juice, or raisin juice, or other 
fruit of the vine. Our recommendation is against the 
use of fermented wine, as being a possible temptation to 
some weak in the flesh, though provision might be made 
for any, if there be such, who conscientiously believe that 
fermented wine was meant to be used. 

We recommend that these little gatherings be without 
ostentation. Decently, orderly, quietly, let us come together, 
full of precious thoughts respecting the great 
transaction we celebrate. Let us not have our attention 
too much taken up with forms and ceremonies. Let us in 
this, as in all things, seek to do that which would be pleasing 
to our Lord; and then we shall be sure that the service 
will be profitable to all who participate. 

We have heretofore suggested that none are to be 
forbidden to partake of the emblems who profess faith 
in the precious blood and full consecration to the Lord. 
As a rule there will be no danger that any will accept the 
privilege of this fellowship who are not earnest of heart. 
Rather, some may need to be encouraged, since wrong 
views, we believe, are sometimes taken of the Apostle's 
words concerning those who "eat and drink damnation 
(condemnation) to themselves, not discerning the Lord's 



body." (1 Corinthians 1 1:29.) For the sake of these 
timid ones, who, we trust, will not forego the privilege 
of commemorating this great transaction, we would explain 
that to our understanding the class mentioned by 
the Apostle is composed of those who fail to realize t lie 
real import of the sacrifice, and who recognize this service 
as a mere ceremonial form. The failure to investigate and 
learn what this signifies, brings condemnation, reproof. 

We trust that the occasion will this year be a most 
precious and profitable one to all the saints. As we are 
approaching the end of our course, the great importance 
of our Calling, its responsibilities and privileges, should 
be impressed more and more upon our hearts and minds. 
We are living in wonderful times. We know not what a 
day may bring forth. Then let us walk with great carefulness, 
with great soberness, yet with joy and rejoicing, 
knowing that our deliverance draweth nigh; and that, if 
faithful, soon with our Beloved Bridegroom we shall 
partake of the wine of joy in His Kingdom and be forever 
with Him. 



R5872 : page 87 

THE RANSOM AND THE SIN-OFFERING 

NOTWITHSTANDING all that we have written 

on the subjects of the Ransom and the 

Sin-Offering in the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 

in THE WATCH TOWER and in the 

TABERNACLE SHADOWS, it would appear that 

some of our dear readers are not yet clear 

in respect to these matters. Some even confuse 

themselves and others by hinting that 

"Brother Russell has changed his views— or 

that the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES contradict 

THE WATCH TOWER. These are harmful mistakes. 

Should our views change we will state the change in no 

uncertain terms. We therefore make a renewed effort to 

make plain what we believe to be the proper interpretation 

of these subjects. 

"The Ransom-Price relates to the valuable thing itself; 
namely, the blood or death of Christ— a ransom price 
sufficient for the payment of the penalty of one member 
of the human family or of all, as it may be applied."— 
Z'09, p. 309. 

The Ransom views the matter of man's recovery 
from sin and death as a purchase— a Redemption. The 
basis of this thought is the Divine Law, "an eye for an 
eye, a tooth for a tooth, a man's life for a man's life." 
(Deuteronomy 19:21.) Adam and his entire race of 
thousands of millions are in dire distress through sin 
and its penalty. God has provided a recovery by a Ransom 
process— purchasing back from their fallen condition. 

Our first thought naturally would be that to redeem. 



or purchase back, the right of humanity to life, would 
mean that each member of Adam's race must be purchased 
by the life of another person, holy, harmless, unsentenced. 
But looking deeply into God's Plan we find 
that only one man was tried before the Divine Court- 
namely, Father Adam; that only Adam was sentenced to 
death; and that all of his children go into death, not because 
of their individual trial and death, but simply 
because Adam, having failed to maintain his perfection, 
was unable to give his children more life or rights than 
he possessed. And so it has been throughout the entire 
period of six thousand years from the time of Father 
Adam's sentence until now. 

Here we see a wonderful economic feature connected 
with the Divine Plan. God would not permit more than 
one member of the human race to be tried and sentenced 
to death; for His purpose from the beginning was that 
the sacrifice of one life should redeem the entire human 
race. By one man the whole trouble came; by another 
Man the whole trouble will be rectified. This the Apostle 
points out, saying, "As by a man came death, by a man 
comes also the resurrection of the dead; for as all in 
Adam die, even so all in Christ shall be made alive— 
every man in his own order."— 1 Corinthians 15:21-23. 

R5873 : page 87 

Thus we see the value of Jesus' death— that it was 
not merely for Adam, but included all his posterity. We 
see, too, how necessary it was that Jesus should be "holy, 
harmless, undefiled and separate from sinners"; otherwise. 
He, like the remainder of the race, would have 
been under a Divine death sentence. Because all of 
Adam's race were involved in sin and its penalty it was 
necessary to find an outsider to be the world's Redeemer; 
and that outsider, whether angel, cherub, or the great 
Michael Himself, the Logos, must exchange the spirit 
nature for the human nature in order to be a corresponding 
price— a Ransom for the first man. 

It was not a God that sinned; hence the death of a 
God could not redeem. It was not a cherub that sinned; 
hence the death of a cherub could not redeem. It was a 
man who sinned, and the ransom for him must be furnished 
by the death of a man. It was for this cause that 
the great Logos, in carrying out the Divine Plan for 
human redemption, left the glory which He had with the 
Father before the world was, humbled Himself and became 
a man, "was made a little lower than the angels, 
for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honor 
[the perfection of human nature]; that He, by the grace 
of God, should taste death for every man."— Hebrews 2:9. 

RANSOM PRICE AND RANSOM WORK 

If we have established clearly what a ransom is, and 
that Jesus was the only One suitable to be a Ransom for 



Father Adam, our next point is to show from the Bible 
that He did give Himself as a Ransom. We have the 
word of Jesus Himself on the subject (Matthew 20:28); 
and also St. Paul's testimony, "the Man Christ Jesus, 

R5873 : page 88 

who gave Himself a Ransom-price for all, to be testified 
in due time." (1 Tim. 2:6.) This proves that the 
giving of the price sufficient to ransom Adam and all his 
race was accomplished in Jesus' death at Calvary. 

But the work of ransoming Adam and his race is much 
more than merely the providing of the Ransom-price. 
The thought connected with the word Ransom goes beyond 
the mere giving and appropriating of the price. It 
includes the recovery of Adam and his race from the 
power of sin and death. Manifestly, this work has not 
yet been accomplished; indeed, it has scarcely begun. 
The only disposition thus far of the Ransom, the merit, 
has been its imputation to the Church, and this only by 
faith. The Church is not yet glorified as a whole— not 
yet delivered from the power of sin and death completely. 
Manifestly, then, it will require the entire thousand years 
of Messiah's Kingdom to ransom, to deliver, to set free, 
from the power of sin and death, Adam and all his children. 
Consequently, the Ransom work, which began more 
than eighteen centuries ago, is still to be accomplished. 

There is no difficulty about the Ransom-price; for 
that price has been in the hands of Justice for nearly 
nineteen centuries. But it has been unapplied as respects 
the world and only imputed to the Church that has been 
called out from the world during this Gospel Age. The 
full completion of the Ransoming work will include what 
the Bible speaks of, saying, "I will ransom them from the 
power of the grave." (Hosea 13:14.) Nor will the Ransoming 
work be fully accomplished when the last member 
of the race has been delivered from the power of the 
grave; for there will still be a great resurrecting work 
to be done— a raising up out of imperfection of mind, 
morals and physique, to the full image and likeness of 
God, lost through Adam's disobedience and redeemed by 
the precious blood at Calvary. 

THE SIN-OFFERING IS DIFFERENT 

With the thought of the Ransom before our minds, we 
now investigate the subject of the Sin-Offering, remembering 
to keep the two subjects separate and distinct. 
"The Sin-Offering shows the manner in which the Ransom-price 
is applicable, or effective, to the cancelation of 
the sins of the whole world." (Z '09, 309.) The Sin-Offering 
does not require so long a time for its accomplishment 
as does the Ransom. We have already seen 
that the Ransoming work has been in progress nearly 
nineteen centuries, and will be in progress nearly ten 
centuries in the future, or a total of twenty-nine centuries. 



But the Sin-Offering will all be completed before 
the glorious Reign of Christ begins. His Church then 
being with Him in glory. 

The Sin-Offering of Israel's Atonement Day shows 
us the same sacrifice of Jesus which constitutes the Ransom-price, 
but it is a different picture; for it shows how 
God appropriates the merit of Christ in behalf of human 
sins. This matter was pictured in that feature of the 
Law which provided the Day of Atonement. The sin-offerings 
were its principal feature. There were two. 
First was the bullock of sin-offering, which was furnished 
by the priest himself, the blood of which was made 
applicable to the priest's own family and tribe. This we 
see represented the death of Jesus, and the primary imputation 
of His merit to the Church of the First-borns. 

This Church consists of two classes. First, is the 
priestly class, who, like the High Priest, are especially 
devoted to God and His service, who "present their bodies 
living sacrifices, holy and acceptable to God, their reasonable 
service." (Romans 12:1.) In the type these were 
pictured both by Aaron's sons and by the body of 
Aaron, he being the head. Thus the Apostle speaks of 
Christ as being the Head of the Church, which is His 
Body, we being "members in particular of the Body of 
Christ."-! Corinthians 12:27. 

Second, there is the other class of the Church which, 
although making the same Covenant of Sacrifice, fail to 
go on obediently to lay down their lives in the Lord's 
service. They do not draw back to sin and to death, but 
neither do they go on to the sacrificing stage: hence they 
constitute a secondary class, servants of the first class. 
These were typified in the Levites, who were the servants 
of the priests. These are not to be in the Throne with 
the sacrificing Priests, the Royal Priesthood, but are to 
serve God in His Temple. They are not to have the 
crowns of Glory, but will be granted eventually palms 
of victory. And all not found worthy of a place in either 
of these classes will die the Second Death. 

In this picture the Lord shows us a special imputation 
of the merit of Jesus for the sins of His consecrated 
people only; and that these, justified by the merit of 
Jesus, are thus qualified through His merit to be sharers 
with Him in His glorious priestly functions. 

THE SECONDARY SIN-OFFERING 

The secondary Sin-Offering of the typical Atonement 
Day was called the Lord's Goat. It was not provided by 
the typical High Priest, as was the bullock, but was taken 
from the people. Indeed, two goats were taken at the 
same time, as representing the two classes of the Church. 
The sacrificing class or priestly class were represented by 
the Lord's goat. The less zealous of the Church, the 
antitypical Levites, were represented in the second goat— 
the Scape Goat. It was the Lord's Goat class, the under 
priesthood, that constituted the secondary Sin-Offering. 



The account says that the Lord's Goat was sacrificed 
and was in every way dealt with in precisely the same 
manner as the bullock, which preceded it. Thus the type 
tells us that the Church must walk in the footsteps of her 
Lord, sacrificially even unto death. We should remember 
that the blood of the bullock was not applied for the sins 
of the people, but merely for the sins of the high priest's 
family and tribe— typically for the Church. We should 
also notice that this secondary Sin-Offering, the Lord's 
Goat, was not offered for the same persons; for they 
needed no further offering. It was offered by the high 
priest as a secondary part of his own original offering; 
and its merit was made applicable to all the people, to 
bring atonement to all. 

In the antitype, the High Priest, Jesus, completed His 
own personal Sacrifice at Calvary. Forty days later He 
ascended up on High, and appeared before the Mercy 
Seat and presented the merit of His Sacrifice, not for 
the world, but for the Church. As the Apostle writes, 
"He appeared in the presence of God for us," the Church 
—not for the world. (Hebrews 9:24.) This is in full 
accord with what we have just seen in the type. 

Ever since Pentecost the Lord has been accepting the 
consecrated persons represented in the two goats; and 
those sufficiently zealous He has accepted as His members, 
and has been offering them up as a part of His own 
Sacrifice. Soon He will have finished this work— when 
the last member of His Body shall have been found faithful 
unto death. The next step in the antitype will be for 
the High Priest then to present again at the Mercy Seat 
the blood of the antitypical Lord's Goat as His own blood 
—otherwise, the sacrifice of His Church as part of His 
own Sacrifice. This He makes applicable to the sin of all 
the people— the original sin of all the people. 

At that moment, which we believe is in the near future 
now, the Father will turn over to the Son all the people, 
their sins fully forgiven so far as the original transgression 

R5873 : page 89 

is concerned. Forthwith Messiah's Kingdom, established 

in power and great glory, will begin to deal with 

the world for its rescue from sin and death, for the ultimate 

uplift to human perfection of all who are willing 

and obedient to the regulations of His Kingdom. 

PUNISHMENT FOR SINS AGAINST LIGHT 

Meantime, there will be other sins of the world not 
included in the Adamic transgression. The Sin-Offerings 
are merely for Adam's sin and all the various weaknesses 
and imperfections which flow from that original sin. The 
other sins will be such as are not to be attributed to 
human weakness, but which represent more or less of sin 
against knowledge, against light. Full, wilful sin against 



R5874 : page 89 

full light would bring upon the sinner the Second Death. 
But only a few have had full light, full knowledge, full 
opportunity; and hence very few indeed will have sinned 
the sin unto death. 

Wherever the light of the Gospel has gone, however, 
a certain measure of knowledge has gone, and a certain 
measure of responsibility accrues; and God intimates that 
He keeps a very exact accounting with all. Every sin 
must receive a just recompense of reward. The penalty 
of Adam's sin has reached down in a general way over 
the whole race for six thousand years; but the penalty 
must be paid for the other sins of which we speak, sins 
which were more or less wilful, more or less against light 
and knowledge and which have not been previously expiated, 
but which have been accumulating since Pentecost. 

Before the New Dispensation can rightly be ushered 
in with all its blessings, the world's accounts must be fully 
squared. It will be the settlement of these accounts 
against the world which will bring the great Time of 
Trouble such as never was since there was a nation— the 
Time of Trouble which we believe has begun in the present 
war, and which will progress until the great catastrophe 
of anarchy will complete it in the near future. 
Then the accounts of Justice having been squared in that 
great Time of Trouble, the blessings of Messiah's Kingdom 
will immediately begin. 

THE VALUE OF THE SCAPE GOAT'S SUFFERING 

However, God is a very strict Accountant. As He 
is sure to count against the world all wilful disobedience, 
and especially all persecutions of His Church, so also He 
is willing to give the world credit on account wherever 
possible. This, we believe, is intimated in the picture 
given us of a work which followed the Sin-Offerings; 
namely, the confessing over the head of the scape goat 
certain transgressions of the people, and the sending 
away of the scape goat into the wilderness. 

Understanding that this scape goat represents some 
of God's consecrated people who have failed to live up 
to their privileges, we understand this to signify that 
these will go into a great Time of Trouble, as represented 
in Revelation 7: 14. There they are represented 
as coming up out of great tribulation and washing their 
robes and making them white in the Blood of the Lamb. 
Those tribulations coming upon the Great Company 
class, the Levite class, are not tribulations for wilful 
sins, but tribulations for the destruction of the flesh, in 
harmony with the Covenant entered into by this class, a 
Covenant of Sacrifice, which they failed to keep. The 
sufferings of this Great Company class, we understand, 
therefore, go as a credit to the world to square the account 
of the world's sins against light and especially 
against God's people. The Time of Trouble will be especially 



against the hypocrites, but the Great Company 

Class will have their portion with the hypocrites and be 

bearers of a certain share of punishment due the world. 

That we may clearly note the character of sins for 
which the world is held responsible, let us recall the 
statement of Rev. 6:9-1 1, "I saw under the altar the 
souls of them that were slain for the Word of God and 
for the testimony which they held; and they cried with a 
loud voice, saying, "How long, O Lord, holy and true, 
dost Thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that 
dwell on the earth? and white robes were given unto 
them"; and they were told that they should wait "a little 
season," until their brethren, who also were persecuted, 
should have the persecutions accomplished in them. 

Thus the same idea respecting the Divine requirements 
in the end of the Gospel Age is given to us that 
Jesus specified in regard to the Jews in the end of their 
Age. He said that all the righteous blood shed on the 
earth from the time of Abel down, would be required of 
that generation— to square the accounts. (Matthew 23:34-36.) 
In the great time of trouble with which the 
Jewish Age ended, those accounts were squared up to 
that time. Similarly we expect that all the remaining 
accounts of the world will be squared during the culmination 
of the great Time of Trouble— just before us. 

THE INAUGURATION OF THE NEW COVENANT 

The Apostle, in contrasting the typical and the antitypical 
Sin-Offering, declares that Jesus, not by the blood 
of bulls and of goats, but by His own blood, accomplishes 
the blessings. (Hebrews 9:1 1-15.) And again, the sacrifices 
of the antitypical High Priest are styled the "better 
sacrifices"— in the plural. This points us back to the 
institution of the Jewish Covenant arrangement, where 
Moses took the blood of bulls and goats and inaugurated 
the Law Covenant, sprinkling first the Tables of the Law, 
and afterwards the people, with the blood.— Exod. 24:3-8. 

The question arises. Why did Moses use the blood of 
bulls— plural— and of goats— plural; whereas in the type 
of Leviticus 16 the blood of one bullock and the blood of 
one goat alone was used? We reply that there was really 
but the one antitypical bullock, the one Man Christ Jesus 
who died for us; and that there is really but one antitypical 
Goat, the one Church, which is accepted by the 
Lord as His Body, and is associated with, and part of. 
His sacrifice. But in the inauguration of the Law Covenant, 
more than one animal of each kind was necessary 
because of the multitudes of the people of Israel who 
were to be sprinkled with that blood. The blood of one 
bullock and of one goat would not have been sufficient; 
hence the statement, bulls and goats— in the plural— and 
yet not definitely stated as to how many; for it was really 
the one bullock and the one goat duplicated as many times 
as was necessary to provide a sufficiency of blood for the 
sprinkling of all the people. 



In the antitype, when the New Law Covenant will be 
inaugurated by Messiah's Kingdom, the blood of Christ, 
as represented in the blood of Jesus and also in that of 
His associated sacrifices, the Church, will be used in 
sprinkling, or satisfying the Divine Law, first of all. 
This will be the basis for the turning over, to the Kingdom 
of Messiah, of the whole world by the Father. Then 
will progress the work of sprinkling all the people with 
the blood— the work of cleansing mankind— giving all 
men the benefits secured by the redeeming blood. 

THE ANTITYPICAL ATONEMENT DAY 

We trust that from the foregoing our readers will see 
clearly the distinction between the Ransom which Jesus 
gave and its application; and the Sin-Offerings of this 
Gospel Age and what they signify. We wish now to impress 
a further point; namely, that the Sin-Offerings were 
associated with the Day of Atonement for sin in the type 

R5874 : page 90 

and in the antitype. The antitypical Day of Atonement 
began with our Lord Jesus and His sacrifices. The entire 
Gospel Age has been a part of this Day of Atonement. 
This Day will witness the full completion of all the sin 
atonement and more; for all of the Millennial Age will 
be a part of the antitypical Atonement Day. 

The sacrifices of the Day of Atonement are merely 
the means to an end. The end to be attained is the blessing 
of the world, and the bringing of the world back to 
at-one-ment, or harmony, with God. That work will require 
all of the Millennial Age. It will include the 
teaching of the world, the restoration of mankind to all 
that was lost in Adam and redeemed at Calvary. The 
Sin-Offerings of the Atonement Day merely represent 
God's Purpose in the use of the Sacrifices which must be 
completed before the world's at-one-ment with God can 
begin to go into effect. 

So, then, let us hope that all will henceforth see clearly 
that the Sin-Offerings of the Atonement Day and its 
Sacrifices constitute a picture of the processes by which 
God accomplishes the world's blessings; while the Ransom 
is entirely distinct, and shows the work of Jesus 
alone and its ultimate effect for mankind throughout the 
whole wide world. 



R5874 : page 90 

"WHY PERSECUTEST THOU ME?" 
-APRIL 2.-ACTS 9:1-31.- 
A NOTABLE ILLUSTRATION OF ZEAL WITHOUT KNOWLEDGE-REPROVED 



FROM ON HIGH-SAUL'S DEEP CONTRITION AN EVIDENCE 
OF GENUINE REPENT ANCE-HIS EYES OF UNDERSTANDING 
OPENED-ST. PAUL'S "THORN IN THE FLESH"- 
THE GREAT APOSTLE TO THE GENTILES A TYPE OF THE 
NATION OF ISRAEL. 

"Faithful is the saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Jesus 
Christ came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am 
chief."-l Timothy 1:15. R.V. 

WHOEVER thinks of Saul's transformation 

from an enemy of Christ and His Church 

to a friend and zealous servant as an experience 

on a par with the conversion of 

sinners is greatly in error. Such conduct 

as is related in today's Study is not the 

conduct of sinners, enemies of God. In our 

opinion, however, the term "conversion" 

would scarcely be appropriate in such a case. 

Saul of Tarsus was either a bad man and a 

hypocritical Pharisee, a money-lover, a self-lover, or 

else an "Israelite indeed," whose aim and object was the 

service of God, and whose persecution of the early Church 

was prompted by his fidelity to God. We believe that the 

latter description is the one which fitted the case of Saul; 

for it is in harmony with his own testimony on the 

subject. -Acts 26:9-1 1. 

If, then, Saul was a true and loyal member of the 
favored nation of Israel, thoroughly consecrated to God 
and serving Him to the best of his ability and knowledge, 
but merely blinded for the time by prejudice and misconception, 
we can no more think of his case as a conversion 
than the cases of the other Apostles. Our Lord chose 
the original Twelve because they were Israelites indeed; 
and He gave them the instruction necessary for His 
service. This He did also for Saul, though in a more 
striking manner. 

The word convert signifies the turning about in an 
opposite direction. But Saul was already going in the 
right direction; namely, in a whole-hearted service of 
God, although his efforts were expended upon the wrong 
thing in that right direction. The Lord merely opened 
his eyes of understanding, and showed him the better how 
his efforts should be used. Saul needed merely to be 
shown aright; and this he demonstrated by as much 
fidelity and energy in the Lord's service afterward as he 
had ignorantly misused previously. 

CONSCIENTIOUS WRONG-DOING 

Saul was one of those Israelites who lived amongst 
the Gentiles, but who occasionally went up to Jerusalem 
to certain of the feasts. (Deuteronomy 16:16.) His home 
was in the city of Tarsus, a notable city of that time- 
said to have been excelled in scholarship only by the cities 
of Alexandria and Athens. Not only had he the advantages 



of a home in such a city, but his family was an 
influential one, as is implied in the fact that he was 
a citizen, not only of Tarsus, but also of Rome. In addition 
to the education of his home city, he had received a 
special course in theology, or Jewish Law, at Jerusalem, 
under Gamaliel, one of the greatest teachers of that time. 

Saul's early training, therefore, and all of its conditions 
were favorable to producing in him a breadth and 
refinement of thought equaled by few. These conditions, 
combined with his honesty of heart and his zeal for God, 
although not at first according to knowledge, fitted him 
to become just what the Lord subsequently made him; 
namely, "a chosen vessel" unto the Lord, to bear His name 
before the Gentiles and kings and the children of Israel. 

Apparently the circumstances connected with the 
stoning of St. Stephen only incited Saul to greater energy 
in stamping out what he believed to be a very injurious 
doctrine— heresy. Our own experience confirms the 
thought that an earnest, conscientious opponent is more 
to be respected than a cold, indifferent professed friend. 
We are reminded of our Lord's words, "I would that thou 
wert cold or hot. So then because thou art lukewarm, 
and neither cold nor hot, I will spew thee out of My 
mouth." (Revelation 3: 16.) Let us have respect, therefore, 
for all who are warm-hearted and zealous, remembering 
that there is more hope of their being pleasing to 
God, and being accounted worthy to receive the Truth, 
than for the lukewarm. 

Under the arrangements of the Roman government, 
the Jewish priesthood was granted considerable power, 
and had come to exercise very much of the power subsequently 
used by the Popes of Rome. The religious 
rulers had power to authorize arrests and imprisonments 
for the infraction of their rules and regulations. Saul, 
exercising the same respect to law and authority which 
subsequently marked all of his dealings and teachings as 
a Christian, did not attempt to take matters into his own 
hands in regard to the persecution of the Christians, but 
went about it in the manner recognized as legal— under 
the sanction and authority of the highest religious 
tribunal. Let us remember that nearly all persecutions 
have been sanctioned by some human law, and regulate 
ourselves according to the Divine code. 

THE THREE ACCOUNTS HARMONIZED 

The account given in today's Study regarding the 
opening of the eyes of Saul's understanding is that of 
St. Luke, and was doubtless received directly from the 
Apostle Paul himself, with whom St. Luke traveled for 
a time. Two other accounts are given by St. Paul himself. 
(See Acts 22:6-1 1; 26:12-20.) The three accounts 

R5874:page91 

are in practical agreement, and show only such variations 



as might reasonably be expected, considering the fact that 
they were delivered under different conditions, as it was 
sought to emphasize or elaborate different points. 

Had the three accounts been exactly alike, word for 
word, there would have been just ground for supposing 
a special preparation of the text with this harmony in 
view. When rightly viewed, even the seeming discrepancy 
of the account is additional evidence of the truthfulness 
of all. The account itself being simple, we need to give 
attention only to those points which apparently conflict. 

All three accounts say that Saul himself heard a voice, 
saw a light and fell to the ground. One account adds 
that all with him fell to the ground as well. The account 
in our lesson declares that the men of his company "stood 
speechless, hearing a voice, but seeing no man." Another 
account says, "They beheld indeed the light, but they 
heard not the voice of Him that spake to me." These accounts 
can be harmonized in this way: Saul himself was 
evidently the center of manifestation— "a great light 
shone round about me." Doubtless his companions saw 
something of this light in a general way, but they did not 
see the source of the light. They did not see the glorious 
body of our Lord Jesus Christ— "seeing no man." Saul, 
however, saw the glorious body of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
as he himself subsequently testified.— 1 Corinthians 15:8. 

Although no one but Saul was smitten to the ground, 
the others, who stood speechless and terrorstricken, no 
doubt soon kneeled reverently about their leader. Respecting 
the voice— Saul and all with him heard a sound, 
"the voice," but only Saul could distinguish the words— 
which were meant for him alone. A similar case is recorded 
in John 12:28,29. In one sense of the word Saul 
and all of his companions heard the sound, or voice; but 
in another sense of the word Saul alone heard the voice. 
We use this same form of expression in our daily conversation. 
If some one addresses us in a low or indistinct 
voice, we say that we did not hear. We mean that 
although we heard the voice, we did not understand or 
comprehend what was said. 

OPENING OF SAUL'S MENTAL VISION 

Saul's feelings, as he heard from the Lord of Glory a 
reproof of his misdirected zeal, can be better imagined 
than described. Nevertheless, we can but admire the 
promptness with which he at once ceased his opposition 
and placed himself on the side of the One whose cause 
he had so recently persecuted. We can imagine him praying, 
"Lord, teach me! In my blindness and ignorance I 
have been fighting against Thee, the Only Begotten of the 
Father, the Messiah, while verily I thought that I did 
God service. Having made such a great mistake, I am 
thoroughly humbled. I can no longer trust either to my 
own wisdom or to the wisdom of those in whom I have 
heretofore confided— the chief priests, the scribes and the 
Pharisees. Now, Lord, I come to Thee. Show me how I 



can undo some of the great wrong which I have done 
ignorantly. Show me; and I will gladly and promptly 
follow and obey." 

How deep a hold the matter took upon Saul's mind 
may be judged from the fact that for three days he 
neither ate nor drank. He could not think lightly of his 
own blinded course. Deep contrition is always a good 
evidence of genuine repentance of wrong. No doubt his 
thoughts were busy; for he was well educated in the Law 
and in the Prophets and was familiar with what he had 
learned concerning the Nazarene. It is reasonable to suppose 
that those three days of blindness and fasting were 
days of prayer and reflection, during which he diligently 
compared the testimony of the Law and the Prophets 
with what he knew of the Nazarene and His teachings. 
Saul's natural sight had been destroyed; but his mental 
vision had been opened, and he now saw matters in a 
new and wonderful light. 

AN ILLUSTRATION OF DIVINE METHODS 

In a previous lesson the name Ananias was associated 
with ungodliness and falsehood. But in today's Study we 
find another Ananias of a totally different character— a 
true servant of the Lord. His hesitation to go to Saul 
does not seem to have been caused by opposition or by 
faithlessness, but rather a reasonable caution. He had 
heard of Saul, and possibly also knew Saul's host to be 
an enemy of the Cause of Christ. Therefore he wished 
to assure himself that he had not misunderstood the Lord. 
But the Lord graciously made the matter clear to him, as 
He always does to His faithful ones; and Ananias promptly 
fulfilled his mission. 

Here again is an illustration of Divine methods. The 
Lord sent upon this important errand one who apparently 
was a very humble member of the Church. He did not 
send St. Peter, St. James and St. John, the Apostles, from 
Jerusalem, with great pomp and show to receive the 
penitent enemy of the Cross and to make a public triumph. 
He merely used a ready and willing instrument that was 
nearby. This should be a lesson to us that the Lord is 
both able and willing to use in His service the humble 
ones who are ready and willing. 

The scales which fell from Saul's eyes would seem to 
indicate that a certain portion of the eye had been destroyed 
by the great light; and the healing may be said 
to have been in a natural way. Although informed that 
he received his sight, we are not informed that his eyes 
were made whole. Indeed, it seems evident, from subsequent 
statements, that to his dying day his eyes never recovered 
soundness, and his sight was never again normal. 

It has been surmised, and with good reason, that the 
continued weakness of his eyes constituted what the 
Apostle terms "a thorn in the flesh." (2 Corinthians 12:7-10.) 
Although under the power of the Holy Spirit 
he was granted many gifts of the Spirit, amongst which 



was the gift of healing, and although he exercised this 
gift of healing upon many (Acts 19:1 1,12), yet the Lord 
did not relieve him from his own weakness in this respect. 
This must have been all the greater trial; for it would seem 
all the more strange that he who could heal others could 
not heal himself— that he who had Divine power for the 
blessing of others of this way should not have the Divine 
power for his own blessing. 

To St. Paul's petition our Lord's answer was, "My 
grace is sufficient for thee; My strength is made perfect 
in weakness." The noble Apostle exclaims, "Most gladly 
therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that the 
power of Christ may rest upon me." Thereafter he never 
requested the removal of this "thorn." 

Several incidents in St. Paul's experience confirm this 
conclusion: (1) Although an educated man, he seldom 
wrote his own letters; and of the one letter which he did 
write, although one of the briefest, he remarks, "Ye see 
how large a letter I have written unto you with my own 
hand." (Galatians 6:11.) The Greek would even give 
the thought that these words apologize for the use of 
very large characters in the writing— such as a semi-blind 
person would use. (2) When standing before the 
tribunal of the chief captain, St. Paul declared that he 
did not know Ananias as the high priest; whereas, if his 
eyesight had been good, he could not have well helped 
knowing the high priest, on account of his gorgeous apparel. 

R5874 : page 92 

(Acts 23:5.) (3) In writing to the Galatians he 
tells them (4:15) that, when he first met them, their love 
unci sympathy for him were such that they would willingly 
have plucked out their eyes for him— an expression which 
would be meaningless unless his eyes were defective. 
After a few days in which to gain strength from his 
fasting and from the nervous excitement incidental to 
his experiences— days of communion with those whom he 
had come to persecute, and whom now in his renewed 
condition of mind he recognized and fellowshiped as dear 
brethren— Saul promptly began to preach Christ as the 
Son of God— publicly using the opportunities afforded in 
the Jewish synagogues. The account of his enlightenment 
in the Gospel is that of a most noble character, which 
commands the respect of every class in every time. 

ST. PAUL AS A TYPE 

We are inclined to regard the Apostle Paul as in some 
sense of the word a figure, or likeness, or type of his race 
—Israel— and the opening of their eyes of understanding 
which is now shortly due to take place. Amongst the 
Jews are many who seem to be Israelites indeed, merely 
blinded, as both the Prophet and the Apostle have described. 
(Romans 1 1:7-12.) That nation, whose blinding 
took place in the Fifth Thousand-year Day, and which 



has been blinded throughout the Sixth Thousand-year 
Day, is to have its eyes opened on the Third Day, which 
will be the Seventh Thousand-year Day— the Millennial 
Day. "After Two Days will He revive us; in the Third 
Day He will raise us up."— Hosea 6:1-3. 

During all this time Israel has also been without food 
or drink of a spiritual kind. Israel also is to be a chosen 
vessel in the Lord's hand as connected with the earthly 
agencies in bearing the Message which shall bless the 
Gentiles and all the families of the earth. We are near 
to the time for the opening of Israel's eyes. When that 
time shall have fully come, the Lord will send some 
Ananias, whose touch under Divine favor shall bring 
sight. The name Ananias signifies, "Jah is gracious." 



R5875 : page 92 

AENEAS AND DORCAS 

-APRIL 9.-ACTS 9:32-43.- 

ST. PETER'S PREACHING TOUR-VISITING THE SAINTS-A TERM 

MUCH MISUNDERSTOOD-A PARALYTIC HEALED AT LYDDA 

-ST. PETER CALLED TO JOPPA-DORCAS AWAKENED FROM 

THE SLEEP OF DEATH-A BEAUTIFUL CHARACTER-THE 

FRIEND OF THE POOR -PURPOSE SERVED BY THESE TWO MIRACLES. 

"In all things showing thyself an example of 
good works."— Titus 2:7. 

PERSECUTORS never like persecution for 

themselves. Those who have the mind of 

Christ are never persecutors. They feel it 

to be their bounden duty not to assist things 

which they believe to be wrong; they may 

even find it necessary or expedient to denounce 

the wrong, to show up its inconsistencies, 

and in some instances to name 

the active agents in wrong teachings and 

wrong doings— as the Apostles have done in 

their writings. But as for persecuting others, the Lord's 

people can take no part in this. They are hindered by the 

spirit of love, the mind of Christ, which directs that we 

should do to others as we would have them do to us— the 

Golden Rule, our "perfect law of liberty." 

The persecution which scattered the disciples throughout 
all Judea, and of which Saul of Tarsus was one of the 
leaders, subsided shortly after he became a Christian, and 
was followed by a period of rest, recuperation, edification. 
While Saul's changed course may have had something to 
do with this, in all probability a trouble which arose about 
this time between the Jews and their Roman rulers had 
more to do with it. 

About the year 38 A.D. the Emperor Caligula, who had 



but recently come into his office, promulgated an edict that 

his statue should be set up in various quarters of the 

empire and worshiped. When the Jews learned that it 

was the intention to put these statues in Jerusalem, and 

even in the Temple itself, as well as elsewhere, their indignation 

and trouble knew no bounds. They gathered in 

great masses, young and old, to entreat the local governor 

to intercede for them that such a desecration of their 

Holy Temple and Holy City and Holy Land should not 

be permitted. While the governor made every effort to 

have the Emperor change the edict, the most he could 

accomplish was a command to leave the Temple untouched. 

But many altars were raised to the Emperor 

outside of its gates; and news came that all the synagogues 

of Alexandria had been turned into temples to Caesar. 

This state of affairs lasted until January 24, 41 A.D., 

when Caligula was murdered. 

A SEASON OF SPIRITUAL GROWTH 

It is not surprising that such outside persecution and 
interference with their own religious rites and liberties 
caused the Jews to relax their persecutions of the Christians, 
and thus brought about the period of rest mentioned 
in today's Study. The record says that the churches 
were edified. We get the thought, therefore, that this time 
of peace was a time of upbuilding amongst the little 
groups of the Lord's people in Palestine. There is a two-fold 
sense in which the Church may be built up or edified; 
in numbers and also in the fruits and graces of the Holy 
Spirit. Apparently the infant Church was edified in both 
ways; for the declaration is that the believers walked in 
the fear of the Lord and in the comfort of the Holy Spirit. 

The Scriptures declare that "the fear of the Lord is 
the beginning of wisdom." (Psalm 111:10.) This is not 
a selfish fear, not a fear that the Lord will eternally torment 
or otherwise unjustly deal with His creatures, but 
a reverence of the Lord which recognizes His greatness 
and His goodness, and fears to do aught that would be 
displeasing to Him or that would separate from His love 
and favor. This proper kind of fear, which is the beginning 
of wisdom, will never be lost so long as the wisdom 
is maintained. 

But reverence of God was not the only grace developed 
in the early Church. To it was added the comfort 
of the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit is the spirit, 
mind, disposition of God. This the primitive Church was 
cultivating, developing it in their hearts, walking in it— 
that is, living it. The word comfort signifies united, 
cemented; and the thought of the statement as a whole is 
that not only was the Church multiplying in numbers 
and being built up together as God's holy Temple, but that 
the various "living stones" were being cemented or bound 
together by the Holy Spirit. 

MEANING OF THE TERM "SAINT" 



From our Study we learn that although the Apostles 
made Jerusalem the headquarters for their work, nevertheless 
they went hither and thither throughout Judea, 
meeting with the Lord's people scattered by the previous 
persecution, and forming little congregations everywhere. 

R5875 : page 93 

In one of his tours St. Peter came to Lydda, the chief 
city of the Plain of Saron (Sharon), about ten miles 
southeast of Joppa. His special mission, we are told, was 
the visiting of the saints. 

This word "saints" signifies holy ones, those set apart, 
sanctified believers in Christ. There is much opposition 
to the use of the word today, attributable, we believe, to 
two reasons. One is that the vast majority of professing 
Christians well know that they are not saints, not sanctified, 
not living as near to the Lord as they could live- 
not separate, even in heart, from the world, the flesh and 
the Devil. Such persons have strong reasons for disliking 
the word "saints," realizing that it would exclude 
them and nearly all of their friends and special associates 
in Christian work. 

Another reason for opposition to the word "saints" is 
the fact that in the Dark Ages it became customary for 
the Roman and Greek Catholic churches to canonize, or 
legally set apart as objects of reverence, certain persons 
respecting whom, after several centuries had elapsed, 
nothing especially evil was remembered, but only things 
esteemed as honorable and praiseworthy. The word saints 
thus became separated from living Christians; and, indeed, 
this may have been because there were few Christians 
so faithful as to be representatives of saintship. 

Still another reason why some dislike the term "saints" 
is that they consider it to be rather boastful— some would 
even say hypocritical. Having lost sight of the doctrine 
of Justification by Faith, in its proper application, they 
have become accustomed to think of all Christians as 
"miserable sinners" and to pray for them as such— overlooking 
the fact that there are some in whom "the righteousness 
of the Law is fulfilled," because these "walk not 
after the flesh, but after the Spirit," the merit of Christ 
covering all their unwilling shortcomings.— Romans 8:4. 

The Lord's people, however, are to remember to apply 
and to take pleasure in all the names and practises authorized 
by Apostolic usage. Thus the term "saint" certainly 
approves itself to us. Almost all of the Epistles of the 
New Testament are addressed to the saints; and those 
professing Christians who cannot properly apply the term 
to themselves cannot properly apply to themselves the exceeding 
great and precious promises contained in those 
Epistles; for all the promises are addressed to the saints, 
are meant for the sanctified in Christ Jesus. Let it be 
borne in mind, however, that the word "saint" does not 
signify actual perfection merely, as in our Lord's case, but 



also those reckoned holy through Him; and that the 
Apostles, who were saints and who classed themselves 
with the saints of God, declared respecting themselves, 
"We also are men of like passions with you."— Acts 14:15. 

The term "saints," then, properly applied in the 
Church, refers to those who, although originally "children 
of wrath, even as others," have been rescued from that 
condition of condemnation, have been washed, cleansed, 
and thus brought into accord with God through the forgiveness 
of their sins and through the covering of their 
weaknesses and blemishes; and who have become the 
"sanctified in Christ Jesus" by making full consecration of 
themselves to live, not perfect lives— an impossibility 
while in the flesh— but as nearly perfect as they may be 
able, the Lord's grace making them continually "holy, acceptable 
to God," through the merit of Christ Jesus. Let 
us never be ashamed of this name "saints," if it present 
before our minds saintship, holiness, separateness from 
the world; for this is the very thought which should be 
there continually. It is a thought which will enable us 
the better to live separate from the world, as the Master 
indicated.— John 17:16. 

The healing of AEneas, the paralytic, was a very 
notable evidence of the power of the Lord, similar to the 
healing at the Beautiful Gate of the Temple. (Acts 3:1-1 1.) 
Here, as always, St. Peter made sure that none 
should think that the power which he exercised was his 
own. He distinctly affirmed that Jesus the Messiah, whom 
their rulers had crucified, had performed the cure, and 
therefore was not dead, as they had supposed, but risen. 

The fame of this miracle spread abroad and resulted, 
we are told, in the drawing of many unto the Lord and 
to the Church. Thus did the Lord establish the Church 
and attract to it those who were in the right attitude of 
heart, using miracles then, as now He uses other means. 
Those miracles, as heretofore pointed out, cannot have 
lasted much longer than the Apostles themselves; for the 
miraculous gifts of the Spirit were granted only through 
the laying on of the hands of the Apostles, and The 
Twelve had no successors, St. Paul taking the place of 
Judas. The Heavenly Jerusalem had twelve foundations, 
and no more; and in them were written the names of the 
twelve Apostles, and no others.— Revelation 21:14. 

ANOTHER NOTABLE MIRACLE 

One of the saints at Joppa was a woman apparently 
of means and education. If her name represented her 
appearance, she was very beautiful; for Tabitha in the 
Syriac language, Dorcas in the Greek, signifies graceful, 
beautiful. But this woman was famed for a grace and 
a beauty entirely separate and distinct from whatever she 
possessed of these qualities naturally. Hers was the 
beauty of a meek and quiet spirit, full of love and helpfulness. 
Evidently she was a burning and shining light 
for the Lord in that vicinity. She did what she could. 



She served the Lord, His brethren and all who needed 
help. According to the best opportunities afforded her 
she helped the poor, particularly widows, who as a class 
were at that time apt to be in a very trying position, especially 
if poor. 

The Greek text indicates that Dorcas had been in the 
habit of assisting the poor with garments, etc., doubtless 
assisting them also with words of encouragement and 
helpfulness, and ministering to them the Truth. Under 
these circumstances it is not strange that her death should 
have produced sorrow, especially amongst the beneficiaries 
of her charities and amongst the numerous friends which 
a beautiful. Christlike spirit of this kind is sure to make. 

Apparently Dorcas took sick and died suddenly, at 
about the time that others of the saints at Joppa heard 
that St. Peter was at Lydda and had cured AEneas. Immediately 
they sent for the Apostle, probably with no 
thought that he would perform such a miracle as that of 
bringing Dorcas back to life, but rather with the thought 
that they had lost a highly esteemed member of their little 
group and that St. Peter could give them some consolation 
at this time. In those days there was neither telegraph, 
telephone nor mail service; and consequently some 
of the brethren became the messengers to take the word to 
the Apostle— to request his presence without delay. 

St. Peter went at once with them to Joppa. As he 
entered the death-chamber, he saw an affecting scene. 
Poor widows and others were lamenting the loss of their 
friend, and showing the garments which she had made 
for them. This was surely a noble tribute to the usefulness 
of her life. No millionaire has ever left monuments 
which will endure so long, or which will reflect so much 
glory upon his character, as were left by this humble 
woman. And even the humblest and poorest of us may to 

R5875 : page 94 

some extent emulate her example and leave behind us 
when we die some such monuments of love and some such 
testimonies of appreciation. 

It is sad indeed when any, especially of those who have 
named the name of Christ, die and leave none who sincerely, 
truly, mourn for them and miss them. Such a 

condition testifies to a life that was either selfish or misunderstood. 
We who are looking forward to the close of 
our journey, and that before very long, should see that 
our lives are spent day by day in such a manner that 
some will be the happier for them; and that our decease 
will be recognized by some, at least, as a loss. 

St. Peter's most notable miracle was the bringing of 
Dorcas back from the portals of death. Like the other 
miracle recorded in our lesson, it was peculiar to that time 
and for the purpose of the establishment of the Church. 
We are not to suppose that it was the Lord's purpose that 
all of His people during the Gospel Age should be thus 
snatched back from death, or that they should all be relieved 



from beds of sickness, or that they should all have 

powers such as the Apostle here exercised. There is a 

ministry of evil— of calamity, sickness, death, etc.— which 

has often been valuable indeed to the Lord's people, inculcating 

various lessons and developing various fruits 

of the Spirit— meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, 

brotherly kindness, love. 



R5874 : page 94 

LESSON OF THE LILIES 

"Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow."— Matthew 6:28. 

FEAR and anxiety are amongst the most serious 

foes of our human family. They wear 

upon the gray matter of the brain; they produce 

nervous exhaustion and are very injurious 

to health. For those who would 

seek to walk in the Divine path which God 

has marked out for the Gospel Church, fear 

and anxiety are special hindrances. The 

Savior had this fact in mind when he spoke 

thus to His disciples. He would have His 

followers to be without worry, to be restful of heart. But 

He would not have them be without carefulness. There 

is a carefulness which is entirely proper, yea, necessary, 

on our part, but not this extreme worry— this inability to 

enjoy the blessings of the present moment because of 

thoughts, fears, respecting tomorrow. When the Apostle 

said (Philippians 4:6), "Be careful for nothing," he was 

not referring to a proper care and sense of responsibility, 

but to an anxiety which would rob the soul of rest and 

peace, and which would indicate a lack of faith in the Lord 

R5875 : page 94 

and in His care for His people. The word rendered "careful" 
here is from a Greek word meaning over anxious. 

In giving a forceful lesson to His disciples on trustfulness 
in God, the Master used the illustration of the 
lilies of the field. The lilies of Palestine are quite common 
—rather a small flower, many of them red. They persist, 
live, grow, notwithstanding that no special provision is 
made for their cultivation, and that they are trodden down 
by those who pass through the fields. Yet they develop 
and mature and blossom, and have an exquisite organism, 
which microscopic examination shows is very beautiful. 
Jesus declared that even Solomon in all his glory was not 
arrayed like one of these. There is a perfection in the 
texture of a flower that is wonderful. The finest clothing 
cannot approximate the delicate structure of the flower, 
created by an Infinite Hand. 

The lesson seems to be that although the flowers may 



be in an unfavorable environment, unable to do for themselves 

or to take any anxious thought in the matter, nevertheless, 
God's providence has so arranged for them that 
they thrive and become very beautiful. These lilies did 
not look up and wish that they might become great trees, 
nor wish that they might climb up higher in the world 
and nearer the sun, as do the vines. On the contrary, 
they were content with the lot chosen for them by their 
Infinite Creator.— Matthew 6:30. 

THE LESSON OF TRUST IMPERATIVE 

And so God's people are to take a lesson from the 
lilies. They too are to be content with the Lord's arrangement 
for them— as the poet expresses it: 
"Content whatever lot I see. 
Since 'tis my God that leadeth me." 
In proportion as we approximate this condition it will 
give us peace and rest of mind. We are not to worry, and 
not to be slothful, but are to be diligent, "fervent in spirit 
serving the Lord," doing with our might what our hands 
find to do. When doing this, we are to be content and 
trustful that He will work out all things for our good. 
He wishes us to learn this important lesson of trust. 

Those who neglect to learn this lesson will be unprepared 
for the great work God has in mind for our future 
under Messiah's Kingdom. God will not have any in that 
Kingdom, we are sure, who are not full of trust. As the 
flowers flourish under God's providential care, so are all 
of His people to flourish— to grow in knowledge and 
beauty of spirit, in beauty of character. And this is not 
accomplished by some great things that they do, but by 
the spirit in which they meet the little things, the every 
day experiences of life. God's people are to grow steadily, 
though unobtrusively. 

The lily would always have a humble place; it would 
never be great like a tree. So it is with us here in the 
flesh. And the Lord puts each one in the place He designs 
for him. We shall learn better the lessons for the 
future by being placed under humble conditions now, 
where we may grow, where our entire loyalty to the 
Father's will may be fully tested, where all the beauties 
of our character may be the most fully developed. 



PASSOVER PROVING 
John 18:11; Psalm 116:13. 

The Cup my Father pours 

Shall I not drink? 
And precious, holy thoughts 

Shall I not think? 
And if His Love doth send 

Less joy than pain. 



And if all friends forsake. 
Shall I complain? 

If foes misrepresent 
And work me woes. 

Shall I not rest content 
Since Father knows? 

If where once friend I had 

I Judas find. 
Still Jesus holds me in 

His love entwined. 
He knew the love and loss 

Of faithless friend; 
He'll know each step I take 

Unto the end. 
His love enfolds me fast— 

I cannot fall. 
The Cup my Father pours— 

I'll drink it all. 

Hattie O. Henderson. 



R5875 : page 95 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
GERMAN SOLDIER'S NIGHT WATCHES 

BELOVED BRETHREN:- 

I wish to thank you for your labors in sending me THE 
WATCH TOWER and letters "To the Brethren in the Field," for 
it is joy to me to let you know with what eagerness I look 
forward to your mail. To me it is a holiday and a day of 
special grace whenever I receive anything which bears the 
stamp, "W. T. B. & T. Soc'y." I imagine myself in the midst 
of my brethren, reminiscences are being awakened, and before 
my mental eye appear forms so dear to my heart. While they 
all differ in form and character, in one thing they are all 
alike, that is the new mind. Gentle are their steps, their 
actions, their language, injuring none; but nevertheless full of 
power and firmness. These are my brethren in God's family, 
as I have come to know them. 

While we are separated in the flesh, the ties of Christian 
love unite us all the more firmly. 

A few hours ago in our march we passed through fields 
of corpses, and now night has settled. I am lying in my tent; 
not far distant, along the ridge of the forest, 21 -cm. howitzers 
are hurling their destructive projectiles, while about a mile 
and one-half further on rattles the gunfire of the infantry. 
The mere sound of it makes me shudder. To sleep is impossible. 
A rattling in my pocket, and the last WATCH TOWER, 
the Herald of Christ's Presence, has fully awakened me. I 
am reminded of the sixth verse of the 63rd Psalm: "When 
I remember Thee upon my bed, and meditate upon Thee in 



the night watches." O what peace fills my heart, and what 
precious hours of communion with my Father are my portion! 

Weeks ago I passed through Lemberg. The engineer of 
a machine shop to whom I spoke concerning the hope of the 
Jews, assured me that they are waiting for the Messiah. Only 
as I rode by on horseback was it possible to speak to some 
of the Jews. I laid my hand upon their shoulders and shouted 
into their ears: "Your Messiah is coming; I have been asked 
to tell you"! Astonishment, tears of joy and God-speed— and 
onward went the march. 

How far we still have to journey I know not; the Lord 
knows. But we well know that 

"Soon our conflicts and toils will be ended; 

We'll be tried and tempted no more. 
And mankind of all ages and nations 

Shall be blessed in that triumphant hour." 
Therefore, while we have such a glorious hope, let us who 
are His and are called by His Name, continue steadfast till 
we shall see Him whom we have loved so long. 
Faithfully your brother, MAX VON DER STEIL. 
(From German WATCH TOWER.) 

"THOU CROWNEDST THE YEAR" 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Greetings in the name of our Redeemer from the Class in 
St. Louis, with best wishes of the Season— a Merry Christmas 
and Happy New Year increased a hundredfold to you and 
the Bethel family! 

We wish to report to you the progress made by the Class 
during 1915, which now numbers about two hundred and 
fifty consecrated members. Seventy-six of these symbolized 
their consecration this year and two hundred and three partook 
of the Memorial supper. 

Twenty-three meetings are held weekly for Bible study, 
praise, prayer and testimony, etc. A number of public meetings 
have been held, in the Odeon, our best auditorium, and 
other halls, with a total attendance of about ten thousand. 

The PHOTO-DRAMA was again presented here this month. 
the Coliseum being used with most thorough publicity; eight 
performances were given with an average attendance of three 
thousand. The EUREKA DRAMA was sent out for one month 
to small towns near St. Louis, giving twelve performances 
with an average attendance of two hundred and fifty. Great 
interest was manifested. 

The pieces of literature distributed by the Class this year 
totals one million. 

We feel that every effort has been made to witness to the 
Truth in the city of St. Louis. It appears now that a clearly 
marked line is drawn between those who are friendly and 
those who reject and slander the Truth. 

We are indeed thankful for the great privilege that is ours 
and pray our Heavenly Father's continued blessing and guidance 
as we seek to do His will, knowing that it is all His 
work and that we can do nothing of ourselves. Our prayers 
are offered daily for you and all colaborers in the Master's 



service. With much Christian love, 
Your brother and fellow servant, 

J. H. HOEVELER, Secretary. 

BRETHREN HELP IMPOSTORS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

From time to time, in the Pilgrim service, I come across 
the trail of certain "false brethren" who appear to make it 
their business to travel from Class to Class, borrowing money 
from the brethren, with the plea that they are bound for a 
certain Colporteur field, etc., and have just run short of funds. 
These "gentlemen" seem to be fairly well posted on the main 
points of the Truth, and can talk glibly about Brother Russell 
and the Pilgrims, although, if the brethren were a little 
more cautious, frequent slips would betray these frauds. 

One of these men recently passed west through Montana, 
doubtless bound for the Pacific coast. He succeeded in bilking 
a number of the brethren. The plan followed is to secure 
the name of one of the brethren at some farther point, then, 
upon arrival, to "pump" this brother for detailed information 
about the other brethren in the Class— their financial standing, 
etc. This information is all too frequently advanced with 
surprising freedom. 

In my judgment such information furnished to strangers 
(even though pretended brethren) is wrong. The Bible 
House plan of giving out no information about the brethren, 
their names, addresses, etc., especially to strangers such as 
the above, could profitably be followed by all the brethren. 

Might it not be well, dear Brother, to repeat the warnings 
that have appeared from time to time in THE WATCH TOWER 
against these "false brethren" that the Classes may again be 
put on their guard? 

With assurance of my deep appreciation of your labors of 
love on behalf of all the flock, I am 

Your fellow-servant in the one Hope, 

W. A. BAKER.-Montana 

A DEDICATED TOY BANK 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

Please find enclosed our "Good Hopes" for 1916, and also 
$10 as part payment toward the same. We are very anxious 
to serve our dear Master, but there is so little we can do, 
although if we are a little more alert and thoughtful we can 
increase our donation to the "Good Hopes." 

At the beginning of the year we decided to have a toy 
bank and dedicate it to the interest of our "Good Hopes" 
(aside from our regular donation) and drop into it such 
money as should be saved on special occasions; for instance, 
if we walk to Prayer Meeting instead of riding, we drop in 
10 cents; or if one of the brethren pay our car fare, another 
nickel goes into the box; or if we decide to have some 
refreshments and for this reason deny ourselves, another 10 
or 20 cents goes into the box. Sometimes we have taxed 
ourselves a certain amount for foolish words or actions, etc. 



It was to my surprise on opening the bank today to find 
$2.98, which was accumulated within less than a month! So 
we expect by His grace to continue this plan and see how 
the dear Lord will bless our feeble efforts. Oh, that we 
could do more to manifest our appreciation of his unspeakable 
blessing to us! 

The time is almost over in which we shall have the privilege 
of ministering to the "Feet" of Him, because the last 
one of the "Feet" members will soon be glorified, and then 
they will not need our help. May God's blessing be upon 
you all! 

Faithfully yours in the One Hope, 

SHIELD H. TOUTGIAN AND WIFE. 

EUREKA DRAMA SHOWN IN STATION 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

I read your regrets in THE TOWER about the EUREKA 
DRAMAS lying idle and I regret the matter also. We try to 
make use of ours when we can, but the weather has been cold 
and expenses high. 

February 1, 2 and 3 my wife and I took the DRAMA to 
Black River, Mich. The three days cost us $8.43, and we 
were entertained free, at that. A French Catholic family 
entertained us and we gave the DRAMA in the R. R. Depot, 
which was a good place. It was well warmed. The stereopticon 
and graphophone were side by side, inside the ticket 
window. We had all the light we wanted for operating, 
while the auditorium was quite dark. We had as fine pictures 
with gas as I ever saw. 

In a town like Black River the passing of the EUREKA 
DRAMA was a great event and I believe other R. R. Depots 
could be obtained free of charge. Several persons walked 
five miles and back again every night to see the DRAMA! The 
audience was very quiet and needed no reminder. I am sure 
the Lord's hand was in the whole matter. We had about 
eighty persons each night. Yours in the service, 



page 96 

International Bible Students Association Classes 
STUDIES AND LECTURES BY MEMBERS OF THE PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 97 

VOL. XXXVII. APRIL 1 NO. 7 
A.D. 1916-A.M. 6044 

CONTENTS 

How are We Sanctified? 99 

How to Enter Heavenly Race ... 99 

Sanctified Through the Truth . . 100 
Quietness in the Midst of Storms . . 101 

Affliction No Proof of God's Disfavor 102 

Kept in Perfect Peace 102 

St. Peter and Cornelius 103 

End of Israel's "Seventy Weeks" . . 103 

The Only True Gospel 104 

Judgment of Quick and Dead . . . 104 
The Risen Christ 105 

The Scriptures Logical .... 106 

Order in the Resurrection . . .106 
The Ransom-Price and Its Application . 1 07 
Interesting Items 110 

Strong Delusions Urge on the War . 110 

Turkish Promises Trusted . . .111 
Interesting Letters Ill 

Drama Turning Point of Life . . .111 

Seed Sowed in Good Ground . . .111 

page 98 

MEMORIAL ANNIVERSARY APRIL 16TH 

After six o'clock p.m. on the above date, thousands of 
Bible Students all over the world will meet to celebrate the 
most important event of history— the death of Jesus, the 
World's Redeemer. 

All should properly approach the Lord's Table with 
clean hearts and clean hands— with consciences purged by 
faith in the merit of the cleansing blood. Our own best 
endeavors to attain purity need supplementing with our 
Savior's merit. 

Let us remember that in partaking of the emblems of 
our Lord's broken body and shed blood, we not only confess 
Him but profess to be His followers. His imitators— laying 
down our lives for the brethren. 

The New York City congregation will assemble at The 
Temple at 7:30 p.m. All trusting in the precious blood will 
be welcome. 



When ordering books, etc., please consult November 1st 
WATCH TOWER for price. 



TWO DUTCH BOOKLETS 

We have a small quantity of small Dutch Booklets: 

(1) "What Say The Scriptures Concerning Our Lord's 
Return— His Parousia, Epiphania and Apokalupsis?" 

(2) "The Hope of Israel in The Divine Plan." 
Five Cents each, postpaid. 

RE VOLUNTEER MATTER 

Some brethren write us that they are mailing four copies 
of B.S.M. to certain Voters' Lists, etc. We fear that this 
is wasting valuable ammunition, for Voters' Lists in many 
communities are not very desirable— and it would seem unwise 
to risk the waste of four numbers. Other dear friends have 
followed a similar course in their house-to-house distribution 
—putting several papers together. We cannot approve this 
method, either, dear Brethren. In our judgment there is 
quite enough interesting matter in each number of the 
B.S.M. to make one number of it sufficient for one distribution. 
It is for this reason that we issue Volunteer matter 
at intervals— and not several numbers together. We believe 
that those Classes which circulate the Volunteer numbers as 
they are issued, and one copy at a time, do the best work, 
as well as the most economical work. We request that all do 
this; we decline to send assorted lots for general distribution. 

We do recommend, however, that each Class keep on 
hand at its central meeting place a variety of the B.S.M., 
so that all the members of the Class can have access to these, 
should special numbers be desired for special individuals. 
Some of the numbers are not suitable for general circulation, 
but very important to have for special individuals— as, for instance, 
numbers treating with the Seventh Day Adventist doctrine, 
with Christian Science, Theosophy, Higher Criticism 
and Evolution. Similarly, a few copies of B.S.M. in foreign 
languages would be appropriate. 

We merely seek, dear friends, the largest amount of good 
as the result of our mutual endeavors to serve the King and 
His Truth-hungry people. We hope that our readers will 
see the matter as we see it. Be sure, always, of our desire 
to cooperate in every form of service that commends itself 
to us as reasonable and economical. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR MAY 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
May follow: (1) 83; (2) 8; (3) 259; (4) 12; (5) 267; (6) 303; 
(7) 7; (8) 235; (9) 197; (10) 105; (11) 204; (12) 199; (13) 
47; (14) 9; (15) 321; (16) 120; (17) 18; (18) 73; (19) 325; 
(20) 78; (21) 79; (22) 263; (23) 305; (24) 114; (25) 307; (26) 
28; (27) 19; (28) 22; (29) 240; (30) 40; (31)214. 



All cheques, drafts, money orders, etc., should be made 
out to WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. There are 
no exceptions to this rule. 



R5876 : page 99 

HOW ARE WE SANCTIFIED? 

For this is the will of God, even your 
sanctification."— v 1 Thessalonians 4:3". 

THE words of our text are addressed only to 
the saints of God, as are all the Apostolic 
Epistles. In respect to His people, this is 
God's will. His desire. His design— even 
their sanctification, their full setting apart 
from the world to Himself and His service. 
This is not God's will in the sense that He 
has determined that certain ones shall be 
sanctified; but it is His will that there shall 
be such a class; and it rests with each of the 
called whether or not he shall belong to this class. 

God has a great work to be accomplished, and hence 
He has a very particular reason for the selection of such 
a class. If we would be of this number when completed, 
we must make our calling and election sure by full compliance 
with the terms and conditions of the call, and this 
even unto death. We should bear in mind that the Lord 
is now selecting, electing, a sanctified class for a very 
special position, a very special work— First, for a thousand 
years they are to be associated with the Lord Jesus 
Christ in the regeneration of the whole world, including 
all who have lived since the time of Adam— for their uplift 
from sin and death to the heights of human perfection, 
from which Adam fell; and then they are to reign with 
Christ their Head and be associated with Him in all His 
future work throughout eternity. This is why it is called 
a High Calling, a Heavenly Calling. 

So the will of God referred to in this text is not the 
will of God concerning the world in the Ages to follow 
the present Age, nor is it His will concerning angels. It 
is His will for the Church, called to be the Bride of 
Christ, members of His Body. This great Call was never 
issued before this Age, nor will it ever be issued after its 
close. There can be but one Bride of Christ; and when 
this class shall have been completed, no addition to their 
number will ever be made. This Class have heard of the 
present grace of God offered through Christ and have 
accepted its terms and entered the race for the "Prize." 

The Apostle in our text is practically saying. Here we 
are as Christians, the called of God. Now, what is the one 
thing God would have us do? Would He have us keep a 



seventh day? Would He have us abstain from eating 
meat? Would He have us adopt some certain forms or 
idiosyncrasies? No. The will of God is our sanctification. 
There is a certain difference between the words 
sanctification and consecration, though they are sometimes 
used almost interchangeably. The word consecrate has 
the thought of surrender. Consecration is a definite step, 
taken at a certain moment. It is the yielding up of the 
will and of all to God. Whoever has not thus definitely 
surrendered his will, himself, to the Lord, has never made 
a real consecration. We believe that there is no step 
more necessary to be seen clearly by God's professed 
people than this one, and none more necessary to be made 

R5877 : page 99 

plain to others. The word sanctification not only has in 
it the thought of this definite and complete consecration 
at the beginning, but also takes in the entire process of 
transformation of character and preparation for the Kingdom. 
It progresses throughout the Christian course until 
the character is fully developed and ripened, and it must 
then be maintained until the end of the way. 

HOW TO ENTER THE HEAVENLY RACE 

Many professed Christians do not see the initial step 
of full consecration as essential to one who would be a 
follower of Christ. In our conversation with people many 
tell us that they have been trying for years to be children 
of God, that they have been for years seeking to do God's 
will and live a holy life. We try always to get these 
down to the particular point: Have you begun right? 
Have you been trying to run the Christian race on the 
outside or on the inside? Then they ask us what we mean. 
And we tell them that the matter is like a race-course, 
where there is a certain prize offered, with certain definite 
rules and regulations. The person who is to run in the 
race must be entered in the regular way. The contract 
must be made and signed. The man must agree to all the 
conditions. Then lie will be entered as a contestant, and 
must run on the prescribed track and for the goal. 

Now another, who had failed to make this contract 
and to enter the race in the prescribed manner, might run 
around and around on the outside of the track. He might 
run as fast and as well as those on the inside. He might 
boastingly say, "I can beat any one running on that 
track!" But would he gain the prize? Assuredly not. 
He would be only amusing himself or wasting his breath 
and his strength. The real race was run on that track. 
He had failed to meet the prescribed conditions, and all 
his running would be in vain so far as gaining the prize 
was concerned. And so it is with one who endeavors to 
live a Christian life without first having carefully learned 
and met the conditions and terms required in order to 
become a real disciple of Christ, and be recognized of the 



Father as His child. 

We believe that this is the trouble with many who call 
themselves Christians. Many who talk with us express 
good desires and all that, but we pin them right down to 

R5877 : page 100 

the point: "Have you made a full consecration to God?" 
We had a case of this kind only recently— a gentleman 
who has now called upon us twice. In our conversation 
at his last visit we said, "Well, you remember what we 
spoke about when you were here before." He replied 
that he had been praying. We then told him that he had 
no right to pray, that he could not properly pray until he 
had an Advocate with the Father; for the Father does not 
hear sinners. We said, "You cannot pray until you have 
surrendered your will to God. And all access to the 
Father must be through the Advocate. 'No man cometh 
to the Father, but by Me.' There is a definite way. It 
is not that you can go in your way and I in mine. All the 
terms of discipleship are laid down by the Lord Himself. 
'If any man will be My disciple,' said the Lord Jesus, 'let 
him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow Me.' 
Unless we take this step of denying ourselves, yielding 
up ourselves to the Lord, we may do a variety of things- 
go to Church, etc., etc., and yet not be Christians. We are 
not Christians until we have accepted Jesus as our Redeemer, 
and made a consecration to God through Christ." 

TWO PARTS TO SANCTIFICATION 

In one Scripture we read, "Sanctify yourselves, and 
I will sanctify you." This means. Set yourselves apart to 
God, and He will set you apart. We have a part in this 
work and God has a part. If we make a full consecration, 
God will consecrate us; He will accept us and set us apart 
for Himself. He gives us the indication of this acceptance 
in the begetting of His Holy Spirit. Such soon 
begin to realize that they have a new mind, a new disposition, 
a new heart. It is of this class that the Apostle 
Paul is speaking in our text. "This is the will of God" 
concerning you, "even your sanctification"— you who 
have consecrated yourselves to Him and whom He has 
accepted and consecrated, has set apart for His service. 

The acceptance of us by the Father is only the beginning 
of the sanctifying work. And it is His will that this 
work should continue and progress in us, to its full completion. 
This sanctifying work should affect our minds, 
our hands, our eyes, our ears, our tongues— our all— that 
we may be fully used of the Lord. It is the will that is 
given up at first, and the will, of course, includes the service 
of our mortal body. 

But this body has natural tendencies of its own. The 
giving up of the will means that the individual will seek 
to bring every thought, word and act into subjection to 
the will of God. It is one thing for the will to be made 



holy, and another thing to bring the mind and the body 
fully into line with this holiness of the will. The will is 
present with us, but how to perform is the problem. Not 
only are our wills to maintain this sanctified state, but we 
are to broaden our appreciation of the Lord's will for us, 
and thus have more and more of the spirit of sacrifice. 

SANCTIFIED THROUGH THE TRUTH 

Now what powers, what spiritual forces, are there that 
will aid us in this work of sanctification? Our Lord 
Jesus, in His last prayer to the Father before His death, 
prayed, "Sanctify them through Thy Truth; Thy Word is 
Truth." ("John 17:17".) Here He gives us the key as to 
how this work of sanctification will proceed. The one 
who consecrates himself to God will not at first have a full 
knowledge of himself or of sin. He is only a babe at the 
beginning. But he is to be helped onward by the power 
of the revealed Word, by the Message of Truth. How 
will this Message sanctify? The Apostle Paul answers 
that thus God works in us both to will and to do His good 
pleasure. He gives us in His Word exceeding great and 
precious promises. He gives us counsel and admonition. 
And as these enter our heart and impress themselves upon 
us, through the illumination of the Holy Spirit, we are 
constrained to work out in ourselves the peaceable, precious 
fruits of righteousness and holiness. 

We realize that by faithfully walking in the narrow 
way which our Master walked, we shall be pleasing to 
our God and shall receive an exceeding great reward, 
even joint-heirship with Christ to "an inheritance incorruptible 
and undefiled, that fadeth not away, reserved in 
Heaven for us who are kept by the power of God through 
faith unto salvation, ready to be revealed in the last time." 
(" 1 Peter 1:4,5".) Thus we see how very important is the 
Word of Truth in this sanctifying process, whether we 
receive this Truth from the reading of the Bible or from 
a hymn or from the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES or however. 
Whatever impresses upon our hearts the Word of 
God and increases our measure of the Holy Spirit is a 
part of that which does the sanctifying work. 

THE METHOD OF SANCTIFICATION 

There is another text which tells us how we are to be 
sanctified. It declares that by God's will "we are sanctified, 
through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ 
once for all." ("Hebrews 10:10".) The Apostle's thought 
here is that we were not sanctified in the beginning, but 
"were children of wrath, even as others." We could not 
sanctify ourselves; and the offering of the body of Jesus 
Christ, the sacrifice of His untainted life for us, was the 
basis whereby we might become God's sanctified people. 
No amount of consecration could have made us the people 
of God unless, first of all, the foundation for this should 
be made in the sacrifice of Jesus Christ. His sacrifice 



opened the way. His merit cleansed us and made us 
acceptable to Jehovah. 

Again, we read that we are of the Elect, "through 
sanctification of the Spirit." (~ 1 Peter 1:2".) When we 
present ourselves in consecration, we are next accepted 
and begotten of the Spirit. This acceptance and begetting 
sets us apart; it inducts us into the Body of the 
Anointed. The spirit of the Truth inspires us and guides 
us in the Heavenly way. It first showed us that we were 
sinners needing a Savior. Next it showed us how to 
present ourselves to God. And after we had taken the 
steps thus shown, and were accepted as sons of God, it 
led us on step by step into the fulness of the stature of 
men in Christ. Thus the Spirit, through the Word, brings 
about our complete sanctification. 

We are told again that it is "the blood of the Covenant 
wherewith we are sanctified." ('Hebrews 10:29".) How 
is this? God has made a great Covenant with the Church. 
It was first made with the Head of this Church, and then 
with those who are to constitute His Body. It is a 
Covenant of Sacrifice. Jehovah said, prophetically through 
the Psalmist, "Gather My saints [My holy ones. My sanctified 
ones] together unto Me; those who have made a 
Covenant with Me by sacrifice." ("Psalm 50:5".) The 
way to come into this class thus called and gathered is to 
accept the terms laid down by Jehovah Himself. No one 
comes into this class except by the blood of the Covenant. 

When our Lord Jesus entered into a Covenant with 
the Father, it was by the consecration of Himself at baptism. 
This consecration was carried out and finished in 
His death on Calvary. There the shedding of His blood 
—the sacrifice of His life— was finished. There was no 
other way to fulfil His Covenant. It was necessary that 
He do all this that He might enter into His own glory as 
well as be the Savior of the world. And we who have 
become His Body members must make this same Covenant 
with the Father. We are to drink with Him His Cup of 

R5878 : page 101 

suffering and death. We are to lay down our lives as He 
laid His down. Our blood is to be shed, our human lives 
are to be sacrificed, with His. There is no virtue in our 
blood other than it is made acceptable by the imputation 
of Christ's merit. But by this imputation, we, as members 
of His Body, share in His sacrifice. So our death is like 
His, a sacrificial death; and our blood is counted in as 
His blood. Thus by partaking in the blood of the Covenant, 
the blood of the sacrificial Covenant, the blood which 
is to seal the New Covenant, we are sanctified. This 
laying down of our lives is a gradual work, in its actual 
carrying out, as was that of our Lord's. It is the work of 
sanctification, progressing until its completion in death. 

So it is true that we are sanctified through the Truth, 
which becomes illuminated to us through the Holy Spirit. 
The offering of the body of Jesus opened the way to this 



sanctification. And our Covenant of Sacrifice gives us a 
participation in the "blood of the Covenant," and this 
means our full sanctification unto death. Whoever does 
not share in the drinking of Christ's Cup, in His sacrificial 
death, will have no part in the Kingdom. The world will 
have a share in the eating of the Bread that came down 
from Heaven; but to be members of Christ's Body of 
sacrifice it is necessary that we also drink of His blood, 
and share with Him in His death. We are to be conformed 
unto His death that we may share in His resurrection, 
the First (Chief) Resurrection. The world are 
to have no part in the drinking of the Cup. The blood of 
the Covenant wherewith we (the Church) are sanctified 
is to seal the New Covenant for the whole world. It is 
not sealed as yet; for the sacrificing is not yet completed. 
The Law Covenant was a type of the New Covenant, soon 
to be inaugurated. The Law Covenant was sealed by the 
blood of the typical bullock and goat. So the New Covenant 
will be sealed by the blood of the "better sacrifices." 

SPRINKLING OF BLOOD, TYPE AND ANTITYPE 

This is all an unmerited favor to the goat class. As in 
the type, when the Law Covenant was instituted, Moses 
took the blood of bullocks and goats, and sprinkled first 
the book of the Law, thus typically satisfying God's Justice, 
and then sprinkled "all the people," so in the antitype, 
the blood of the antitypical bullock and goat sprinkle 
first the Law, satisfying Justice on behalf of the entire 
world; and then the blood sprinkles "all the people." the 
whole world, who are dead in Adam. This will mean the 
Restitution, to be gradually attained by the world in the 
incoming Age as the result of the Ransom-sacrifice and 
its application on their behalf. This will be accomplished 
by the Millennial Reign of The Christ, Head and Body. 

It may be asked. Why were there many bullocks and 
goats offered in the type, when there is only one bullock 
and one goat in the antitype? Why the difference? We 
reply. There is no difference. It was merely the duplication 
of the bullock and goat in the type. But why? Because 
it required much more blood than one bullock and 
one goat would supply, to sprinkle all Israel. But there 
is no difference in the thought. It typified the work of 
the one bullock and the one goat in antitype. 

It is a marvelous privilege to be of this Lord's goat 
class, the sanctified in Christ Jesus, who are to share with 
Him in His sufferings of the present time and then to 
reign with Him throughout eternal ages of glory. Let us 
prove to God our appreciation of this glorious calling, by 
faithfulness even unto death. 



R5878:page 101 

QUIETNESS IN THE MIDST OF STORMS 



"When He giveth quietness, who then 
can make trouble?"— "Job 34:29". 

ELIHU, the speaker of these words, was a 
young man who lived in Job's day— supposedly 
in llie lime of Abraham. He was 
one of the four friends of Job who called 
upon him in his adversity to comfort him. 
Being the youngest of all, he hesitated to 
speak as freely as did the other three friends 
of Job. He had heard them speak, and had 
discerned where they had made mistakes. 

The fact that certain words are recorded 
in the Bible does not necessarily mean that they are inspired 
of God or even that they are true. We remember 
having in our youth a discussion with some one who 
finally quoted us a passage of Scripture which seemed to 
be in conflict with all the other Scriptures. We said, "If 
that is Scripture, we would like to know it." Our opponent 
looked it up and found that it read, "And the 
Devil said," so and so. Surely there is no reason to believe 
that the Devil is inspired— no reason to believe that 
the Devil's words are inspired. 

These words spoken by Elihu were as wise as any 
spoken by Job's comforters— probably wiser; but they 
were surely human wisdom, so far as we can discern. 
When Elihu put this question, "When He giveth quietness, 
who then can make trouble?" he was seeking to 
draw a line in this criticism of Job, being averse to an 
extreme position, yet agreeing neither with Job nor his 
other friends. Job's three friends had been arguing that 
he must have done some very wicked deeds, and that as 
a result his camels and his cattle were destroyed— in fact 
all of his property, everything he possessed, as well as his 
children. He had lost all his ten children and lost also 
the affection of his wife. And these comforters were trying 
to have him admit that he had committed some great 
crime and that God was angry with him. Still Job insisted 
that he had been doing his very best— not that he 
claimed to be perfect, but he had been striving to live a 
godly life, a just and honorable life. 

ELIHU'S SOUND REASONING 

So when Job had gotten through with his argument 
and his three friends had gotten through with theirs, Elihu 
said (we paraphrase), "Job, you admit that you are in 
trouble. Now if God had given you quietness, who could 
make you trouble? He has surely purposed that this 
trouble come upon you." 

Elihu defended God. He claimed that the Lord had 
evidently designed that Job should not have peace and 
prosperity longer; otherwise these adversities could not 
have come upon him. Whatever was the reason for it, 
Job's calamity evidently was not accidental. There must 



have been a Divine hand in the matter. Even if Satan 
had sent all these difficulties and trials, he could not have 
done so unless God had permitted it. No one could have 
thwarted the Divine arrangement and will. Elihu contended 
with Job that the Lord had the right and the power 
to decide, that Job had not. He showed distinctly the 
Power and the rightful authority of God to order in all 
the affairs of life, and incidentally showed that Job was 
more righteous than all his associates; that while he was 
a sinner, yet not on this account was he being afflicted. 
We may profitably get a thought from this discourse 
given by Elihu. Here is a process of reasoning used by 
a man away back in the past— about the time that the 
Evolutionists tell us man was a monkey. Pretty sound 
reasoning for a monkey! Many of our college presidents 
would do no better today. It is sound logic. 

R5878 : page 102 

AFFLICTION NO PROOF OF GOD'S DISFAVOR 

We also see that Job was not a great sinner. On the 
contrary, we have every reason to believe that he was a 
true Prophet of God, a true servant of God. He was one 
whom the Bible tells us God especially loved. This is 
shown in "Ezekiel 14: 19,20". "If I send a pestilence into 
that land, and pour out My fury upon it in blood, to cut 
off from it man and beast, though Noah, Daniel and Job 
were in it, as I live, saith the Lord God, they shall deliver 
neither son nor daughter; they shall but deliver their own 
souls by their righteousness." Again, the Apostle says, 
"Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the 
end of the Lord; that the Lord is very pitiful and of 
tender mercy."— "James 5: 1 P. 

It is quite true that Job's trouble could not have come 
upon him if God had not permitted it. If God had wished 
him to have quietness, no one could have made him 
trouble. But He permitted trial to come to test His 
servant, just as He permits trouble to come upon His 
Church, and as He permitted it to come upon His well-beloved 
Son. He permitted that men should do all 
manner of evil against His Son— should scoff at Him, 
should spit upon Him, should smite Him, should scourge 
Him, and finally crucify Him. The Lord has not always 
given quietness in these cases, but often trouble. 

The lesson of the text for those who have put themselves 
in God's care, is that no one can make them trouble 
without Divine permission. The Lord tells us that during 
this Gospel Age He will make all things work together 
for good to His children, and that He will not 
suffer us to be tempted above what we are able to bear, 
("1 Corinthians 10:13\) In our Lord's case it pleased 
Jehovah to bruise Him, to allow suffering and death to 
come upon Him. ("Isaiah 53:10".) It pleased God to 
adopt this Plan for the recovery of the world, because 
it best illustrates His Justice, His Wisdom, His Love 



and His Power. It also resulted in great honor and glory 
to our Lord Jesus. 

As concerns the Lord's people, there might be certain 
matters relating to dispensational changes that could best 
be accomplished through severe trials coming upon them. 
Then, additionally, God wishes certain trials to come upon 
His people because He desires them to trust Him where 
they cannot trace Him. He wishes them to have unwavering 

R5879 : page 102 

faith in Him. The children of God, then, can 
take these words of our text in a very different way from 
that originally suggested to Job by Elihu. We may truly 
say, "When God giveth quietness, who then can make 
trouble?" We recognize that there is a certain quietness 
and rest of heart that all the Lord's saints may enjoy. 
We realize this even when He permits severe trouble. 
The Apostle Paul in his Epistle to the Hebrews says, 
"We who have believed do enter into rest." We enter 
into rest by coming into the attitude where we can believe, 
where we can and do exercise entire trust in God. 
Sometimes outward difficulties are helpful in overcoming 
a wrong spirit. The Lord's people are not discouraged 
by the things that would utterly crush out the vitality 
and the courage of others. They get the wrong spirit pounded 
out of them; but it is the hand of love that administers 
the blows, and the Lord knows just how many and how 
severe ones are needed. 

KEPT IN PERFECT PEACE 

"Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is 
stayed on Thee." ("Isaiah 26:3".) This thought is very 
precious to us as New Creatures. "The peace of God 
which passeth all understanding," is to rule and keep our 
minds and hearts. ("Philippians 4:7".) We are to count 
the things of the present life as not worthy of comparison 
with the glories of eternity. And so the Apostle says, 
"For our light affliction which is but for a moment, worketh 
for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of 
glory, while we look not at the things which are seen, 
but at the things which are not seen; for the things which 
are seen are temporal; but the things which are not seen 
are eternal." ("2 Corinthians 4:17,18".) When our minds 
are stayed on the Lord, and we take the proper view of 
our experiences, we can sing with the poet: 
"No storm can shake our inmost calm. 
While to this Refuge clinging." 

We have peace, no matter what the outward conditions 
may be. The trials and the difficulties of life come to the 
Lord's people commingled with joys— the rain and storm, 
then the sunshine. They enjoy all righteous pleasures 
that are in harmony with their consecration. They learn 
to cultivate patience in trial, knowing that patience works 
out experience, and experience works out more and more 



that hope which maketh not ashamed.— 'Romans 5:3-5". 

So, then, it is to the Christian that our text brings the 
assurance that when God gives quietness, none can make 
trouble. They "shall say all manner of evil against you 
falsely for My sake," said the Master, but then we are to 
"rejoice and be exceeding glad." "Let not your heart be 
troubled." ("Matthew 5:1 1"; 'John 14:1\) We think our 
text very precious when viewed from our standpoint. 

TROUBLE NECESSARY TO OUR PROVING 

Our Heavenly Father designs that various kinds of 
trouble shall come upon us, that these may develop and 
prove our characters. It is a part of the Divine Plan to 
permit us to have experiences of affliction. ("Psalm 1 19:67,71,75"; 
"34:19,20".) So when we see God's people in 
trouble or trial today we are not to say that God is 
against them. We are each to demonstrate our willingness 
to suffer according to His will, and often to suffer 
unjustly. Our Lord set us an example of cheerful, patient 
submission to God's will. We are to walk in His footsteps. 
And we have the example of the Apostles, when 
trials and difficulties and persecutions came upon them; 
and the example of other saints all down the Age. 

Trouble is not necessarily a sign of the disfavor of 
God. On the contrary, we know that "many are the 
afflictions of the righteous," and that "All that will live 
godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution." The 
Truth will cost them something. Faithfulness to the Lord 
will cost them much. As the Apostle says, "If ye be 
without chastisement [discipline, training], then are ye 
bastards and not sons." ("Hebrews 2:8".) If God gives 
peace of heart, who can upset the one who is thus in 
harmony with God, in whom this peace of heart is 
ruling? This, then, is the greatest blessing of all. And 
He grants this peace to those who are faithfully striving 
to walk in the footsteps of Jesus. We have a Refuge 
which none but His own can know. No harm can reach 
us within this Shelter; no storm can shake us from our 
moorings, for we are securely anchored to the Rock of 
Ages. "And we know that all things work together for 
good to those who love God, to the called according to 
His Purpose." ("Romans 8:28".) And as Job's after blessings 
far outweighed his brief trials, so it will be with 
the Lord's saints today. 

"What though my joys and comfort die! 
The Lord, my Savior, Iiveth; 

What though the darkness gather round! 
Songs in the night He giveth. 

No storm can shake my inmost calm. 
While to that Refuge clinging; 

Since Christ is Lord of Heaven and earth, 
How can I keep from singing?" 



R5879:page 103 

ST. PETER AND CORNELIUS 

-APRIL 16.- ACTS 10:l-16,24-48\- 

CORNELIUS, THE FIRST GENTILE CONVERT TO CHRISTIANITY 
-BEGINNING OF A NEW DISPENSATION-EXPIRATION OF 
ISRAEL'S "SEVENTY WEEKS" OF EXCLUSIVE FAVOR- 
ST. PETER'S VISION-'MIDDLE WALL OF PARTITION" BROKEN 
DOWN-THE GOSPEL PREACHED TO THE GENTILES- 
"WORDS WHEREBY THOU SHALT BE SAVED." 

There is no distinction between Jew and Greek; for the same 

Lord over all, is rich unto all that call upon him,"— 'Romans 10:12". 

CORNELIUS, the Roman centurion, was evidently 

converted to God and righteousness 

years prior to the incident which forms today's 

Study. Although he was a worshiper 

of the true God, a benevolent almsgiver, 

and although his love of righteousness and 

his consistent life were recognized amongst 

those with whom he had to do, yet something 

was necessary before he could be accepted 

of God in the proper sense of the 

word. There is a lesson here for those who imagine that 

a reverence of God and morality is all that is necessary 

to Divine acceptance. As Cornelius had these qualities 

in large measure for some time before his acceptance, 

the Lord's dealing with him may well be a guide for all 

who desire to approach Him in covenant relationship. 

Although devout, as we have seen, Cornelius was not 
a Jew; and he realized that he was outside of the pale of 
Divine favor. Still he prayed to God. While we are not 
told for what he prayed, yet in harmony with the records 
we may readily suppose that he prayed for enlightenment 
respecting the Divine character and Plan, and for a closer 
approach and realization of Divine favor and acceptance. 

Perhaps Cornelius had heard of Jesus of Nazareth, 
and was perplexed on this very subject. Perhaps this 
perplexity led him to the earnest prayers which the Lord 
saw fit to answer in a miraculous manner, sending an 
angel to assure the centurion that his prayers and his 
alms were appreciated of the Lord as memorials of his 
piety. The angel intimated that something further than 
prayers and good deeds was necessary. But the additional 
tilings the angel was not commissioned to tell. 
Cornelius needed to know of the Lord Jesus from the 
true standpoint. He must exercise faith in our Lord 
as his Redeemer, before the memorials of his piety would 
count for anything with God or bring him into the desired 
relationship and under the Divine favor. 

The angel instructed Cornelius to send for the Apostle 
Peter, and also informed him that certain words which 
St. Peter would tell him were of importance— essential to 



his further progress in knowledge and in faith, and 
through these into Divine favor. The centurion's readiness 
of mind is shown by the promptness of his obedience. 
He not only prayed, but prepared to cooperate with God 
in the answering of his own prayer. 

The three persons sent to bring St. Peter down to 
Caesarea, all of whom feared God, give us good evidence 
that this Gentile, who was feeling after God and striving 
to the best of his ability to please and honor Him, had not 
been hiding his light under a bushel. It had shone out 
not only before his family and his servants, but before 
the soldiers under his control. This is the kind of man 
whom God delights to acknowledge, whatever may be his 
nationality or the color of his skin; and all such are recognized 
of the Lord and favored above others with light and 
truth— ever since the close of Natural Israel's special 
favor. There is a lesson here that some of the Lord's 
people need. It is that they should let the light of the 
Truth shine through them upon all with whom they come 
into contact; that the spirit of devotion should pervade 
every family, every household, including the servants. 

Evidently Cornelius was full of faith in the Lord. He 
did not wait to see whether St. Peter would come. He 
knew that the Apostle would come. He had faith in the 
Lord's promises through the angel. Accordingly he 
gathered together his friends, his relatives and his household 
—those upon whom he had been exercising an influence. 
Apparently they were like himself— earnestly 
desirous of learning all that they could concerning the 
way of life— the way of reconciliation and harmony with 
God. as well as all the principles which He represents. 



END OF ISRAEL'S "SEVENTY WEEKS" 

Meantime St. Peter, with all the prejudice belonging 
to the Jews for centuries, needed to be prepared to receive 
this first out-and-out Gentile brought into the Church. 
This was done by means of a vision. On the following 
day the Apostle, with six brethren from Joppa, went 
down to the centurion's home— "doubting nothing"; for 
evidently the Lord was leading him in the matter. Of all 
the disciples, St. Peter was the best one to be chosen for 
this work; first, because of his impetuous disposition and 
his zeal to follow the Lord's directions quickly and 
heartily; second, because, he being the oldest of the 
Apostles, and in many respects the most influential, his 
course would have the greater weight with the others. 

It is difficult for us to conceive the prejudice which 
the Jews had entertained for centuries against any 
thought that the Gentiles might become fellow-heirs with 
them in the Abrahamic Promise. They considered it a 
settled matter that God's favor had been set apart to 
their nation; and that it could not possibly go outside of 
that nation to others, in the sense of making those others 
equally acceptable to God. These views were based upon 



three facts; first, God's Promise to Abraham, "In thy 
Seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed"; 
second, the Israelites were not permitted to have general 
dealings with the Gentiles or to intermarry with them; 
third, added to all this, the Jewish rulers had to some 
extent exaggerated these differences. 

But now a new dispensation had come. The "seventy 
weeks" of favor to Natural Israel had expired; and the 
Lord began to extend His favor beyond the Jews— as we 
have already seen, to the Ethiopian eunuch. According to 
Divine prophecy, these "seventy weeks," or 490 years, had 
been specifically set aside as a period of favor to the 
Jewish nation. It had been foretold that at the beginning 
of the last seven years, "week," of that period Messiah 
would come; and that in the exact middle of those seven 
years Messiah would be cut off in death, not for His own 
sins, but for the sins of the people. It had been foretold 
that the prophecy would be marked by the anointing of 
"the most holy" at Pentecost; and that the end of the 
seventieth week would also be marked as the termination 
of God's exclusive favor to Israel. It was so marked by 
the sending of the Gospel Message to Cornelius and by 
his begetting of the Holy Spirit, after he had believed the 
Message.-'Daniel 9:22-27\ 



"WORDS WHEREBY THOU SHALT BE SAVED" 

When St. Peter arrived at the home of Cornelius, the 
centurion recognized him as God's appointed servant for 
bringing this Message to him; and he prostrated himself 
at the Apostle's feet in worship. Instead of looking down 
upon the Jew, and instead of thinking of himself as a 
representative of the greatest government in the world, 

R5879 : page 104 

Cornelius was filled with the spirit of humility. The fact 
that his visitor represented the Lord called forth from 
him some of the same feelings that were filling his heart 
in respect to the Lord Himself— feelings of reverence. 

But if Cornelius was noble and humble, the Apostle 
Peter showed himself to be no less noble and loyal to 
God; for at once he began to lift up the centurion, saying, 
"Stand up; I myself also am a man." St. Peter commends 
himself to our hearts by this noble course, by this 
refusal to receive unauthorized homage. He saved himself 
also from a great deal of trial by thus promptly disowning 
supernatural honor and authority, by recognizing 
his true position— that he was only a broken and emptied 
vessel, distinguished only because the Lord had been 
pleased to fill him with the Holy Spirit and to use him as 
a vessel of mercy and truth. 

Not many today are disposed to offer worship to fellow 
creatures; and not many— except high dignitaries of the 



nominal churches, such as popes and prelates— consent to 
receive worship. But all such have a rebuke in the course 
of St. Peter on this occasion. In our day there is little 
danger, perhaps, that any of the brethren would receive 
too much honor of men; for the spirit of our time is running 
in the opposite direction. Nevertheless, wherever a 
spirit of worship is manifest, it becomes the duty of the 
brother to whom it is offered to refuse it and to point to 
the Lord as the real Benefactor of us all— the One from 
whom cometh every good and perfect gift, by whatever 
channels He may be pleased to use. 

Entering the house and finding a congregation of earnest. 
God-fearing Gentiles assembled, St. Peter asked the 
pointed question, "For what intent have ye sent for me?" 
Cornelius then related something of his past experience, 
his desire for fellowship with God, his endeavor to live 
in a manner pleasing to God, the vision that he had received, 
and now the Apostle's arrival in response to that 
vision, and his own expectancy that he was about to hear 
what had been promised him— "words whereby thou and 
all thy house shall be saved."— v Acts 11:14'. 

Cornelius was not saved by his almsgiving, not saved 
by his prayers, nor yet by the Message which St. Peter 
delivered. But the Apostle's Message— "words"— explaining 
matters, enabled Cornelius and his household to grasp 
by faith the great redemption which is in Christ Jesus— 
and thus to be saved. Saved at once from alienation from 
God, and from condemnation as sinners, they received a 
foretaste of the complete salvation to be granted unto 
them at the Second Coming of our Lord. 



THE ONLY TRUE GOSPEL 

We note with keen interest the Apostle's preaching, 
that we may clearly discern the life-giving Message which 
he brought and from which Cornelius and his associates 
derived their saving faith. St. Peter's discourse was the 
same Gospel Message which he had delivered repeatedly 
before. The theme was Jesus and the sacrifice for sins 
which He accomplished when He died on the cross. It 
was the Message of the hope of a resurrection from the 
dead through Christ Jesus, as attested by His resurrection 
by the mighty Power of God. It was the Message that, 
our risen Lord having appeared in the presence of God 
for the Church, the Father is now pleased to accept sinners 
on condition of faith, reverence, and obedience to 
righteousness according to ability. 

St. Peter's discourse was "the old, old Story," which 
to many has become tedious and distasteful, but which to 
every soul in the right attitude is the Father's Message 
of forgiveness of sins and of reconciliation through the 
death of His Son. There is no other Gospel; and those 
who present another message are not, in their service, 
ambassadors for God, messengers and mouthpieces of His 
Holy Spirit.- v Galatians 1:6-12". 



The Apostle Paul tells us that "It pleased God through 
the foolishness of preaching to save them which believe." 
CI Corinthians l:21-25\) That is, it pleased God to adopt 
this method of declaring the Truth respecting His Plan 
of redemption and to accept and justify those who would 
believe and accept this testimony. Today the testimony 
may reach through letters, tracts or books, or through 
oral preaching. It matters not in what manner the true 
Message is delivered and received; but invariably the 
Message goes through the human channel, and not 
through angels nor by the operation of the Holy Spirit 
aside from human agents. 

We are to bear in mind these lessons of God's methods 
and are to apply them in connection with the affairs of 
life. We are not to expect the Lord to move upon or 
instruct our friends or kindred or neighbors, but are to remember 
that He has conferred this honor upon His Royal 
Priesthood. Accordingly we are to be not slothful in 
business, but fervent in spirit, serving the Lord— serving 
the Truth in any and every manner open to us. 



THE JUDGMENT OF QUICK AND DEAD 

After telling the Message itself, St. Peter explained 
to Cornelius that Jesus had commanded His Apostles to 
testify to the people that it is He who was ordained of 
God to be the Judge of the quick and the dead. The coming 
judgment, or trial, of the world is an important part 
of the Gospel Message, and is not to be neglected in the 
preaching of the Gospel. 

What advantage could accrue to the world through 
Christ's death if there were no future judgment or trial 
for them? All were judged once in the person of Adam; 
and his condemnation passed upon all. ("Romans 5:12"; 
" 1 Corinthians 15:22".) The world needs no further judgment 
along the lines of the Adamic transgression and its 
weaknesses. The judgment for that transgression was 
complete, and nothing could be added. The Judge was 
Jehovah Himself; the sentence was death. 

But now the Gospel includes the fact that Christ is to 
be the Judge of the world. This signifies that a new 
trial for life is to be accorded to Adam and his race. 
This fact of itself implies a release from the original 
death sentence, a redemption from Adam's sentence, and 
an individual trial to determine which members of the 
redeemed race will be accounted worthy of life everlasting. 
Yes; this is the "good tidings of great joy which 
shall be unto all people"— even though the Adversary has 
deluded the vast majority into thinking to the contrary— 
that no new trial such as Adam had at first is to be 
granted to the whole world, bought with the precious 
blood of Christ. 

All are witnesses that this trial could not have begun 
before Jesus became the Judge. Hence none of those who 
had died during the four thousand years preceding His 



earthly ministry could have been judged by Him. None 

of them could have been on trial for life eternal. All 

should likewise be aware of the fact that the world in 

general has not been on trial since our Redeemer was appointed 

Judge, and that it is not on trial today; that, on 

the contrary, the great mass of the world neither knows 

the Judge nor understands the Law, nor has any conception 

of the requirements necessary to life everlasting. 

This agrees exactly with St. Peter's statement under 
consideration and also with that of St. Paul, "God hath 
appointed a Day in the which He will judge the world in 
righteousness by that Man whom He hath ordained." 

R5879 : page 105 

CActs 17:31\) As the Apostle indicates, that Day was 
still future in his time; and it is still future. From other 
Scriptures we learn that this Day is the Millennial Day 
—"a Day with the Lord, a thousand years." The only 
judgment— trial— since our Lord's resurrection has been 
to the Church, to determine the question of life or death 
eternal. The Church, as Spiritual Israel, has had much 
advantage every way over the remainder of mankind; 
for during this Gospel Age this class are being "called 
of God according to His purpose"— that the more than 
overcomers may be joint-heirs with Jesus in His future 
work of judging the world.— v 2 Peter 3:7,8'; " 1 Cor. 6:2\ 



THE GOSPEL TO THE GENTILES 

Cornelius and his devout associates had been waiting 
for just such a Message of Divine grace; and as the 
words fell from the Apostle's lips, they were quickly and 
gladly appropriated in the hearts of his hearers, who 
were by this lime accepting Jesus with the same fulness 
of appreciation as St. Peter himself. Their hearts being 
thus in the right condition before God, it would have 
been appropriate for the Apostle to say to them, "Now, 
brethren, your proper course will be to be baptized into 
Jesus by a water baptism, symbolizing your full consecration 
to be dead with Him, as His faithful followers." 

But St. Peter was not ready to make such a step, we 
may be sure. He was surprised that God was willing 
that the Gentiles should even know about the wonderful 
provisions of salvation in Jesus, which of itself would be 
a blessing. But he was not yet prepared to expect that 
the Gentiles would be received of the Lord on practically 
the same terms and with exactly the same manifestations 
of Divine favor as were the Jews. To make good his insufficiency 
of knowledge along this line— and as a lesson 
to him also— the Holy Spirit was given to Cornelius and 
his companions without the laying on of hands— in the 
same manner that it was bestowed upon the assembly in 
Jerusalem at Pentecost. 



St. Peter quickly learned the lesson; and undoubtedly 
his readiness to learn it was in large measure due to his 
humility and sincerity of heart, the fulness of his consecration 
to the Lord and his desire that the Divine will 
should be done in every particular. The Apostle and his 
companions from Joppa— "they of the circumcision"— 
were astonished at God's favor upon the Gentiles. Yet 
they were not envious. They were glad to welcome as 
cleansed, as brothers, all whom the Lord indicated that 
He had received into His fellowship. 

The result of this outpouring of the Spirit was a grand 
testimony meeting. The record is that they "magnified 
God," praising Him, rejoicing in their acceptance, etc. 
Then St. Peter drew their attention to the symbolical 
baptism and the propriety of observing it. We are not 
given his argument on the subject. Possibly he explained 
that in thus publicly symbolizing their consecration to 
the Lord they would be strengthening their own faith, 
buttressing their own determination to live and die the 
Lord's. Possibly, too, he showed them the beautiful significance 
of the water immersion as a symbol of death and 
burial with Christ and of a resurrection to newness of 
life in the present time, and to a newness of life in perfect 
bodies at the Second Advent of our Lord. 

The Apostle then called for an expression from those 
present— especially from the brethren who accompanied 
him from Joppa— to know whether any objection could 
be thought of to show why these dear brethren should not 
be admitted to every blessing and arrangement which God 
had provided for His faithful ones— irrespective of their 
being Gentiles by birth. They had believed in God, had 
given evidence of their consecration and their good works, 
even before they knew of the Lord and His glorious Plan; 
and now they had been accepted of God, who had manifested 
His acceptance by the outpouring of the Holy 
Spirit upon them. No objection being offered, St. Peter 
directed that they should be baptized in the name of our 
Lord. He had been sent to teach them, and he delivered 
his Message with no uncertain sound. 



R5882:page 105 



THE RISEN CHRIST 

-APRIL 23.- 1 CORINTHIANS 15:1-28".- 

RANSOM AND RESTITUTION TWIN DOCTRINES-JESUS' RESURRECTION 
ATTESTED BY MANY INFALLIBLE PROOFS-TODAY'S 
STUDY IN IRRECONCILABLE CONFLICT WITH CURRENT 
THEOLOGY-THE TIME OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE-THE WORK OF 
THE MESSIANIC KINGDOM BRIEFLY OUTLINED-SUBJECTION 
OF EVERY OPPOSING POWER. 



"Now hath Christ been raised from the dead, the 
First-fruits of them that are asleep."— 'Verse 20'. R.V. 

TODAY'S Study calls attention to the great 
importance of the doctrine of the Resurrection, 
presenting it as the twin of the other 
great doctrine which the Apostle sets forth 
"first of all"-"how that Christ DIED FOR 
OUR SINS according to the Scriptures." 
To this fundamental doctrine of the Ransom 
that of the Resurrection stands related as 
effect to cause. 

So important is this doctrine in the 
estimation of the inspired Apostle that he emphatically 
declares that, if it be not true, then there is no hope for 
any one beyond the present life, the preaching of the 
Gospel is in vain, those who preach it are false witnesses, 
the faith of Christians is vain and their hope 
delusive. Moreover, he urges that their life of sacrifice, 
in view of the resurrection and its rewards, merely robs 
them of what little enjoyment and advantage they might 
have in this present life, which is all they would ever 
have; and that those who have fallen asleep in Christ 
have perished— if Christ be not risen from the dead. 

Such indeed would be our sad plight if there be no 
resurrection. If this, which Christ died to secure, is not 
guaranteed to us, to be realized in due time, we are yet 
in our sins and under the death penalty without one ray 
of hope. Moreover, if there be no resurrection, although 
our Lord Jesus Christ died to secure it, then God is not 
fulfilling His part of the contract. 

While 'verses 12-19' declares the importance of this twin 
doctrine of the Ransom— the Resurrection— 'Verses 20-26" 
emphasize its truthfulness. The resurrection of Christ, 
attested by many infallible proofs ('Verses 5-8'; 'Acts 1:3'), 
is the guarantee that those whom He redeemed by His 
precious blood shall have not only an awakening from 
death, but an opportunity to attain a complete resurrection 
to all the blessings and favors lost in the Adamic fall. 
This is the assurance which God gave to all men that the 
Ransom for the sins of the whole world given at Calvary 
was acceptable, a full satisfaction of the claims of Justice 
against the race of mankind, so that now He can be just, 
and yet the Justifier of all that believe in Jesus.— 'Acts 17:31'; 
'Romans 3:26'. 

R5882 : page 106 

In 'Verse 20' let Christians observe what the various 
creeds of Christendom ignore, and what is in direct antagonism 
to their teachings; namely, that the risen Christ 
was "the First-fruits of them that slept"— that our Lord 
was the first to experience a resurrection in the full sense 
of the term, the first to experience a resurrection to perfection 
and everlasting life. True, some before Him were 



temporarily awakened, again to relapse into death; for 
example, Lazarus, Jairus' daughter, the son of the widow 
of Nain, the Shunammite's son, etc. But these were only 
partial illustrations of resurrection, to assure men of the 
Divine Power to accomplish it fully in God's due time. 



THE SCRIPTURES LOGICAL 

Mark the logic of these facts: If Christ was the first 
to be resurrected from the dead, no one was resurrected 
before Him; and if, as shown in the preceding verses, 
those who have fallen asleep in Christ have perished, except 
they be restored to life by a resurrection; and if 
those who die in Christ "sleep in Jesus" until His Second 
Coming, it is plain that none of them went to Heaven 
when they died. They were dead, they slept in Jesus, 
they rested in hope; and they must remain so until the 
time appointed for their resurrection— at the Second Advent 
of Christ, when "all those that sleep in Jesus will 
God bring withHim."- v l Thess. 4:14'; 'John 5:28,29'. 

"David hath not ascended into the Heavens." Daniel 
must wait, and he shall stand in his lot "at the end of the 
days." Abraham must wait his time for the possession 
of the Promised Land, of which he has never yet owned 
so much as to set his foot upon. Job must tarry until the 
wrath of this "evil day" be overpast. St. Paul, and with 
him all those that love the Lord's appearing, must await 
the fulness of time when the reward of their faithfulness 
will be due.-' Acts 2:34"; "Daniel 1 2: 13'; 'Acts 7:5'; 'Job 14: 12-15,21" 
"2 Timothy 4:8". 

All this Scripture teaching is in perfect accord. But 
it is in irreconcilable conflict with the current theology of 
so-called Christendom, in whose theories, logically considered, 
there is no place whatever for the doctrine of the 
resurrection. If a man goes to Heaven when he dies, and 
is glad "to shuffle off this mortal coil" which some call his 
prison, although he loves it, cherishes it, and stays in it 
as long as possible— why in the name of reason should he 
hope for a reunion with his body? The whole position is 
illogical, unscriptural, untenable. 

'Verse 21' antagonizes the current theology with equal 
force. It declares that since by man came death, by man 
—"the Man Christ Jesus, who gave Himself a Ransom 
for all"— comes also the resurrection of the dead. Current 
theology says that our redemption is secured by the sacrifice 
of a God, not a man. But the Scriptures are very 
explicit in pointing out an exact equivalent, a human substitute 
for the human head of our race, whose redemption 
secures that of his posterity, on precisely the same principle 
that his fall and condemnation entailed sin and death 
upon them.—' 1 Timothy 2:5,6'; 'John 1:14'. 



ORDER IN THE RESURRECTION 

In consequence of the sacrifice of Himself— His flesh. 
His humanity— our Lord has been highly exalted, even to 
the Divine nature. It was after His resurrection that He 
said, "All power in Heaven and earth is given unto Me." 
When "the Man Christ Jesus" gave up His humanity, He 
gave it up forever. Consequently, when He was raised 
from t lie dead. His existence was in a new nature, that 
the abundant power of the Divine nature given Him might 
be exercised in actually reclaiming from sin and death 
those whom He had legally rescued by His own death.— 
'Philippians 2:8-1 P; 'Matthew 28:18'; 'John 6:51\ 

'Verses 22,23' show that all who are Christ's— by faith 
in His sacrifice— are to receive the benefits of His death 
in full resurrection to the perfection of life forfeited in 
Eden. The order of resurrection is to be "Christ the 
First-fruits," which includes Jesus the Head and the 
Church His Body— "the First Resurrection." ('Revelation 20:6'.) 
Then follows the resurrection of all that are 
Christ's during His presence— Greek parousia, presence— 
not coming. The time of His presence is the entire thousand 
years of His Reign. During that period "all that are 
in their graves [good and bad, just and unjust] shall hear 
His voice and shall come forth: they that have done 
good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have 
done evil, unto the resurrection of judgment"— Greek 
krisis, judgment, not condemnation.— 'John 5:28,29'. 

The former class enter immediately upon their reward 
of full resurrection— human perfection; while the latter 
class awake to a judgment, or trial for life everlasting. 
This it will be their privilege to attain if they become 
Christ's by fully submitting themselves to His discipline 
and control. Otherwise, their trial will be cut short at a 
hundred years; and they will die the Second Death, from 
which there is no recovery.— 'Isaiah 65:20'. 

No one out of Christ will be made alive, fully resurrected, 
though all will experience the awakening from 
death, which is the first step in the resurrection process, 
and a trial to prove their worthiness or unworthiness of 
the fulness of resurrection, which is actual perfection and 
everlasting life. "He that hath the Son hath life, and he 
that hath not the Son of God hath not life." He that 
believeth on the Son hath everlasting life; and he that 
believeth not the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of 
God abideth on him."—' 1 John 5:12'; 'John 3:36'. 



THE WORK OF THE MESSIANIC KINGDOM 

'Verses 24,25' assure us of the victory of Christ, and 
show us in what that victory will consist— the complete 
subjection of every opposing power and authority, and 
the putting of all enemies under His feet, whether those 
enemies be evil conditions, evil principles, evil powers or 



evil individuals. He will banish all evil conditions by 
first permitting a great Time of Trouble (/Daniel 12: 1") 
and then by causing perfect conditions to supplant them. 
He will forever banish evil principles by flooding the world 
with His light and truth and by effectually renewing a 
right spirit in the hearts of all the willing and obedient. 
He will completely overcome every opposing power by the 
exercise of His own Almighty Power for their complete 
and final overthrow. He will put down every opposing 
individual by cutting such off in the Second Death, from 
which there shall be no recovery. 

"He must reign until He hath put all enemies under 
His feet." The time of that reign is limited to a thousand 
years. ("Revelation 20:6".) At the expiration of that 
period all in opposition to righteousness, and the Devil 
who deceived them and led them, are to be cast into the 
Lake of Fire, which is the Second Death. ("Revelation 20:7-15".) 
"The last enemy that shall be destroyed is 
death." This is not the Second Death, into which the 
opposers of God have been cast; else the language would 
be contradictory. It is the Adamic death, which Christ 
came to destroy by liberating all its subjects. To accomplish 
this work will require the entire Messianic Reign— 
a thousand years. 



"Praise, my soul, the King of Heaven; 

To His feet thy tribute bring; 
Ransomed, healed, restored, forgiven. 

Evermore His praises sing!" 



R5879:page 107 



THE RANSOM-PRICE AND ITS APPLICATION 

THE doctrine of the RANSOM as related to 
God's Plan of Salvation is the very center 
—the hub from which as spokes all other 
doctrines radiate to the circumference of 
the Plan. It is hoped that the answers 
given below may prove illuminating and 
helpful: 

Question I.— Give a brief definition of 
the word RANSOM. 

Answer.— A Ransom is the amount or 
consideration paid for the release of a person or property, 
captured or detained. 

Question 2.— Give brief definition of the word MERIT. 

Answer.— Merit is (1) that which deserves consideration, 
reward, or esteem; (2) value, reward or recompense 
deserved or received, as at school. 



Question 3.-Give brief definition of LEGAL TENDER. 

Answer.— Legal Tender is that currency or money 
which the law authorizes a debtor to offer in payment of 
a debt and requires a creditor to receive. In other words, 
that which the government or law approves as a medium 
of exchange. 

Question 4.— What is the meaning of the words TO 
PAY or PAID? 

Answer.— To Pay means to discharge a debt, to give 
an equivalent for, to fulfil. The word Paid would signify 
that such a debt had been discharged; was fulfilled; that 
the proper equivalent had been turned over. 

Question 5.— Give brief definition of the word DEPOSIT. 

Answer.— A Deposit is anything deposited; something 
committed to the care of another. 

Question 6.— What is the difference in the meaning 
of the terms PAID, APPLIED and DEPOSIT? 

Answer.— There is quite a difference in the meaning 
of these words. When the word paid is used, it signifies 
that the thing applied to an obligation is sufficient; when 
the word applied is used, it signifies that a financial 
obligation has been met, directly or indirectly; when the 
word Deposit is used, it signifies that something has been 
left in the care of another which has not yet been appropriated, 
or applied. 

Question 7.-Define briefly the term SIN-OFFERING. 

Answer.— The term Sin-Offering signifies an offering 
made on account of sin, as an offset to sin, as a satisfaction 
for the sin. 

Question 8. -What is meant by the term MERIT OF 
CHRIST JESUS? 

Answer.— We might speak of the Merit of Christ 
Jesus from various viewpoints; as, for instance, the merit 
of His having become the Man Jesus, in the sense of its 
indicating His loyalty to God and His obedience to the 
Divine Program; or we might speak of His merit as a 
man— that He made a meritorious delivery of that which 
He had, of that which was right, just and lawful. But 
when we speak of the Merit of Christ Jesus with respect 
to His making atonement for the sin of the world, we have 
in view another matter entirely; namely, that a contract 
existed between the Heavenly Father and the Lord Jesus 
Christ, by which the Lord was to become a human being 
and then to give up His human nature, permitting His 
life to be taken from Him as a man, thus signifying His 
loyalty and obedience to the Father's will, complete obedience 
unto death, even the death of the cross. 

When we speak of the Merit of Jesus Christ, we understand 
that, on account of that Merit which He had, and 
which the Father recognized when He raised the Son 
from the dead, our Lord was rewarded, not merely by 
being taken back to the spirit plane, but by being "highly 
exalted" to the Divine nature. This Merit of Jesus, then, 
which God rewarded, left Him a certain amount of substance 

R5880: page 107 



or blessing which He might bestow upon others; 
namely. His right to human life, which He had not forfeited 
by sin, nor by any other procedure. This right to 
human life, which we speak of as a merit to the credit of 
Jesus, the Bible informs us is ultimately to be appropriated 
by the Lord Jesus Christ, in full harmony with the 
Father's Plan, for the cancellation of the "sins of the 
whole world" ('1 John 2:2\)~ the sins of Adam and all of 
his race, who died in Him. That Merit is already our 
Lord's, and is subject to His disposal at the proper time, 
set by the Father. 

Question 9.— Give a brief definition of the word 
ATONEMENT. 

Answer.— The word Atonement signifies the making 
at-one, the bringing back into harmony persons or things 
not in full accord. As applied to the human family, it 
would signify that, Adam and his race having been disobedient 
to the Divine arrangement, and having come 
under Divine displeasure and condemnation, this condemnation, 
by Divine arrangement, is to be done away 
with, and mankind are to be brought back into harmony 
with God— to be at-one with Him again— as many of them 
as are willing and will accept the Divine terms. The arrangement 
by which this is to be accomplished is what we 
term the work of the Atonement; and this work of Atonement 
was the work begun by our Lord Jesus Christ at His 
First Advent, continued since, and to be completed at and 
during His Second Advent. In a word, then, the Atonement 
in the fullest sense of the word begins with the 
Church and will not be completed until its provisions shall 
have been extended to all the members of the human 
family, bringing all the willing and obedient back into full 
harmony with Jehovah. 

Question 10.— Could a perfect human being pay the 
Ransom-price? 

Answer.— No! A perfect man could not pay the Ransom-price, 
unless by some Divine arrangement, contract, 
agreement. If, for instance, there had been a perfect 
human being in the world, he could not have become the 
Redeemer of Father Adam, except as a privilege by Divine 
arrangement. It would be for the Divine Court to determine 
whether or not one could be accepted for another. 
In the case of the Lord Jesus Christ, by Divine arrangement 
He became suitable to be the Ransom-price— a perfect 
man— and then, in fulfilment of the Divine Program, 
He gave Himself; and because of this arrangement He 
was acceptable. 

Question 1 1.— How was the Ransom-price provided? 

Answer.— God Himself provided the Ransom; and it 
"taketh away the sin of the world." Only by Divine provision 
would the ransoming of man have been possible. 

Question 12.— Where was the Ransom-price provided? 

Answer.— In the Divine Purpose, the Ransom-price 
was provided from the foundation of the world; for the 
Scriptures assure us that our Lord Jesus Christ, in the 



Divine Purpose, was the Lamb of God slain from the 
foundation of the world. (" Revelation 13:8".) In a secondary 
sense, the Ransom-price was provided when the 
contract was made between Jehovah God and His honored 
Logos. In another sense of the word, the Ransom-price 
was not provided until the Logos had been made flesh 
and had reached full human perfection at 30 years of age. 

It was then possible for our Lord to serve, in harmony 
with God's arrangement, as a Ransom-price, and to give 
Himself a Ransom-price. But He did not give Himself 

R5880 : page 108 

to be this Ransom-price until He entered into the Covenant 
with God, symbolizing by baptism the full consecration 
of His life even unto death. Yet it was not a completed 
thing then, for there were conditions associated with it. 
While His will was there given up, and was so recognized 
by the Father, nevertheless it remained for Him, day by 
day and hour by hour, to show His full surrender. His 
sacrifice was completed when He died on Calvary, crying, 
"It is finished!" He had finished the laying down of the 
Ransom-price; that is to say. He had fully provided the 
Ransom-price. We are to recognize a difference, however, 
between providing the Ransom-price, and giving, or 
appropriating, or delivering it. It was merely provided at 
the time when Jesus died; it was not yet given, in the 
sense of being applied for man's delivery from death. 

Question 13.— Who provided the Ransom-price? 

Answer.— Jehovah God, primarily, in that He was the 
One who made the arrangement; without His arrangement 
the Ransom would not have been possible. In a secondary 
sense, Jesus Himself provided it, in that He gave 
Himself; He had full control of His own course at the 
time He made His consecration. His will was not coerced. 

Question 14.— In the type, where did the sin-offering 
begin, and where did it end? 

Answer.— The animal to be the sin-offering was 
selected and brought to the door of the Tabernacle for 
this purpose; but it became the sin-offering the moment 
when the high priest laid his hands upon it and slew it. 
The sin-offering, according to the type, was composed of 
two parts— a bullock and a goat. The slaying of the 
bullock did not finish the sin-offering; for in the Divine 
Purpose and arrangement, the great High Priest. Jesus. 
was to offer two sacrifices— the Lord's goat class as well 
as the antitypical bullock. The goat in the type, we 
understand, represented the followers of Jesus, as the 
bullock represented Jesus Himself. In the type, therefore, 
the killing of the sin-offering was not ended until 
the goat of the sin-offering was slain. There it was that 
the sin-offering in the sense of sacrifice was finished. 
There was to be no more sacrificing. But the word sin-offering 
has a still broader meaning than this. It included 
in the type also the presentation of the blood of 
these animals to Jehovah God, as shown by the high 



priest's taking first the blood of the bullock, and afterwards 
the blood of the Lord's goat, into the Most Holy, 
and sprinkling the blood upon the Mercy Seat and before 
the Mercy Seat eastward. When this had been accomplished, 
the sin-offering was ended. 

Question 15.— In the antitype, where did the offering 
for sin begin? 

Answer.— In the antitype, the offering for sin began 
when Jesus presented Himself at Jordan in compliance 
with the arrangement already entered into with the 
Father. There, according to the statement of the Apostle, 
our Lord gave Himself, surrendered Himself, made Himself 
an offering for sin. He has continued the work 
during this Gospel Age, offering up those who accept 
His merit and who voluntarily become His footstep followers, 
surrendering their wills to Him. He offers these 
as a part of His own sacrifice. 

After Jesus had finished offering His own personal 
sacrifice. He ascended up on High, and there made a 
presentation of His sacrificial merit to the Heavenly 
Father on behalf of the Church class, as symbolized by 
the sprinkling of the blood of the bullock in the Most 
Holy of the Tabernacle, for the high priest and his house. 
Subsequently continuing the sacrificing, in His followers. 
He will ultimately finish the work of sacrifice when the 
last member of the Body of Christ shall have tasted death 
and shall have passed beyond the veil. Then it will remain 
for the High Priest to complete this matter by offering 
the Sin-offering "for all the people," by presenting 
the merit of the "better sacrifices" to Jehovah God, the 
actual merit being in Jesus alone. 

Question 16.— Was the Ransom paid at Calvary? 

Answer.— We have already covered this point, showing 
that the Ransom was laid down at Calvary, and later 
placed in the hands of Justice, but not paid over in the 
sense of completing the contract— that being reserved for 
a future time. The Ransom was laid down at the cross, 
when Jesus cried, "Father, into Thy hands I commit My 
spirit"— My life! Thus Jesus, so to speak, made a deposit 
of the Ransom-price without definitely applying it. 

Question 17.— Was the Ransom paid when Jesus 
ascended into Heaven? 

Answer.— No! The reasons for this already stated. 

Question 18.— Has the Ransom-price been paid yet? 

Answer.— No! For reasons already given; and we will 
say additionally, that the Ransom-price is not to be fully 
paid until after the Church has been entirely glorified and 
with Her Lord. Then it will be paid on behalf of the 
whole world, securing the release of the whole world from 
death, and the cancellation of Adamic condemnation. 

Question 19.— What did Jesus do with the Ransom-price 
when He ascended into Heaven? 

Answer.— He had already placed it in the hands of 
Justice as a deposit. The human life-right, the price, still 
was at His command. His next step was to embargo, or 
mortgage it, by imputing a share of it to His Church— yet 



undeveloped. 

Question 20.— Did Jesus satisfy Justice when He 
ascended into Heaven? 

Answer.— Justice is always satisfied. Justice never 
lets go until it has an equivalent. Justice was satisfied, 
for instance, when Adam was condemned to death on account 
of transgression. Justice has been satisfied all 
along in holding Adam and his race for that sin. Justice 
is satisfied now to allow the Church to pass under the 
present conditions, because a deposit is in the hands of 
Justice fully equivalent to the requirements of the Church, 
and more. Justice will not be satisfied to release mankind 
until the Ransom-price shall have been fully paid over 
into the hands of Justice. This will be after the Church 
is completed and glorified. 

Question 21.— When and how is Justice satisfied? 

Answer.— This question is answered in reply to the 
twentieth question. 

R5881 : page 108 

Question 22.— How can any one be a joint-sacrifice 
with Christ, if Justice was not fully reconciled by Jesus 
Christ when He ascended into Heaven? 

Answer.— As stated in answer to question 20, a Deposit 
was made of sufficient merit to satisfy for the sins 
of the whole world; and on the strength of this Deposit, 
Justice was perfectly reconciled to the releasing of these 
members of the race who came into a special covenant-relationship 
with God through the Lord Jesus Christ, who 
made a Covenant by Sacrifice. 

Question 23.— Which takes place first. Justification or 
Consecration, and why? 

Answer.— It depends upon the meaning attached to the 
word consecration. The Bible recognizes consecration 
from two different viewpoints; first, the consecration of 
the individual; and second, the making of this consecration 
valid by the Lord Jesus Christ, and its acceptance by 
the Father. The consecration of the individual to do the 
Lord's will, the full surrender of his own will, as typified 

R5881 : page 109 

by the tying of the goat to the door of the Tabernacle, 
precedes justification. But the second step is this: 
namely, that it is necessary for our Lord Jesus Christ to 
become the Advocate for those who desire to become 
members of the Royal Priesthood, before they can be acceptable 
to the Father. Hence, their justification by the 
Lord Jesus Christ, who imputes of His merit to them, 
follows their consecration of themselves and is immediately 
followed by the Heavenly Father's act of consecrating 
these, in the sense of accepting them as consecrated persons 
and giving them all the rights and privileges included 
in this covenant arrangement. 
Question 24.— Is it Merit or Righteousness that is imputed 



to the one who is justified by faith? 

Answer.— We would here need to qualify the expression, 
"justified by faith," because in Bible usage this 
term has two different significations. We read, for instance, 
that Abraham was justified by faith, but surely 
not in the sense that the Church is justified by faith! 
Abraham was justified to fellowship with God, to receive 
the Promise, to know about certain things that God purposes 
in the future, and to demonstrate his loyalty to God 
under a Divine standard. But he was not justified to 
eternal life. He was not justified in the sense that he 
could be invited to present his body a living sacrifice and 
become a redeemer for Adam, or in any sense a meritorious 
sacrifice for another. No one could be thus justified 
by faith until after the death of Jesus, until His imputation 
of His merit after He ascended up on High and 
appeared "in the presence of God for us"— the Church. 

Question 25.— If Merit is imputed, who imputes it? 
If Righteousness is imputed, by whom is it imputed? 

Answer.— Our Lord Jesus imputes His own Merit to 
His own followers under the conditions of their covenant 
of full consecration; but this imputation is with the full 
sanction of and in cooperation with Divine Justice— not 
otherwise. This imputation of Merit to the imperfect one 
desiring to be the follower of Jesus may be expressed as 
an imputation of Righteousness to such a one on the part 
of Divine Justice, on the part of the Heavenly Father; 
as we read, "It is God that justifieth." — 'Romans 8:33\ 

Question 26.— What is meant by the terms "right to 
live" and "life-rights?" And what is the difference between 
these terms? 

Answer.— A person might have a right to live by being 
in harmony with God; for God has ordained that all of 
His intelligent creatures may continue to live if they live 
in harmony with His Divine Law and its requirements. 
A right to live, therefore, was the privilege of Father 
Adam in the beginning. He had a right to life and he 
would not have forfeited that right had he not sinned. 
Jesus also possessed a right to live. Not only before 
He came into the world, but also after He became 
the Man Jesus, He had a right to life. It was because 
of this right that He would be able to lay down 
His life sacrificially on behalf of Adam and his 
race. After He had made His consecration at baptism, 
He no longer had the right to live as a man; for He had 
given up that right to live. But having been begotten 
by the Holy Spirit, He had a right to life as a New 
Creature, spiritually begotten, unless He should make 
failure by violating some Divine Law or by violating His 
own contract, or covenant. The world of mankind will 
have the right to live after the Millennial Age, after they 
shall have reached perfection, shall have been delivered 
over to the Father and He shall have accepted them. 
They will then have the same right to life that Father 
Adam had at first, before he sinned. 

"Life-rights." This term we may use in different ways. 



Applying it to the Lord Jesus Christ as having life-rights, 
for instance, we may say, while He had consecrated His 
life as a man. He had done nothing really to forfeit that 
life. He had agreed to lay it down; it was rightfully His; 
else He would not have had the right to use it again for 
others. He maintained the right because of His personal 
righteousness. Therefore He still possessed a right to human 
life, because this life which He was permitting to 
be taken. He had not forfeited. He still has the life-rights 
of a human being, although He has no need of 
human life or life-rights now for Himself, since He has 
something so much better, and since He could not use two 
lives at the same time. He has Divine life-rights; but He 
still maintains his human life-rights; and these He is 
about to dispose of, to give as a Ransom-price, as a full 
offset for Adam and all that was lost through him. 

Question 27.— What is sacrificed by one who is begotten 
of the Spirit to membership in the Body of Christ? 

Answer.— In one sense of the word, no one does any 
sacrificing except the great High Priest. What we do is 
to consecrate our wills, and present our bodies that they 
may be living sacrifices, that the great High Priest may 
make sacrifices of them. It should be easily discerned 
that merely killing an animal is not sacrificing it. The 
Jews killed thousands of animals for food, just as we do 
today; but these animals were not sacrificed by merely 
being killed. No sacrifice can be offered except by an 
arrangement with God; and He has arranged that sacrificing 
must be done by a priest. The priest that sacrificed 
under the Jewish Law was the high priest, the others 
being his assistants, and taking his place in case of death. 
The High Priest was the one who typified Jesus; and Jesus 
alone is the One who is able to offer up the antitypical 
sacrifices. All that the followers of Jesus do, therefore, 
is to present themselves. 

This presentation in the type was pictured by the goat's 
being tied at the door of the Tabernacle. In other words, 
this class devote, set apart, consecrate themselves as human 
beings. It is after Jesus lays hold of this individual, 
accepts his consecration, imputes His own merit, and 
offers him to the Father, that the Father's acceptance is 
manifested through the Son, the great High Priest, by 
the begetting of the Holy Spirit. Thenceforth such an 
one is a member of the Body of Christ, and his name is 
written in the Lamb's Book of Life, from which it will 
not be blotted out if he maintains his faithfulness. 

Question 28.— Briefly define the difference between 
Ransom and Sin-offering. 

Answer.— The term "sin-offering" specifically refers 
to the fact that the thing, or life (or lives) is presented to 
God as an offering, and on account of sin. A sin-offering 
implies a ransom, but not specifically, not positively. It 
is an offering for sin, but might not necessarily mean a 
full, satisfactory offering; and yet the fact that a sin-offering 
is acceptable to God would imply that such 
offering was a full, complete offset, or satisfaction. The 



word Ransom as used in the New Testament, has in it not 
only the thought of an offering on account of something 
that was wrong, but additionally it specifies that the offering 
corresponds fully and exactly, for the meaning of the 
word Ransom as applied to Jesus, is a corresponding price. 

Question 29.— Does the Church participate in the Ransom 
and in the Sin-offering, and why? 

Answer.— In considering this question we must view 
the Church from two sides. If we think of the Church 
in connection with the presentation of their bodies living 
sacrifices to God, we would say that they are not participators 

R5881 :page 110 

in the Ransom, for they have nothing that they 

could give as a share in the Ransom— they are imperfect. 

If we view the question from the other standpoint— that 

the Church are spirit beings and as spirit beings are members 

of the Body of Christ, one with Him who is their 

Head— they would as members of The Christ share with 

Him in everything He does, just as the hand shares with 

the head; for the human body is the figure that the Bible 

gives us, in speaking of The Christ. The Merit by which 

the Ransom-price is effective with God was in Jesus alone. 

It was that merit which we did not possess when we presented 

ourselves to God in consecration. But when we 

were accepted by Jesus as disciples. He imputed His own 

merit to us, and made us part of His own sacrifice. He 

was at the same time making us part of that which He is 

to give to God for the sins of the whole world, at the 

close of this Age when the Church, His Body, is complete 

and glorified together with Him. 

We are to remember, however, that none of the human 
remains; for at the time we were made members of the 
Body of Christ we had become dead as human beings, 
by the surrender of our wills. Because we are New 
Creatures, old things have passed away and all things 
have become new. ('2 Corinthians 5: 17".) We are to remember, 
also, that it is not the spiritual Body of Christ 
that is sacrificed, even as it was not the spiritual Head 

R5882:page 110 

that was sacrificed. The Sin-offering was the flesh. And 
it was Jesus' flesh that constituted the Ransom— not our 
flesh. But now that this Ransom-price has been placed in 
the hands of Justice as a deposit, whose title is possessed 
by Jesus, we are joint-sharers with Him in this possession 
by reason of our relationship to Him and our interest in 
everything that He possesses. Thus the Church becomes 
a sharer in this Ransom-price, because as His Bride we 
are His joint-heirs; and we are to be associated with Him 
in giving to the world the benefits of that Ransom-price. 
We do not make the Sin-offering any more than we do 
the ransoming. We are merely accepted by the High 
Priest. This acceptance is shown in His sacrificing of us 



as human beings after He has imputed to us His merit. 

And in this presentation at the end we shall share as New 

Creatures. It is not the offering of anything the New 

Creature has in itself; but the New Creature having participated 

with Jesus in the crucifying of the flesh, each 

of these will be associated with Him also when the merit 

is presented to the Father. 

Question 30.— If Jesus paid the Ransom-price when 
He ascended into Heaven, could He have become the 
Advocate of the Church? And if so, how? 

Answer.— If Jesus had paid over and fully disposed of 
the Ransom-price when He ascended up on High, it would 
immediately, if accepted, have taken effect for Adam and 
his race; and such of the race as were living at that time, 
or have lived since, would have been on trial again, individually, 
and would have been liable to death because 
of their imperfection, not being able to cope with the situation 
unless Jesus had established His Millennial Kingdom 
and had immediately begun to provide all the necessary 
assistance through the New Covenant arrangement. But 
as for the Church, there would have been no provision 
for the Church, and no opportunity for giving the Church 
anything special, since those who are of the Church were 
members of the human family. The Ransom having been 
paid over, this would have settled all the obligations against 
mankind, and would have left no room for the Church 
class to be dealt with in any different manner from the 
rest of the world. They would not have had any need of 
an Advocate, and, of course, would not have had one. 

Question 31.— When will the Ransom-price be fully 
paid and disposed of finally? 

Answer.— The Ransom-price will be fully paid and 
fully disposed of after the Church shall have passed beyond 
the veil, and when the great High Priest, Head and 
Body (the Church then being the glorified Body of the 
great High Priest), shall seal the New Covenant and 
put it into effective operation on behalf of Adam and all 
his race. The Ransoming will then be finished. The 
Atonement work will not be finished at that time, however; 
it will include the work of the Millennial Age, in 
bringing mankind (all who will) up out of sin and degradation 
into full at-one-ment and harmony with God. 
Bui the Ransom-price must be fully paid over to Jehovah 
and accepted by Him before this New Covenant can go 
into effect, and before human Restitution can properly 
begin. Man's recovery from death is a part of the Ransom 
work.— v Hosea 13:14". 



R5882:page 110 



INTERESTING ITEMS 



STRONG DELUSIONS URGE ON THE WAR 

All the nations now at war seem possessed of the 
thought that they are fighting God's battles and that He 
is leading them on to sure and great victory. We quote 
the following from The Record of Christian Work:— 

"The leading Church weekly of Germany, the Allg. 
Luth. Evang. Kirchen Zeitung, prints a parallel between 
the experiences of the German nation in 1914-1915 and 
our Lord's passion, which recalls the pathological misuse 
of religious symbols, etc., in French decadent literature. 

"The article opens with the words of a Kempis, 'No 
one feels the sufferings of Christ so deeply as he who has 
passed through similar sufferings.' Germany is the suffering 
servant who must bear the sins of many, for it is 
very clear that we fight for the continuance of genuine 
Christianity. As Israel was the earlier type of Christ, 
so Germany is the succeeding one. On the other hand, 
all the figures of the Savior's tragical trial and death-day 
reappear in the present world conflict. The types are so 
clear that no one can mistake the resemblance. The Czar 
plays the sad role of Pilate acting against better knowledge 
and conscience, surrendering the innocent in anxious 
fear lest he lose his own power. Serbia is Barabbas, who 
has committed murder. Vain and frivolous France recalls 
the picture of Herod Antipas. Autocratic, orthodox 
Russia and atheist, republican France are made friends, 
as were the two rulers of Christ's day. The active agent 
in Christ's passion was the Sanhedrin. The evangelical 
story repeatedly affirms that it sought Jesus' death out 
of envy. Is there aught else save envy which has made 
England the driving force in the war upon Germany?' 

"The writer then indulges in characteristic flings at 
'England's Sabbath-keeping, mission fanaticism, and general 
Pharisaism. The power of the Sanhedrin was 
exerted over the Jews of the dispersion, as England's 
is over her over-seas colonies.' In the United States, the 
writer sees 'Judas, the great betrayer,' and quotes the 
words of "Ezekiel 22:12', 'They have taken gifts to shed 
blood; thou hast greedily gained of thy neighbors by 
extortion.' The thirty pieces of silver have become thirty 
milliards. The false witnesses are 'the international press 
and telegraph agencies.' 'The students and musicians 
who warmed themselves at German Universities and Conservatories, 
and who now deny Germany, figure as Peter. 
Also the poor little Waldensian Church to which, it seems, 
German Protestants formerly made contributions. 

R5882 : page 1 1 1 

" 'The penitent thief who redeemed a bad past by a 
good deed in his last hours and who suffered the same 
sorrow as the Lord is the type of the Turkish people who 
now put to shame the Christianity of Europe'— 'apart 
from the Germans,' the writer is careful to explain. 

"The publication of this paragraph in cold type in a 



Christian paper in the period of the worst excesses which 

Turkish anti-Christian fanaticism has ever perpetrated 

gives a pretty good measure of the moral and intellectual 

aberration into which German Christianity has fallen. 

There are other parallels, some trivial, where Sven Hedin 

is compared with the centurion at the Cross; others blasphemous, 

in which the dry period preceding the last 

German harvest is related to the 'I thirst' of Christ." 



TURKISH PROMISES TRUSTED 

The Sentimental, a Jewish weekly (Chicago), says: 
"The return of Turkish authority in the Balkans must 
be welcomed as a result of the war. The sentimental love 
of nationality cannot be encouraged when the fact of 
nationality imperils the peace of Europe and the world. 
The Turk has shown that he is a friend of peace and 
humanity and only the intolerance of Christianity and the 
cupidity of the adjoining kingdoms make him appear "terribly" 
otherwise. The German haters, of course, will 
point to Turkey's recent announcement of equal rights to 
Jews as inspired by Germany for effect and as resembling 
the liberal grants of the Czar, but the fact of the matter 
is that the Turkish government is not the Russian government, 
for nothing is more certain than that a pledge with 
Mohammedans is sacred, however the Greek Orthodox 
conscience may construe its own promises. We would 
rather deal with the Turk than with any other power except 
our own free nation. But if anything else is certain, 
it is the Kaiser's sincerity in preaching equal rights for 
our people, where at present these are denied them. But 
even if it be granted that the concession is inspired solely 
by the average statecraft ethics, both by Turkey and by 
Germany, the move must add momentum to the advance 
of the liberal spirit, so that when peace is discussed, the 
opponents of equal rights for our people will themselves 
realize that in urging the status quo for their Jewish subjects 
they are flying in the face of the moral judgment 
and the enlightened will of Europe and civilization, and 
must therefore yield. If this definite result comes out of 
the war, all the sufferings of our brethren and even of the 
millions sacrificed by the war's ravages will have been 
offered for a moral gain worth even more." 



R5882 : page 1 1 1 



INTERESTING LETTERS 



DRAMA WAS TURNING-POINT OF HIS LIFE 

DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

Some months ago we were curious to know what was 
meant by PASTOR RUSSELL'S PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION, 
having seen placards to the effect that this DRAMA would pay 
a visit to our city. The only way to satisfy our search for 
knowledge was to go and see. And now I am writing to tell 
you— God bless you— that that first visit to your DRAMA was 
the turning-point of my life; or, I should say, the turning-point 
in my knowledge of the Bible, for I have always tried 
to do right and had never ill used my life. 

I can see clearly now that the Bible was written in 
symbols, to be explained "in due time." Indeed, dear Pastor, 
I believe I could almost preach a sermon since studying your 
teaching! It is wonderful how clear your STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES are! 

We attended the whole of the DRAMA, going twice to see 
Parts III. and IV., and we would love to see it all again. 
Some time after the DRAMA a Colporteur visited us, and 
mother purchased the six volumes of STUDIES and subscribed 
for THE WATCH TOWER. I can truly say that every spare 
moment I have is wisely spent. I think your idea of the 
Great Pyramid is perfect. Of your sermons I especially like 
THE BATTLE OF ARMAGEDDON, and would like more of them 
for distribution. 

I marvel at the clear way in which you explain a difficult 
text! When reading my Bible, directly I find numberless 
difficult verses; I look them up in your STUDIES, and when I 
close my book I find myself thanking you, all these miles 
away, for helping me, for otherwise I should be "lost" in both 
senses of the word! 

And now, dear Pastor, I find myself confronted with a 
problem in which I feel sure you will help me. As you know, 
we shall have compulsory military service; I am seventeen 
years of age, and if the trouble be not over by the time I 
reach my nineteenth year, I feel that I would rather be shot 
as a "traitor" than to disobey God's command. Is there any 
way in which we can defend our loved ones without murder? 
I am greatly perplexed and anxious to do what is right. I 
shall follow your advice, so great is my belief that God is 
using you to enlighten those who are willing to learn. Hoping 
I have not interrupted too long, I am 

Yours in Jesus, TALBOT B. ELSTON.-England. 



IN REPLY 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

We rejoice to know that the Truth is thus being spread in 
every direction, and that the Lord is using the consecrated 
talents of His servants everywhere for the sealing of His 
saints in their foreheads— intellectually.— 'Revelation 7:1-3'. 

We are glad to note that you are in full agreement with 
what we said recently in THE WATCH TOWER to the effect 



that God's consecrated people can have no interest in the war. 
If there be any excuse for violence and bloodshed anywhere, 
it would be in the actual defense of the home. The Bible, 
however, does not lay down laws for the world, but merely 
for God's consecrated people. To these the Master's own 
example and words would seem to teach that although they 
may invoke every legal protection, barricade their homes, etc., 
against the enemy, such saints would not be disposed to take 
the lives of others— even in self-defense. And yet we confess 
that this would be a very serious test upon nearly all of 
them.-THE EDITOR. 



SEED SOWED IN GOOD GROUND 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We can wait no longer to tell you how glad and thankful 
we are to be privileged to address you as above. We received 
the knowledge of the Truth and made our consecration about 
three months ago. We are especially thankful to be accepted 
by our dear Redeemer. 

Living in an isolated place we have purchased an automobile 
and have commenced distributing THE BIBLE STUDENTS 
MONTHLY among the farmers in this district. Prior to this 
we had been witnessing, loaning volumes, etc., and soon began 
to feel opposition stirring. We sent letters of withdrawal 
to the minister of the Methodist church which had been our 
home, then we rented a hall, asking one of the Toronto 
brethren to speak, which he did and we had an attendance of 
over one hundred adults, nine of whom handed in their names 
for more literature. 

We are happy to be able to report that one dear sister has 
come into the Truth and has consecrated, as a result of our 
work. Needless to say, the local ministers are very bitter 
against us, having tried in every way to prevent our meeting 
above mentioned; but the owner of the hall attended the 
meeting, bought the six volumes and assures us we can have 
the hall when we wish. 

Our former pastor continues his persecution, but the Lord 
has been with us, keeping us meek in spirit. We had met 
none of the Truth brethren until your recent visit to Toronto, 
when we went ninety miles to hear your sermon. We eagerly 
drank in your words, for our hearts were starved for fellowship 
with the brethren. We wish you to record our names as 
having taken the Vow. We are endeavoring to live according 
to its requirements, considering it a help, as we do also the 
HEAVENLY MANNA book. 

We enclose an order for tracts for distribution, also a 
"mite" toward the good work. We love you very much, dear 
brother, as our Pastor, and pray daily that the dear Lord 
continue to bless your efforts in His Cause. We will be 
grateful for an interest in your prayers on our behalf. If 
you can spare time to write us a few words we can scarcely 
tell you how much they will be appreciated. 

Faithfully your brother and sister in Christ, 

GEO. C. and LAURA M. FORTHERGILL.-Ont. 



page 1 1 2 

International Bible Students Association Classes 
STUDIES AND LECTURES BY MEMBERS OF THE PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 1 13 

VOL. XXXVII. APRIL 15 No. 8 
A.D. 1916-A.M. 6044 

CONTENTS 

Principles of Love and Justice Contrasted 1 15 

Justice Before Generosity . . .115 

Love and Justice Both Control . .116 

How Love May Overflow the Measure . 116 
Yoke-fellows With Christ . . . .117 

New Creature Fulfils the Law . .117 

The Perfect, Adjustable Yoke . .118 

"The Little Foxes" 118 

St. Peter Delivered From Prison . . .119 

Passover Season Siftings . . .119 
The Missionaries of Antioch . . . . 121 

Disciples First Called Christians . 122 

Ordination and Laying on of Hands . 123 
"Lo, We Turn to the Gentiles!" . . .123 

"Ordained to Eternal Life" . . .125 
Proper and Improper Judgment of Brethren. 125 

Church Incapable of Judging Now . . 125 
Interesting Letters 126 

Spirit of a Sound Mind .... 126 

page 1 14 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED, 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDER, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 



for this Journal, will be supplied free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA, 



SEND REPORTS OF MEMORIAL PROMPTLY 

We request prompt reports from all classes and little 
groups celebrating the Memorial of our Lord's death on April 
16th. A postcard report of numbers and interest will do. 



THE EUREKA DRAMA SUCCEEDING WELL 

Nineteen Classes have sent in reports which show the following 
results for one week's exhibitions of EUREKA DRAMA: 

Thirteen places were served. A total of twenty-nine exhibitions 
were given to an audience of thirteen hundred and 
thirty-eight. One hundred and twenty-nine cards requesting 
free literature were handed in. 

These nineteen EUREKA DRAMAS heard from for the week 
are only a small portion of the whole number thus far sent 
forth. Fifty-seven have sent in no report whatever for the 
week. We can only imagine how many other thousands they 
may have served if actively engaged, or how many other thousands 
missed being served if they were not actively engaged. 

Total EUREKA DRAMA reports to date show 1,788 places 
served; total exhibitions, 5,967; total attendance, 1,041,998; 
total cards received, 33,188. 

All this is very encouraging and shows what possibilities 
there are in connection with this EUREKA DRAMA outfit. In a 
previous notice we suggested that the EUREKA DRAMA be not 
used in theaters, but in country schoolhouses, etc., leaving the 
theaters for the regular DRAMA. However, we have no desire 
to restrict the use of the EUREKA sets. We therefore 
suggest now that where openings for it may be found, it 
should be shown. Indeed, we have some excellent reports 
of its showing in theaters. Quite a number of exhibitions 
have been given in private theaters on Sunday mornings recently. 
They were very successful. People seemed to be 
interested and a good class of people seemed to attend. The 
Theater Managers were very pleased to have the EUREKA 
DRAMA, desiring in some manner, no doubt, to cooperate for 
the public good and also to give tone to their Theaters. 

Be it remembered that we have the lecture records in 



Danish, Swedish, German, Polish, Italian, and Spanish (soon). 
These foreign records have cost us more than the English, 
but we propose to supply them hereafter to the friends at 
uniform prices— an entire set of DRAMA records for $25.00. 

Wonderful opportunities, dear Brethren, are at our hands. 
Many are showing their love and zeal. Let each do according 
to his judgment of what would be pleasing in the sight 
of the Lord. 



R5883:page 115 



THE PRINCIPLES OF LOVE AND JUSTICE CONTRASTED 

NOTHING is more necessary to the peace and 

prosperity of the Church of God than that 

its members should have a clear understanding 

and appreciation of moral principles, 

with a full determination to be controlled 

by them. Even among Christians there are 

often differences of opinion with reference 

to principles of action, which greatly interfere 

with spiritual growth and prosperity. 

Such difficulties most frequently arise 

through failure to distinguish between the relative claims 

of Love and Justice. Therefore we consider it profitable 

to examine these principles and their operation among 

the children of God. 

Justice is sometimes represented by a pair of evenly 
poised balances, and sometimes by a square and compass, 
both of which are fitting emblems of its character. Justice 
knows no compromise and no deviation from its fixed 
rule of action. It is mathematically precise. It gives 
nothing over for "good weight" or "good measure." 
There is no grace in it, no heart, no sympathy, no favor 
of any kind. It is a calculating, exact measure of truth 
and righteousness. When justice is done, there are no 
thanks due to the one who metes it out. Such a one has 
merely done a duty, the neglect of which would have 
been culpable, and the doing of which merits no favor or 
praise. And yet, firm and relentless as this principle is, 
it is declared to be the very foundation of God's Throne. 
It is the principle which underlies all His dealings with 

R5884 :page 115 

His creatures. It is His unchangeable business principle; 
and how firmly He adheres to it is manifest to every 
one who understands the Plan of Salvation, the basis of 
which is the satisfaction of Justice against our race. 
Though the arrangement for the satisfaction of Justice 
cost the life of His Only-begotten and well-beloved Son, 
so important was this principle of Divine Justice that 



God freely gave Him up for us all. 



JUSTICE, BEFORE GENEROSITY 

The principle of Love, unlike that of Justice, overflows 
with tenderness, and longs to bless. It is full of grace, 
and delights in the bestowment of favor. It is manifest, 
however, that no action can be regarded as a favor or a 
manifestation of love which has not underneath it the 
substantial foundation of justice. Thus, for instance, if 
one comes to you with a gift, and at the same time disregards 
a just debt to you, the gift falls far short of 
appreciation as an expression of love; and you say, "We 
should be just before we attempt to be generous." 

And this is right; if Justice is the foundation principle 
in all of God's dealings, it should be the same in all 
of our dealings; and none the less so among brethren 
in Christ than among those in the world. As brethren 
in Christ, we have no right to presume upon the favor of 
one another. All to which we have a right is simple 
justice, though we may waive those things that are really 
our rights. But in our own dealings, we should strive 
always to render justice— justice in the payment of our 
honest debts to each other, justice in our judgment one 
of an other (which must make due allowance for frailties, 
etc., because we recognize in ourselves some measure 
of similar imperfection), and justice in fair and friendly 
treatment one of another. 

As we have just said, there is no obligation to demand 
justice for ourselves, and we may, if we choose, 
even suffer injustice uncomplainingly. We must, however, 
if we are Christ's, render justice so far as we are 
enabled to recognize it. In other words, we are not responsible 
for the actions of others in this respect, but are 
responsible for our own. Therefore we are to endeavor 
earnestly that all our actions, our words and our thoughts 
may be squared by the exact rule of justice, before we 
offer even one single act as an expression of love. 



JUSTICE, EQUITY, A CHRISTIAN QUALITY 

It would appear that many Christian people spend 
years of their experience without making any great 
progress. One difficulty leading up to this condition is a 
failure to recognize the basic principles underlying the 
Divine Laws, which apply to us from the moment we are 
adopted into the Lord's family. The first of these basic 
principles is justice. We need to learn more and more 
clearly what are our own rights and the rights of our 
fellow creatures in the Church and out of the Church. 
We need to learn how to measure the affairs of ourselves 
and of others with the plummet of justice, and to 
recognize that we must not under any circumstances or 



conditions infract the rights, interests or liberties of 
others— that to do so would be wrong, sinful, contrary 
to the Divine will, and a serious hindrance to our growth 
in grace. Secondly, we must learn to esteem love next to 
justice in importance in the Divine Code. By love we 
mean, not amativeness nor soft sentimentality, but that 
principle of kindness, sympathy, consideration and benevolence 
which we see manifested in our Heavenly Father 
and in our Lord Jesus. 

In proportion as we grow up in the Lord, strong in 
Him, it must be along the lines of these elements of His 
character. More and more we must appreciate and sympathize 
with others in their trials and difficulties and 

R5884:page 116 

afflictions; more and more we must become gentle, patient, 
kind toward all, but especially toward the Household of 
Faith. All the graces of the Spirit are elements of love. 
God is love; and whoever receives of His Spirit receives 
the spirit of love. 

These two basic principles must cover all of our conduct 
in life. Justice tells us that we must cease to do 
evil— that we must not speak a word nor do an act that 
would work injustice to another, nor even by look imply 
such injustice; that we must be as careful of his or her 
interests and welfare as of our own. Justice must govern 
all of our dealings with others. Love may permit us to 
give them more than justice could require, but justice 
demands that we must never give them less than due. No 
matter if they do not require justice at our hands, no 
matter if they are willing to take less than justice, no 
matter if they would say nothing if we should take advantage 
of them, no matter if they would not appreciate 
our degree of justice, still our course is the same. 
We have received of the Lord's Spirit, and must act 
from this standpoint and not from the standpoint of 
others who have not His Spirit or who are more or less 
blinded and disabled from dealing justly. 



LOVE AND JUSTICE BOTH CONTROL 

If justice must mark our conduct toward others, so 
love must be used by us in measuring the conduct of 
others toward us. We may not apply to others the strict 
rules of justice which we acknowledge as our responsibility 
to them. Love, generosity, demands that we accept 
from others less than justice, because we realize that they 
are fallen, imperfect, not only in their flesh, but also in 
their judgments. Furthermore, we see that the great 
mass of the world has not received the Spirit of the Lord 
at all, and therefore cannot appreciate these basic principles 
of justice and love as we appreciate them. We 
must in love look sympathetically upon their condition, 
as we would upon the condition of a sick neighbor. 



friend, parent or child. We must make allowance for 
their disordered condition, and think as charitably as 
possible of their words, conduct, etc. 

This does not mean that we are to be blind or oblivious 
to true conditions, and permit ourselves to be deprived 
of all that we possess or earn; but it does mean that we 
should take a kind, sympathetic view of the unrighteousness 
and injustice of those with whom we have dealings. 
We should remember that they are fallen, and that they 
have not received the grace of God as we have received 
it; and that they are not, therefore, to be measured by the 
line of strict justice, but rather that their imperfections 
are to be allowed for reasonably by the elastic cord of 
love. It is our own conduct that we are to measure by 
the law of justice, the Golden Rule. 



HOW LOVE MAY OVERFLOW THE MEASURE 

How clearly the Master sets forth these conditions, 
urging upon us the Golden Rule as the measure for our 
conduct toward others, and that in measuring their conduct 
toward us we shall be as generous as we shall wish 
our Lord to be in His judgment of ourselves, in harmony 
with His statement, "With what judgment ye judge, ye 
shall be judged"! A right appreciation of these basic 
principles, justice and love, by the Lord's people, and 
worked out in the daily affairs of life, would lift them 
above the world. It would save many an altercation, 
many a law suit, many a quarrel, and would make of the 
Lord's people shining examples of kindness, generosity, 
love, and at the same time examples of justice, right 
living, sterling honesty, etc. 

Love is not, like justice, an exact principle to be 
measured and weighed. It is three-fold in its character: 
it is pitiful; it is sympathetic, in the sense of kinship of 
soul— affectionate; it is reverential. These different forms 
of love are exercised according to the object upon which 
love is centered. Pity-love is the lowest form of love; 
it takes cognizance of even the vile and degraded, and is 
active in measures of relief. Sympathetic love rises 
higher, and proffers fellowship, comradeship. But the 
reverential love rises above all these, and delights in 
the contemplation of the good, the pure and the beautiful. 
In this latter form we may indeed love God supremely, 
as the personification of all that is truly worthy 
of admiration and reverence; and love our fellow men 
in proportion as they bear His likeness. The Divine 
Law demands love, both to God and to man. 

Although we owe to every man, as a duty, love in one 
of these senses, we may not demand it one of another; 
but love overflows justice. Love shakes the measure, 
presses it down, heaps it up. The lack of love is not to 
be complained of by the Christian, however, but when bestowed 
it is to be appreciated gratefully and reciprocated 
generously. Every one who craves love should crave it 



in its highest sense— in the sense of admiration and 
reverence. But this form of love is the most costly; and 
the only way to secure it is to manifest that nobility of 
character which calls it forth from others who are truly 
noble, truly like our Lord Jesus. 

The love begotten of sympathy and fellowship is also 
very precious. But any sentiment that comes merely in 
response to a demand, is deprived of love's choicest aroma. 
Therefore never demand love, but rather by manifestation 
of it toward others court its reciprocation. The 
love of pity is not called out by the nobility of the subject, 
but rather by the nobility of the bestower, whose heart 
is so full of love that it overflows in generous impulses 
toward even the unworthy. All of the objects of pity, 
however, are not unworthy of love in the higher senses; 
and some such often draw upon our love in every sense. 



A SELFISH, ONE-SIDED VIEW 

To demand Love's overflow of blessing— which is beyond 
the claim of justice— is only an exhibition of covet ousness. 
We may act on this principle of love ourselves, 
but we may not claim it from others. If we do, we manifest 
a lack of love and the possession of a considerable 
measure of selfishness. Some seem to see clearly where 
brotherly love should be extended to themselves, but are 

R5885:page 116 

slow to see their own obligations in this respect. 

For instance, two brethren were once rooming together, 
and through a failure to consider the relative 
claims of love and justice, one presumed upon the brotherly 
love of the other to the extent of expecting him to 
pay the entire rent of the room. When the other urged 
the claim of justice, the first urged the claim of brotherly-love, 
and the former reluctantly yielded, not knowing 
how to refute the claim, yet feeling that somehow some 
Christians had less principle than many worldly people. 
How strange that any of God's children should take so 
narrow, so one-sided, so selfish a view! Cannot all see 
that love and justice should work both ways; that it is 
the duty of each not to oversee others in these respects, 
but to look well to his own course, to see that he manifests 
brotherly love; and that if he would teach others, 
it should be rather by example than by precept? 



LET LOVE REIGN SUPREME 

Let us beware of a disposition toward covetousness. 
Let us each remember that he is steward over the Lord's 
goods entrusted to him, and not over those entrusted to 
his brother; that each is accountable to the Lord, and 



not to others, for the right use of that which the Master 

R5885:page 117 

has placed in his hands. There is nothing much more 

unbecoming and unlovely in the children of God than a 

disposition to petty criticism of the individual affairs of 

one another. It is a business too small for the saints, 

and manifests a sad lack of that brotherly love which 

should be especially manifest in broad and generous consideration, 

which would rather cover a multitude of sins 

than to magnify one. 

The Christian is to have the loving, generous disposition 
of heart— a copy of the Heavenly Father's disposition. 
In trivial affairs he is to have so much sympathy 
and love that he will take no notice, just as God for 
Christ's sake deals with us and does not impute sin to 
us, except as it represents knowledge and wilfulness. 
With such a rule operating amongst Christians, a determination 
not to recognize as an offense anything that is 
not purposely done, or intended as an offense, would be 
a great blessing to all, and the proper, God-like course. 
The transgressions to which our Lord refers in "Matthew 18:15-17" 
are not the trivial affairs of no consequence, 
are not evil surmisings and imaginings, are not rumors, 
are not fancied insults, but positive wrongs done us, and 
on account of which it is our duty, kindly and lovingly 
and wisely, to give some proper rebuke— some intimation 
that we recognize the wrong and that it has grieved us 
and hurt us and needs correction. 

The disposition to forgive should be with us always, 
and should be manifested by us at all times. Our loving 
generosity, our kindness and our desire to think no evil 
or as little evil as possible, should be manifested by all 
the words and acts of life. This is God-like. God had 
a kind, benevolent, generous sentiment toward us even 
while we were yet sinners. Nor did He wait for the 
sinners to ask forgiveness, but promptly manifested His 
desire for harmony and His readiness to forgive. The, 
whole Gospel Message is to this effect: "Be ye reconciled 
to God." Our hearts should be so full of this disposition 
toward forgiveness that our faces would not 
have a hard look, nor our words of reproof a bitter 
sting. We should manifest the loving forgiveness that 
we should have in our hearts at all times. 

May love and justice find their proper, relative places 
in the hearts of all of God's people, that so the enemy 
may have no occasion to glory! The Psalmist said, "O 
how love I Thy Law [the Law of Love whose foundation 
is justice]! It is my meditation all the day." ("Psalm 1 19:97".) 
Surely, if God's Law were the constant meditation 
of all, there would be fewer and less glaring mistakes 
than we often see! Let us watch and be sober, that 
the Adversary and our fallen flesh may not gain an advantage 
over us as New Creatures. Let SELF be more 
and more eliminated and LOVE reign supreme. 



R5885:page 117 

YOKE-FELLOWS WITH CHRIST 

"Take My yoke upon you and learn of Me;. ..for My 

yoke is easy and My burden is light."— "Matthew 1 1:29,30". 

OUR Lord was here addressing the Jews. He 
did not preach to the Gentiles, because the 
time for favor to the Gentiles had not yet 
come. He was not sent. He declared, 
"save to the lost sheep of the House of 
Israel." The Israelites were under the yoke 
of the nation of Rome, but we do not think 
that this was the yoke to which our Lord 
referred. They were under a religious 
yoke, the yoke of the Law. 

A yoke signifies servitude. One who bears a yoke is 
a servant. For instance, oxen have a yoke put upon 
them, not that they may bear a yoke, but that they may be 
enabled by the yoke to bear the burdens which are to be 
laid upon them. Hence the yoke becomes the symbol of 
service, of burden-bearing. So with the Israelites; all 
the obligations of the Law Covenant were to be borne 
by them. They had agreed to become the servants of 
God under the conditions of this Law Covenant. But 
they found themselves so unbalanced and weak, as the 
result of sin, that they could not bear the burdens of the 
Law. No Jew could draw that Law Covenant load. 
"There is none righteous; no, not one"— none could meet 
the obligations of God's perfect Law. 

Our Lord did not come to do away with the Law. 
On the contrary. He magnified the Law, and made it 
honorable. He showed that its requirements were neither 
unreasonable nor unjust, although by reason of their 
imperfection no man had been able to keep it. By keeping 
the Law perfectly Himself, our Lord proved that it 
is not beyond the possibility of the obedience of a perfect 
human being, but it is the full measure of a perfect man's 
ability. The Law did not prove too weighty a load for 
Him to bear; He was able fully to meet its every requirement, 
and did so. 

But now He was inviting His disciples to come under 
a different yoke— a yoke of servitude with Him. He had 
a new Message— the Gospel, the Message of "good tidings." 
It spoke of release from the obligations of that 
Law Covenant which they were unable to bear, but which 
was designed to be a "schoolmaster, to lead them to 
Christ." He told them how they might have part in 
this wonderful new arrangement which was just opening 
up, of which He Himself was to be the Head. The arrangement 
was altogether of the Father, but the Son 



was to be His special Representative. His disciples 
might have a part by becoming dead to the Law Covenant, 
through believing in Jesus their Messiah and becoming 
united to Him. Thus they would be acceptable 
to God by Him, and would be begotten of the Holy Spirit 
and become sons of God. 



THE NEW CREATURE FULFILS THE LAW 

In this way they would become associates of the 
Messiah in the keeping of the Law of righteousness; for 
it would be quite possible for them to keep God's Law 
under this new kind of yoke and these new conditions. 
The new yoke would not be upon the old creature; the 
old creature had already demonstrated that it could not 
keep the Law's requirements. But the Divine arrangement 
was that in order to become New Creatures they 
must become dead, not to the Law Covenant alone, but 
to all earthly interests, hopes and prospects. The Apostle, 
speaking of such, says the righteousness of the Law is 
fulfilled in us who walk not after the flesh, but after the 
Spirit.— "Romans 8:4\ 

We are not only fulfilling the requirements of the 
Law, but we do more. We lay down our lives for the 
brethren. This is beyond what the Law could require. 
But it is the New Creature that does this. The old 
creature is dead, from God's standpoint. The New Creature 
must operate through the old body, the imperfections 
of which are all covered by the robe of Christ's 
righteousness. Hence the New Creature is, from the Divine 
viewpoint, fulfilling the righteousness of the Law, 
for it abides faithful to the Lord and has continually 
the cleansing of the imputed merit of the blood of Christ 
for the imperfections of its body. 



THE HEAVY YOKE OF THE LAW UPON ISRAEL 

It was for a purpose that the Master brought this 
figure of a yoke to the attention of the Jews. They knew 

R5885:page 118 

something about the burdens of the Law under which 

they as a people had long groaned. They had learned 

that they were unable to gain the everlasting life which 

it promised on condition of perfect obedience to its requirements. 

For sixteen hundred years they had been 

trying to keep the Law, and had failed. They remembered 

that God had promised them the Messiah, and they 

knew that somehow or other He would bring in a new 

arrangement; but they did not know how or when. 

Through their Prophets God had foretold that He would 

take away the stony heart out of their flesh and give 



them a heart of flesh. So the faithful ones had been 
watching and waiting with longing for this Messiah and 
all that had been promised through Him. And devout 
Jews are still waiting for the fulfilment of those promises. 

But when Jesus came He began a work not clearly 
understood before. He did not then bring in the New 
Covenant which had been promised through the Prophets. 
Jeremiah 31:31-34'; "32:38-41"; v Ezekiel 1 1:19; "36:25-30".) 

R5886:page 118 

He did not then take away their stony hearts and give 
them hearts of flesh. This was to be a still future work, 
the work of the Kingdom, when it should be set up in 
power and great glory over all the earth. 



THE BEGINNING OF THE NEW CREATION 

But now, previous to all this, the Messiah had come 
for a different purpose; to do a preparatory work. He 
was instituting a new thing; He was starting a New 
Creation, and was inviting as many of the Jews as were 
in the proper attitude of heart to join with Him— not 
waiting for the New Covenant of the future, but to 
have a part with Him in this matter of becoming sons of 
God. "Yoke up with Me," Jesus said. And His Message 
was appreciated by those who had been sincerely 
trying to keep the Law. "Come unto Me, all ye that labor 
and are heavy-laden, and I will give you rest." ("Matthew 1 1:28".) 
Here was a new proposition. It must have 
seemed very strange to them, even if they had fully 
understood the figure of speech which He used. 

Although we who are Gentiles by nature were never 
under the yoke of the Jewish Law, yet, in another way, 
we have had a great burden which we were unable to 
bear— the burden of sin and death. Adam first came 
under the burden of sin which has brought so great a 
curse upon the world. We have all borne and felt the 
weight of sin and all its evil accompaniments. So the 
Master's words of hope and comfort have brought joy 
and refreshing to our hearts also, and we have found 
this offered rest— rest in Him, our true Yoke-Fellow. 

All who are heavy-laden, who appreciate the nature 
and the bitterness of sin, who know and fear it and are 
striving against it— all these are invited to come to the 
Master. They are invited to take His yoke upon them 
and to learn of Him. They are assured that His yoke 
is easy. It is easy in the sense that it is possible to bear, 
and that it is not galling. 



THE PERFECT, ADJUSTABLE YOKE 

We have seen oxen yoked. We have seen the great 



wooden yokes upon their necks bear down with heavy 

pressure upon the skin and muscles. A yoke that does 

not fit an animal will chafe him and cause restlessness; 

whereas a yoke that is properly fitted will be comfortable 

and will make (lie load much more easily drawn. Our 

Lord declares that He has a yoke that is easy, comfortable 

and enjoyable. His yoke is, so to speak, an elastic 

yoke. It meets the varied conditions of the different individuals 

who wear it. It is large for the large, small 

for the small, medium for the medium. It is a yoke by 

which the greatest, the highest and the most talented may 

yoke up with the Lord— or the most insignificant, may 

do the same. The Lord is able to bear for us all that 

we lack ability to bear. There is no yoke which will 

enable one to bear burdens as this yoke does. True, it 

requires perfection to bear this yoke and we are weak 

and imperfect beings; but if we have only one -tenth of 

perfection, and nine -tenths of imperfection, our Lord will 

bear for us the lacking nine -tenths. If we have one-half 

imperfection. He will bear that. Thus the weakest are 

provided for, and the strongest get what they need. Here 

is the great opportunity of the Gospel Age. 

Our Lord Jesus gave to the Apostle Paul the assurance, 
"My strength is made perfect in weakness." ( v 2 Corinthians 12:9'.) 
All things shall work together for 

good to us because we love Him, because we have taken 
His yoke, have become yoke-fellows with Him. We rejoice 
in the privilege of suffering with Him. The flesh 
may suffer, but the spirit rejoices. We shall not be tried 
beyond our strength. His burden is light. No one is required 
under this arrangement to do more than he is able 
to perform. If we have the right spirit we shall be glad 
to do all that we can accomplish. One who would not 
be willing to do all in his power would not be accounted 
by the Lord as faithful. The Master's burden is light if 
it be accepted in sincerity and in truth, and only those 
who so receive it can become yoke-fellows with Him. 



R5886:page 118 



"THE LITTLE FOXES" 

"Take us the foxes, the little foxes, that spoil the vines, 
for our vines have tender grapes."— 'Canticles 2: 15". 

IN THE above text the word "take" is used in 
the sense of catch— help us to catch the 
foxes, especially the little foxes. The fox is 
known as a very cunning, but docile little 
animal, not capable of ferocity and viciousness, 
but nevertheless the cause of much 
harm. Its very appearance of harmlessness 



makes it the more dangerous. The young 

fox, like all the young of the dog family, is 

very destructive in its character; and the 

fox is particularly cunning and crafty when bent on mischief, 

hence less likely to arouse suspicion of its evil intentions. 

It has a peculiar simplicity of manner; it attracts 

by its apparent innocence, and is all the more apt 

to deceive. 

In our text King Solomon seems to be picturing the 
depravities of our fallen nature which are not so extreme, 
not so gross, as some, but which are none the less 
very harmful; indeed they are especially deceitful and 
likely to elude our attention, and for this reason need 
more careful and constant watching. The words seem to 
be the language of the Bridegroom to His espoused. He 
emphasizes the expression, "the little foxes," and intimates 
that they would be very destructive. 

If we apply the term to sins, we find that there are 
little sins which are really more dangerous than grosser 
sins, because we are less likely to be on our guard against 
these than against the greater sins. Every one would be 
instinctively on guard against lions, bears, serpents, etc.; 
but little foxes are so attractive-looking and seem so artless 
in disposition that unless one has had bitter experience 
with them he would have little or no fear. But these 
little animals are much given to scratching and generally 
destroying everything with which they come in contact. 

R5886:page 119 



GUARD CAREFULLY THE "TENDER GRAPES" 

In this illustration of the wise man the grape-vine is 
spoken of, as though these foxes have a special predilection 
for grapes— the grapes representing the fruits of the 
Holy Spirit. As these little foxes delight to tear the vine 
with their sharp claws and to gnaw the roots with their 
teeth, so small sins tear the branches and gnaw at the 
roots of the spiritual vine, thus endangering its very life. 
They destroy or devour the precious grapes, which are 
very tender. Grapes during the formative period and 
while very small are exceedingly tender and the stems 
very brittle and easily snapped off the vine and destroyed. 
So the Spirit's fruitage in the hearts and lives of immature 
Christians may be easily ruined, either by their 
own lack of care and watchfulness or by the example of 
the brethren. How careful should those be who have 
been longer in the Heavenly way to guard their words 
and conduct in the presence of the younger, less mature 
ones, the lambs of the flock! Unloving criticism of the 
brethren before beginners, or others, may do untold 
harm and is a manifestation of a lack of love and 
Christian maturity. 

Every child of God should be especially on guard 
against the little things— the things that seem like jokes. 



which sometimes do more harm in the Church than things 
which appear great; the little insinuations, that often 
leave a sting; the jesting about sacred matters, turning 
Scriptural passages into jests; the little acts of selfishness. 
etc. These things and many others which by careful 
thought each one may note really do much damage, injuring 
the branches and destroying the precious fruits 
of the Lord's Vine. Then let us, dear brethren, strive to 
be more and more watchful to catch these "little foxes." 
Let us each, individually, watch and pray that we do not 
by thought or word or act of ours hinder or lessen our 
own fruit-bearing or that of another. 

It is difficult for us to realize how potent is our influence 
for either good or evil in matters which, unless 
carefully scrutinized, seem trifling. Ah, these little foxes! 
Careless words, spoken with scarcely a thought or in a 
moment of impatience, little grumblings, a sarcastic word 
or laugh or look or shrug— oh, how these things count in 
our daily lives either for or against our own spiritual development, 
and often the development of others! How 
earnestly we should each seek to upbuild our own character 
and the characters of the brethren! Our Lord is 
marking all these things. Remember, "He that is faithful 
in that which is least, will be faithful also in much." 



R5887:page 119 



ST. PETER DELIVERED FROM PRISON 

-APRIL 30.- ACTS 12:1-11".-- 

PASSOVER TRIALS AND TESTINGS-DEATH OF ST. JAMES- 
ST. PETER IMPRISONED-HIS MIRACULOUS DELIVERANCE- 
AN ALL-NIGHT PRAYER-MEETING-THE REWARD OF 
FAITH-LESSONS FOR OUR DAY-DIVINE GUARDIANSHIP OF 
ALL WHO ARE TRULY THE LORD'S-THE POWER OF 
SATAN-THE POWER OF GOD AND THE POWER OF PRAYER. 

"The angel of Jehovah encampeth round about them 
that fear Him, and delivereth them."— v Psalm 34:7'. 

HEROD was the family name of several kings 
who ruled Israel, but who were descendants 
of Esau— Edomites. At the time of our 
Study for today Herod Agrippa I. had been 
appointed king of Judea. He was the grandson 
of Herod the Great, murderer of the 
babes of Bethlehem, and the nephew of 
Herod Antipas, who beheaded John the 
Baptist and subsequently, with his soldiers, 
set Jesus at naught and mocked Him, just 
prior to His crucifixion. 



Herod Agrippa appears to have been desirous of the 
good will of the people, even at the cost of principle. He 
took pains to observe the minutiae of Jewish ceremonials. 
He hung up in the Temple the gold chain which the 
Emperor Caligula had given him. The story is related 
that at the Feast of Tabernacles he caused the entire Book 
of Deuteronomy to be read in the hearing of the people; 
and that when the reader came to the words, "Thou 
mayest not set a stranger over thee, who is not thy 
brother" ("Deut. 17: 15"), the king "burst into theatrical 
tears." Thereupon the populace obsequiously cried, "Do 
not weep, Agrippa; thou art our brother!" 



PASSOVER SEASON SIFTINGS 

On the lookout to curry favor with the Jews, especially 
the influential ones, Agrippa caused the Apostle James to 
be beheaded. St. James was one of the three who had 
usually accompanied our Lord in the most confidential 
capacity. Although the record of this noble Apostle's 
ministry is brief in the extreme, it contains nothing that 
gives the slightest suggestion of anything but zeal and 
faithfulness to our Lord and to His Cause. This James, 
who died early in the Christian Era, should not be confounded 
with the author of the Epistle of James— "James 
the Less," supposed to have been second cousin to our 
Lord, and for this reason styled "the Lord's brother," according 
to Jewish custom. 

Finding that the death of St. James brought great 
pleasure to the Jews, Agrippa had the Apostle Peter arrested. 
The expression, "When he had apprehended 
him," implies that some delay occurred between the order 
for the Apostle's arrest and the time of his imprisonment 
—that his arrest was after searching. Probably all of 
the Apostles were more or less secreted about that time; 
but, trusting to the sacredness of the Passover season, St. 
Peter had ventured forth and was arrested and imprisoned, 
Agrippa intending his death directly at the close 
of the Passover week. Meantime, however, the Lord 
delivered His faithful Apostle, as this Study shows. 

We can well imagine the sadness of the Church at this 
Passover season, which must have reminded them considerably 
of the time of our Lord's death and of the 
alarm then amongst His followers. For some years past 
it has seemed to us as though each Passover season, each 
Memorial celebration, was a time of special trial and 
testing amongst the followers of our Lord. Whether 
this is a fact or not, it surely will not injure the Lord's 
people to be especially on guard against the wiles of the 
Adversary at these times. Let us watch and pray always, 
lest we fall into temptation. 

The thought of special trial, special temptation from 
the Adversary at this season of the year, seems to have 
been the foundation for the Lenten Season, a period of 
special restraint, fasting and prayer, which has come 



down to us through the oldest channels of Church history. 
The fact that with many today the Lenten season 
is a mere formality does not mean that it is so or that it 
was originally so. Strongly would we recommend the 
fasting and prayer at all times enjoined in the Scriptures; 
and we suggest that, if possible, alertness be especially 

R5887 : page 120 

exercised by all the consecrated during the forty days 
preceding the Memorial. 

As we have already explained, our self-denials are 
not merely along the lines of food and drink, but are to 
extend to all of our appetites. Undoubtedly a very simple 
and limited diet during the Spring of the year would be 
beneficial for the majority of mankind, even though there 
were no spiritual blessings connected therewith. Winter 
cold brings hearty appetites; and the result is that toward 
Spring the system is apt to be surfeited, or over-charged. 
From this condition it need to be relieved by a measure 
of abstention, which is as favorable to spirituality as 
surfeiting is unfavorable. 



PRAYING FOR ST. PETER 

St. Peter is supposed to have been imprisoned in the 
famous Castle of Antonia, where our Lord was arraigned 
before Pilate, and where St. Paul was subsequently taken 
when mobbed in Jerusalem. The Apostle had a guard of 
four quaternions— four soldiers each— who relieved each 
other every three hours. Two of the four were chained 
to St. Peter's arms, one to each arm; a third stood outside 
the door; and a fourth was stationed in the passage 
leading to the outer iron gate. 

The power of Divine grace to help in ever)' time of 
need and to give peace amidst alarms is well illustrated in 
this case by the fact that under all these circumstances 
St. Peter was fast asleep when the angel of the Lord 
came to deliver him. The proprieties of the case are also 
illustrated by the fact that the Church were not asleep, 
but praying for the Apostle. It was not for him to pray 
for his own deliverance from the power of Agrippa; he 
had already consecrated his life unto death, and properly 
should feel quite ready to lay down his life at this time, 
if such proved to be the Divine will respecting him. For 
him to have asked for the prolongation of life would have 
been to ask amiss, and would have manifested a wilfulness 
incompatible with a full consecration to the Lord's 
will. But with the Church it was different. While expressing 
their confidence in the Divine supervision of the 
affairs of the Church, they could with all propriety tell the 
Lord of their love for St. Peter and express the hope that 
it might be the Lord's will that the Apostle should continue 
with them for their joy and comfort and for their 
upbuilding in the "most holy faith." 



Then, too, the loss of the Apostle James, who apparently 
was the leader amongst the Apostles, would make 
St. Peter and every other Apostle doubly precious in the 
estimation of the Household of Faith. God purposed 
that St. Peter should live to be an old man; for this was 
our Lord's prophecy concerning him. ('John 21: 18,19'.) 
But the emergency proved a blessing to the Church, by 
way of stirring up their pure minds to an appreciation 
of God's Cause in general and of St. Peter in particular. 



DELIVERED BY AN ANGEL 

Between three and six o'clock in the morning St. 

Peter, who had been sleeping peacefully, was awakened 
by an angel, whose radiant features enabled the Apostle 
quickly to discern that his deliverer was a holy being. 
The Apostle was bidden to arise. Quickly and simultaneously 
the chains were loosed which bound him to the 
soldier by either hand. He was then instructed to put on 
his sandals and his outer garment, or cloak, and to follow 
his leader. He did so, realizing the facts as those in a 
dream. Thus he was led past the first and second wards, 
or doors, until they came to the great gate leading into the 
city. This swung open of its own accord; and then the 
angel left him. 

It is worthy of notice that the miracles performed were 
only such as were beyond St. Peter's natural power. 
Whatever he could do he was required to do; namely, to 
put on his sandals and his cloak and to follow the angel. 
He might have been transported; sandals might have been 
fastened to his feet; a new cloak might have been provided. 
But the lesson is more profitable as it was given. 
Similarly in the Lord's dealings with us today, we should 
remember that it is ours to do everything in our power; 
and that it is the Lord's to overrule all things for our 
good and to supply our deficiencies from His abundance. 

When the Apostle came to himself, when he realized 
the facts in the case— that he was free— his faith was 
strengthened. Willing to die, he found that the Lord was 
willing that he should live, labor and endure; and he was 
equally pleased, rejoicing, we may be sure, for the privilege 
of further service, even though it would mean further 
sacrifices and sufferings for the sake of the Lord 
and of His people. 

Doubtless the angel had started St. Peter in the direction 
of Mary's home, where prayer was being made on 
his behalf. The description of the house implies that it 
was one of the better class. St. Peter's knock was answered 
by little Rose (Rhoda), who child-like, was so 
delighted, when she recognized the Apostle's voice, that 
she neglected to open the door before running back to tell 
the praying household that he was at the gate. Expecting 
no deliverance at such an hour, some thought that the 
little maid was mistaken, and insisted that it must be his 
angel— in harmony with the prevalent thought that an 



angel had supervision of each individual of God's people, 
and that such might personate the one under his protection. 

The brethren were surprised at the Lord's answer to 
their petition; for it came very unexpectedly as respects 
time. When they realized that it was actually St. Peter 
who stood before them, there was an outburst of excitement 
and of questions which the Apostle was obliged to 
silence by the shaking of his hands. Then he narrated 
the wonderful story of his deliverance, and bade them tell 
it to the other James, the cousin of Jesus, and to the other 
disciples. Then he went his way, whether to another city 
or to another house we do not know. In any event, he 
exercised wisdom in not needlessly provoking Herod. 

With the coming of daylight there was consternation 
in the prison. Later on in this same chapter we learn of 
another visit of the angel of the Lord. This time he came 
to smite the king with disease, from which he subsequently 
died. The entire chapter shows us the power of Satan, 
the power of God and the power of prayer. 



THE GOLDEN TEXT 

Our Golden Text is a symbolical statement illustrative 
of the Divine guardianship of all those who are truly the 
Lord's. The thought is that the affairs of His people are 
under His continual supervision. Whether we think of 
the angel of the Lord as one of the Heavenly host especially 
appointed on our behalf, or whether we think of 
him from the standpoint of the various powers of nature, 
the levers of which are all in the Divine care, it matters 
not. We have the assurance that the Father Himself 
loves us, and that all the Heavenly powers are pledged to 
those whom He has accepted in Christ Jesus; and these 
unitedly guarantee blessings to all who abide in God's love. 

To thus abide means to abide in the Redeemer. It 
means to abide loyal to our consecration, to do the 
Father's will to the best of our ability. That will is declared 
to be that we shall love the Lord supremely, shall 
love our neighbor as ourselves, and shall love all the members 
of the Household of Faith even as Christ loved us. 



R5888:page 121 



THE MISSIONARIES OF ANTIOCH 

-MAY 7.-' ACTS 11:19-26'; M 3:1 -3\- 

PERSECUTION SPREADS THE GOSPEL-THE FIRST CHURCH 
AMONGST THE GENTILES-BARNABAS SENT FROM JERUSALEM TO 
ASSIST THE YOUNG CHURCH-SAUL OF TARSUS BROUGHT 
TO ANTIOCH-THE TWO BRETHREN SENT FORTH AS 



MISSIONARIES-ORDINATION AND LAYING ON OF HANDS. 

"Go ye therefore, and make disciples of 
all the nations."- v Matthew 28:19\ R.V. 

ANTIOCH, at the time of our Study, was the 

third city in the world both in commercial 

importance and in population, only Rome 

and Alexandria taking precedence. It is 

noted as being the first city outside of 

Palestine in which a Christian Church assembly 

was formed. Indeed, we might say 

that as Jerusalem was the center of influence 

in Palestine, so Antioch became a 

center of influence as respected the Gospel 

amongst the Gentiles. 

It seems that the little spark of Truth which started 
the work of the Lord at Antioch resulted from the persecution 
which arose at the time of St. Stephen's death. 
Some of those forced out of Jerusalem by the persecution 
settled at Antioch; and of course they could not 
walk in the light of the Gospel without letting the light 
shine out for others. At first this was done only toward 
those who were of the Jewish faith; and in a large commercial 
center such as Antioch there were sure to be large 
numbers of Jews. We know not how many of them were 
reached with the Gospel; but it was surely confined to 
them until the end of Israel's seventy symbolical weeks 
of Divine favor— until the autumn of 36 A.D. 

At the same time that the Lord was sending Deacon 
Philip to the Samaritans and to the Ethiopian eunuch, 
and the opening the door to the Gentiles through the Apostle 
Peter, He was ready to open the door to the Gentiles 
everywhere. Under the leadings of Divine providence 
some of the Christian Hebrews got the proper thought 
at the proper time— that a Gentile who would receive 
the Lord Jesus could be classed as a disciple equally with 
the Jews who had done so. The work thus started 
amongst the Gentiles at Antioch spread considerably, the 
Gentiles seeming to take more notice of the Gospel than 
had the Jews to whom it was first preached. 



BARNABAS SENT TO ANTIOCH 

The news that the Gospel had gone to the Gentiles 
at Antioch, and that large numbers were turning to the 
Lord, reached the Church at Jerusalem— the head-center 
of the Christian work, so to speak. The Apostles and all 
the brethren had been prepared by the Lord's manifest 
dealing in the case of Cornelius, the Roman centurion; 
and this undoubtedly would detract from their surprise 
and would largely correct any prejudice on the subject 
of the Gentiles as fellow-heirs of the Abrahamic Promise, 
which had previously pertained to the Jews alone. 



Nevertheless, we note that the record does not say that 
this news caused rejoicing in the Church at Jerusalem. 

trepidation that large numbers of Gentiles were attaching 

that this would have an injurious effect upon the Cause 
they loved to serve. 

Barnabas to Antioch was that he might see and judge 
of the true condition of things, and give a report as to 

as fellow-heirs with the saints. When Barnabas had 

manifested amongst the believers there. This must have 
been manifested not only in their faith in Jesus as their 

disciples of our Lord. Barnabas quickly discerned the 

these believers, and thus realized that the Cause, instead 
of being hindered by such accessions, would be honored 

although it is not stated, that he promptly made report to 
the brethren at Jerusalem, and that they were glad also. 

they sent Barnabas to Antioch. The fact that he was 

Levite by birth would make him very careful of every 
Jewish interest connected with the faith; and undoubtedly 

of Cyprus, an island in the Mediterranean Sea, not far 
from Antioch. Born thus at a distance from Jerusalem 

man, as well as familiar with the dialect spoken by the 
people of Antioch. Another good reason for sending 

very helpful as a brother and a teacher in the Church. 
We remember that he sold a part of his property in the 

the name Barnabas— "a son of consolation," a helper— 



HIS WORK WITH THE YOUNG CHURCH 



brethren, and in the same comforting and helpful manner 
as at Jerusalem he exhorted them all. Doubtless he saw 

finding fault, instead of lacerating their feelings and chiding 
them, he began by acknowledgment of what he saw 

was to the effect that they should cleave unto the 
Lord with purpose of heart. He wished the dear 

were firmly united to the Lord, that their minds were 
fully made up, that their consecration was complete. 



might show them kindly, gently, certain weaknesses of 
the flesh to which they were addicted. Or, their hearts 
being more firmly united to the Lord, they might very 
speedily see these inconsistencies of themselves, without 
a word being said. The point which we would impress 
is that it was not a restraining of the flesh, nor a perfecting 
of it, but a much deeper work of grace than this 
—a purity of heart, a heart-adhesion to the Lord. 

We cannot do better today than to follow this same 
course in our endeavors to do good unto others as we 
have opportunity. The brethren need strengthening 
rather than tearing. They need building up in the most 
holy faith and in love. They need encouraging in heart 
adhesion to the Lord. Criticisms of the flesh may come 
in afterward, but very gradually and kindly. 

There were three elements cooperating which made 
Barnabas so suitable a person for service, and which will 
surely make any of us an able minister of the Truth. 
These elements are stated in "Verse 24 v : "He was a 
good man [moral, upright, reverential], full of the Holy 
Spirit [he had not received the grace of God in vain; in 
him it was a living power, the new mind guiding and controlling 
in all of his affairs] and of faith." However 
good a man may be, and however much of the Lord's 
Spirit he may have, a strong faith is essential. "Without 
faith it is impossible to please God." Let us strive to have 
all of these qualifications in our ministry, that we may be 

R5888 : page 122 

true sons of consolation, helpful in the Lord's service 
and to His people wherever we may be. No wonder we 
read that as a result of the labors of Barnabas at Antioch 
much people was added to the Lord! 



SAUL OF TARSUS BROUGHT TO ANTIOCH 

The last we heard of Saul of Tarsus ("Acts 9:30") was 
that after the opening of his eyes of understanding, after 
he had become a disciple of the Lord Jesus, he had 
preached first in Damascus and then in Jerusalem, after 
which, his life being endangered, the brethren had sent 
him down to Caesarea, and then probably by ship to his 
native city. Tarsus. We are not informed regarding the 
nature of his work in his home city, but can readily 
suppose that one of his character and disposition would 
not long remain idle. And if the sphere of outward 
activities was a narrow one, we may be sure that his 
mind was active in the study of the Divine Plan, and 
that his great heart was also active, in comprehending 
Divine grace and in considering ways of service. 

Evidently Barnabas had in mind the talents, the force, 
the logic, of Brother Saul, whom he had met in Jerusalem; 
and he concluded that. Tarsus being not very far 
from Antioch, he would look Saul up, interest him in the 



service of the Church at Antioch, etc. He probably remembered 

that 

extremely broad— too broad, perhaps, for the brethren at 

Jerusalem to appreciate fully when Saul was amongst 

large-hearted Barnabas, had come to see the Divine Plan 

comprehended it. 

were such as would deeply interest Saul, and that the 
brethren there would be greatly profited by his assistance. 

influence was doubtless great. We rejoice in noting the 

heart nobility of 

smaller caliber would have reasoned themselves into a 

wrong course, saying, "Having had larger opportunities 

Apostles at Jerusalem, I am the chief one amongst the 
brethren here. But if I bring Saul into our midst, his 

Scriptures, will cast me quite into the shade." 
Brethren who reason thus are misguided by their own 

own hands; that with such a spirit they could neither 
please Him nor be prospered in His service; and that the 

All of the Lord's people should be noble and unselfish. 
And the closer we approximate this character, the more 

the greater will be our sphere of influence for righteousness, 
for the Truth, for the Lord. 



It is noteworthy that our Lord never gave a name to 
His people, but called them disciples— pupils, learners. 

such as, "Church of the living God," "Church of God," 
"Church of Christ," "the Church." But gradually the 

came to be the general name everywhere. 
It is a pity that any have thought it necessary to adopt 

entire Church of Christ, or to use these names in a sectarian 
manner. Evidently the name Christian should represent 

therefore, who trusts in Him as the Redeemer and who 
accepts all the fundamental doctrines of the Scriptures. 

That all were sinners, needing to be redeemed before 
they could be acceptable to God. (2) That the believer 

Christ. (3) That he has accepted the Leadership and name 



of Christ and henceforth will seek to walk in His steps. 

There was a start toward sectarianism in the early 
Church, some saying, "I am a Christian, but of the order 
of Paul." Others said, "I am a Christian of the order of 
Apollos;" still others, "I am a Christian of the order of 
Peter." St. Paul promptly rebuked this spirit, assuring 
them that relationship in Christ was all that was necessary, 
that neither Peter nor Paul had redeemed them, and 
that neither Apostle could therefore occupy the place of 
a head to the Church. Furthermore, the Apostle calls 
attention to the fact that such a spirit on their part was 
an evidence that much carnality still remained, much of 
a worldly, partisan spirit, contrary to the teachings of the 
Holy Spirit. -1 Corinthians l:10-13V3:l-7\ 

It is to be regretted that ever since the Reformation 
this spirit has prevailed to a large extent, some taking 
the name of Luther, others, Wesley, Calvin, others non-personal, 
sectarian or party names such as Methodist, 
Presbyterian, Baptist, etc. We are not claiming that 
those who do so are wholly carnal, without the Lord's 
Spirit; but with the Apostles we do claim that a disposition 
to such partisanship is contrary to the Spirit of the 
Lord, and to that extent is carnal, fleshly, and should be 
overcome by all who would be recognized of the Lord 
as overcomers. 

What we ought to have is one Church, one Household 
of Faith, accepting the plain fundamentals of Scripture, 
and with limitations as to acceptance of more or 
less conjectural views outside of those fundamentals- 
all fellowshipping each other, and all known as Christians, 
and thus separated from all who deny the Atonement. 
from all who deny the results of the Atonement in the 
resurrection, and from all who deny the propriety of a 
newness of life in the present time. In this view of the 
matter, each individual Christian would have an independence 
as respects his own thought, aside from fundamentals 
which are clearly stated in the Scriptures. 



MISSIONARIES SENT FORTH 

For a considerable time Paul and Barnabas met with 
the Church at Antioch in the worship of the Lord and 
in the study of His Word. The result of these studies 
was that the Church as a whole was developed and 
brought to the point of considering and praying about 
means for the spread of the Gospel. There were a number 
of Prophets— public speakers— and teachers in the 
Church; and evidently they began to think of how they 
might be used to the glory of God and to the blessing of 
others, as they themselves had been blessed by the Truth. 

This is always the case with those who receive the 
Truth into good and honest hearts. Properly enough. 
they desire to feed thereon themselves and to grow strong 
in the Lord. But just so surely as the Truth is received, 
it gives a strength and a desire to use that strength. 



This is as true today as it was then. The sanctification 
which the Truth brings starts with our begetting 
of the Spirit; and the energy for service corresponds 
with the quickening of the Spirit. 

Evidently the Church at Antioch had an oversupply 
of teachers, as compared to its own requirements, and 
began to look about for larger fields of service. They 
were uncertain as to the course they should follow, and 
hence looked to the Lord as the real Head of the Church. 

R5888 : page 123 

They served and they fasted; and we may be sure that 
they prayed also. As a result they came to the conclusion 
to send forth two of their number— Barnabas and 
Paul— as representatives of the whole in mission work. 

We are not informed in what manner the Lord directed 
them to this decision. It is possible that this was 
after the same manner that we today would consider 
a similar case, and would say, "After studying the Scriptures 
and praying, seeking thus to know the mind of the 
Lord, we believe that it would be His will that such ones 
of our number should go for a public service of the 
Truth. We believe that we are guided to this conclusion, 
not by any wrong spirit of pride or ambition, nor with 
any mercenary motive, but by the Holy Spirit. We believe 
that it is the Lord's will that we as a congregation 
should send forth these representatives to carry the 
light to others." 

In some manner the conviction came strongly to the 
Church at Antioch that this was its duty and privilege. 
It is worthy of note that the Church sought out its very 
best representatives for this service, thus letting the spirit 
of self-sacrifice prevail. No doubt the Lord blessed the 
Church correspondingly, and made up to them the loss 
sustained in the giving of these two very talented brethren 
to the mission work. 



ORDINATION AND LAYING ON OF HANDS 

The proper course having been decided upon, the congregation 
fasted, prayed and laid their hands upon Paul 
and Barnabas, and then sent the two on their missionary 
tour with God-speed. The laying on of hands would 
probably be done by the congregation through their representatives, 
the Elders. But this proceeding did not 
signify, as is generally understood today, an "Ordination"; 
for Paul and Barnabas had been recognized for a 
considerable time as amongst the principal prophets and 
teachers in the Church at Antioch. It would not signify 
authority to preach, as Ordination sometimes means today 
amongst Christians of various sects and parties. 

This ceremony simply meant, "We, the congregation 
at Antioch, by this laying on of hands of our 
representative Elders, are sending forth these two men. 



Paul and Barnabas, on a missionary tour; and that they 

go, not only as representatives of the Lord and of themselves, 

but also as representatives of the Church of the 

Lord at Antioch; and that as such we hold ourselves responsible 

for their maintenance. We will supply them 

the needful assistance, and thus will be colaborers— 

sharing in their labors, sympathizing in their difficulties 

and trials, helping them in their necessities, and partaking 

with them also in whatever results shall come to the 

Lord's praise through their efforts." 

Accordingly we find that after this missionary tour 
the two brethren returned to Antioch, and made report. 
It would appear that subsequently the Apostle Paul, at 
least, traveled without any such dependence upon the 
Church at Antioch— without any such praying and laying 
on of hands and without any subsequent reports of 
results of labors— though still in love and sympathy with 
them, so far as we may judge. 



R5889:page 123 



"LO, WE TURN TO THE GENTILES!" 

-MAY 14.- ACTS 13:13-15,42-52\~ 

ST. PAUL'S FIRST MISSIONARY TOUR-HIS SERMON AT ANTIOCH 
IN PISIDIA-EFFECT OF HIS DISCOURSE TWOFOLD- 
VIOLENT OPPOSITION FROM THOSE BLINDED BY SECTARIAN 
PREJUDICE-MISREPRESENTATION AND SLANDER EVER 
THE ADVERSARY'S METHOD OF FIGHTING THE TRUTH. 

"I have set thee for a light of the Gentiles, that thou shouldest be 
for salvation unto the uttermost part of the earth."— v Verse 47\ 

FROM Antioch Paul and Barnabas went to the 
seaport town of Selucia, where they took 
ship for the island of Cyprus. This island 
was as about as good a place to begin as any, 
and had the advantage of being the home 
country of Barnabas, who was familiar with 
the dialect of the people, their customs, etc. 
With them went a cousin of Barnabas, John 
Mark, writer of the Gospel of Mark and 
son of one of the Marys at Jerusalem. 

Although Paul and Barnabas fully appreciated the 
fact that Gentiles might now have access to the blessings 
of the Gospel, nevertheless in every place they entered 
into the Jewish synagogues. The Jews already believed 
Moses and the Prophets, and therefore expected Messiah. 
Hence they would necessarily be in a much better attitude 
of mind to receive the Gospel Message than would be 
the Gentiles, who knew nothing of such matters and who 



therefore would require more instruction. Indeed, probably 
the larger proportion of converts between the time 
of our Lord's resurrection and the fall of Jerusalem, 
A.D. 70, were made amongst the Jews; and up to 
that time comparatively few Gentiles accepted Christ. 

The missionary tour probably consumed considerable 
time, as the three went from village to village, preaching 
Christ, until they reached the city of Paphos, at the far 
end of the island. There they found Sergius Paulus, a 
man of good judgment, the governor of the island. Even 
before the missionaries got there, he had a hearing ear; 
and the Adversary, noting this, was at work upon him 
through Elymas, a Jewish sorcerer or magician, who 
had ingratiated himself with the proconsul and was 
esteemed his friend. We are not to wonder that a man 
of sound judgment, as the proconsul is represented to 
have been, should be so interested in the magician and 
his doings. On the contrary, we should remember that 
similarly there are some men of ability today who are to 
some extent under the influence of the same Adversary 
and his agents— spirit mediums. Besides, the magicians 
in olden times were mixtures of scientist and miracle 
worker, and usually very bright men. 



CONFLICT BETWEEN TRUTH AND ERROR 

When the proconsul heard something respecting Paul 
and Barnabas, he sent for them, desiring to know more. 
Then came a conflict between the powers of light and the 
powers of darkness, between Truth and Error. There is 
no harmony between the two; they are opponents at every 
point. And so in this case, as soon as the magician discovered 
that the proconsul was coming under the influence 
of the Truth, he used his every power to prevent it. This 
furnished occasion for a remarkable manifestation of 
Divine power through the Apostle Paul, who denounced 
the magician by a plain statement of his case and declared 
that he would become so blind that he could not 
see even the sun for a season. The blindness came upon 
Elymas gradually— first, a mistiness, which subsequently 
settled into complete darkness. 

This manifestation of Divine power was convincing to 
the proconsul. It was not that this incident converted 
him; but that having already heard the teachings, and 
being in the process of comparing these with his previous 
views and with the presentation of Elymas, he was 
enabled by this incident to reach the right conclusion and 
to decide his matters on the Lord's side. 

R5889 : page 124 

DEPARTURE OF JOHN MARK 



St. Paul and his company did not tarry at Paphos, 
but departed for Asia Minor. When they came to Perga, 
in Pamphylia, there John Mark discontinued his service 
and returned to Jerusalem. Hardship or discouragement 
or home-sickness— we know not what— evidently quenched 
his zeal as a servant of the Lord for a time, assuredly 
much to his disadvantage. Whatever the cause, the 
Apostle Paul evidently considered it quite insufficient, for 
on another occasion, when Barnabas suggested that Mark 
accompany them similarly, St. Paul declined. OActs 15:36-40'.) 
This he would not have done had Mark's 
desertion been fully justified by necessity. 

There is an element of encouragement in Mark's experience, 
however. Later on, he evidently became a devoted 
soldier of the Cross and was again accepted to the 
Lord's service; and we find that the Apostle Paul made 
acknowledgment of appreciation of his faithfulness. 
PColossians 4:10 v ; v 2 Timothy 4:1 P.) The Lord is very 
merciful to us in our weaknesses and imperfections; and 
as He restored Mark, undoubtedly He is willing also to 
restore all who will similarly learn a lesson from their 
failures, and who earnestly strive for reinstatement and 
for the privilege of service. 



PREACHING AT ANTIOCH IN PISIDIA 

The first stop in Asia Minor was made at Antioch of 
Pisidia. The usual custom was followed— of going first 
to the Jewish synagogue. There the missionaries were 
recognized as strangers and also as men of talent. After 
the regular services of the synagogue had been introduced 
by the reading of the usual lesson from the Law, the two 
were invited to address the assembly— Jews by birth and 
Jewish proselytes from the Gentiles. 

The Apostle Paul was the speaker and made a telling 
address. He recognized the fact that his hearers had 
faith in God's promises regarding the coming Messianic 
Kingdom. He did not need, therefore, to emphasize the 
Kingdom feature in his discourse. Rather, his hearers 
needed to see that there could be no Kingdom and no 
permanent blessing of all the families of the earth, such 
as was implied in the Promise made to Abraham, unless 
in some manner Divine forgiveness of the sins of the 
world could first be obtained. 

The trend of the Apostle's address, therefore, was to 
show that in the past God had established a typical kingdom, 
which had never reached the grand stage essential 
to the fulfilment of the Abrahamic Promise; and that 
the thing necessary and lacking was a REDEMPTION of 
the world and the forgiveness of sins. Then he presented 
to their attention Jesus as the Messiah— not merely a 
crucified Messiah, but also a risen One, who, because of 
His death for the sins of the world, was able to save to 
the uttermost all that should come unto God through Him. 
Having put the matter squarely before them, the Apostle 



offered his hearers forgiveness of sins as the very essence 
of the Gospel of Christ. 

Forgiveness of sin is still the essence of the Gospel, 
although mankind now, as then, are generally loth to 
accept it thus. It disappoints them by condemning them 
and declaring that all are sinners; that "there is none 
righteous, no, not one"; that all need just such a redemption 
as God has provided in the Sacrifice of Christ. It 
disappoints also in that it shows a necessity for repudiation 
of sin in the heart and, so far as possible, in resisting 
it in all the conduct of life. 

Few have an ear to hear this Message. The majority 
are ready to say, "Preach unto us smooth things! Praise 
us for our religious fervor! Point out to us how far 
superior we are, not only to the heathen world, but to 
the masses of those about us. Tell us that we are God's 
people, and that He could not get along without us. Do 
not tell us that we are sinners, under condemnation as 
others are; and that all who would come unto God through 
Jesus Christ must come by the same narrow gate of faith, 
repudiation of sin, and heart-consecration to do God's will." 



TWOFOLD EFFECT OF THIS DISCOURSE 

The Apostle's discourse had a twofold effect. The 
honest-hearted realized the Truth regarding God's perfection 
and their own imperfection, and recognized their 
need of just such a Savior as the Apostle had preached. 
These were speedily drawn to the missionaries, who 
recognized their right attitude of heart and assured them 
that they were already in God's grace, or favor; that now 
the Message of salvation through Jesus was an additional 
unfolding and development of the same favor that had 
already been extended to the Jews; and that they should 
continue in the grace of God— continue to let God guide 
them in His way— continue to be the recipients of His 
mercies and blessings, which now were multiplied to them 
through Christ Jesus and the Atonement work which He 
had accomplished. Others were much less prepared for 
the Apostle's words, and rather inclined to be envious of 
the attention shown the missionaries and their teachings. 

News of the new religion— supplemental to the Jewish 
—spread throughout the little city, in which Judaism had 
evidently gained a good foothold and great respect. The 
next Sabbath the whole city gathered to hear the Message 
of the missionaries— the majority probably coming merely 
out of curiosity, to see the difference between these doctrines 
and those of the regular Jewish teachers. Such 
attention to two strangers and their new doctrines, which 
threatened an overthrow of Judaism, naturally awakened 
a spirit of jealousy in those interested in forms and ceremonies, 
honor amongst men, and denominational pride. 

As a result, they contradicted St. Paul's statements with 
blasphemy. This does not mean that they blasphemed 
God's name, but that they slandered, or blasphemed, the 



Apostle and Barnabas, speaking evil of them. We may 

surmise that they misrepresented the motives and the 

characters of the missionaries, etc. This is the usual 

course of those who fight against the Truth. It has ever 

been thus. The Truth cannot be gainsaid; it is irresistible. 

But it can be misrepresented; it can be denied. The presentations 

of the Truth can be distorted, and its messengers 

slandered, vilified. The Adversary seems to adopt 

this method on every occasion. It is the method now in 

vogue. Those who oppose Present Truth dare not meet 

it openly in public discussion; but they distort and misrepresent 

it, and speak evil of its advocates. 



TWO LESSONS FOR OUR DAY 

The missionaries were not discouraged by the opposition. 
Rather, they were the more courageous, and 
brought to the point where they explained to their vilifiers 
the fact that they were rejecting God's favor, God's 
Plan, to their own loss. The two pointed out that 
God had in His mercy long favored Israel; and that in 
sending the Message of Messiah to them first He was 
still favoring them; but that according to His instructions 
it was the duty of His representatives to proceed and to 
tell the Gospel to whoever had ears to hear— to the Jews 
first, but also to the Gentiles. They showed that the 
Lamp of Truth which God had now lighted was not for 
the Jews exclusively, as had been His previous favors; 
but, as the Prophet had already declared, it was to be "a 
light to lighten the Gentiles" also— salvation unto the ends 
of the earth.- v Luke 2:32 v ; 'Isaiah 42:6'; v 52:10\ 

R5889 : page 125 

This feature of the Gospel especially aroused the opposition 
of such Jews as were in the wrong condition of 
heart, but was proportionately attractive to the few who 
were in the right attitude. So it is today. The Message 
now due to Christendom is— more Light! It shows that 
the Lamp of God's Word of promise, which at the beginning 
of this Age was permitted to bless both Jews and 
Gentiles in proportion as the eyes of their understanding 
were opened to see it, is shortly now to give place to a 
greater Light; that whereas the Word of God has been 
a Lamp to the feet and a Lantern to the footsteps of 
the faithful for over eighteen centuries, the Sun of Righteousness 
is soon to rise and flood the whole world with 
the light of the knowledge of the goodness of God. 

Those of God's people in the right attitude of heart 
will be gladdened by this unfolding of the Truth. No feelings 
of jealousy will be theirs. But the majority, full of 
sectarian plans and selfish sentiments, and blinded largely 
by false theology and by misrepresentations of God's 
Word, are violently opposed to any thought of Divine 
mercy being extended to every creature— not only to those 



who have not yet gone to the prison-house of death, but 
also to the twenty billions who have already gone down 
into death in ignorance of the only name given under 
Heaven or among men whereby we must be saved. But 
the faithful, the honest-hearted, will ultimately rejoice 
in the lengths, the breadths, the heights and the depths 
of God's Plan, to be consummated during the Millennium 
by the glorified Christ, Head and Body. 



"ORDAINED TO ETERNAL LIFE" 

Many of the Gentiles were glad as they heard that 
God's favor was broader than they had previously supposed. 
Some, we may infer, were merely pleased that 
something had been shown up that was broader than the 
Jewish teachings. But some others, we are assured, believed 
in the true sense of the word— accepting Christ 
as their Redeemer and their Lawgiver. And so today 
we see two classes amongst those who favor Present 
Truth. Some hail it with joy, and gratefully serve the 
Lord more fervently than ever. Some are merely glad 
to find that there is no Scriptural ground for the popular 
theory of eternal torment for the vast majority, but are 
not especially drawn by Divine love and mercy. 

The more the Truth spread, the more angry became its 
opponents, the Jewish leaders; and what they could not 
oppose with argument or with logic they did oppose successfully 
with prejudice and superstition, arousing these 
baser sentiments by misrepresentation. Thus they secured 
the cooperation of some of the most honorable and notable 
people of the city to such an extent that the missionaries 
were obliged to depart. 

The record is that "as many as were ordained to 
eternal life believed." The word "ordained" here may 
properly be translated disposed. Thus we get the thought 
that as many of those as heard the Gospel and its offer 
of everlasting life, and who were disposed to accept the 
terms, became believers— obedient to the faith. So it 
still is. Wherever the Truth goes there are some who 
like it, and others who dislike it; some who appreciate the 
doctrines and rewards which it represents, and some who 
prefer the pleasures of sin or the affairs and rewards of 
the world. This is the time for each who has heard the 
Message to make his choice. Soon the number of the 
Elect will be complete; and then their work will begin— 
the blessing of mankind— the blessing of the non-elect. 



R5886:page 125 

PROPER AND IMPROPER JUDGMENT OF BRETHREN 



"There is one Lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy. 
Who art thou that judgest another?"— "James 4:12 s . 

IN THIS Epistle, St. James has been discussing 

the fact that partiality had been shown 

in the Church— that some, without proper 

reason, were esteemed unworthy of as 

high honor as others. This is particularly 

brought out in the Second Chapter. Some 

who were rich and influential were given 

the choicest seats in their assemblies and 

treated with great deference and respect. 

Others, who were poor and humble, were 

given obscure places and treated with scant courtesy, as 

though they were inferiors. Judgment was passed upon 

the brethren contrary to the instructions of the Lord. 

The Apostle points out the sin of judging and of having 

respect of persons aside from the standpoint of character. 

He declares that as there is but one Lawgiver, Jehovah, 

so there is but one great standard. He who gave that 

standard, that Law, is to be the Executor of His own Law, 

although He may appoint various representatives. His 

special Representatives are to be Christ and the Church 

associated with Him in glory as judges. But they will 

judge by that standard given by the great Lawgiver; and 

there will be no other law in competition with it. 

Since this is the case, and since there is an arrangement 
by which we are accepted as God's children, who is 
he who undertakes to say what degree of Divine favor or 
disfavor each of this class may have? Who is to say 
which will be destroyed in the Second Death and which 
saved to life? God has a personal dealing with each one 
of those who are accepted into His family. Hence the 
very fact that one has been thus accepted is a proof that 
God has seen something in that person pleasing in His 
sight. If He who is the Lawgiver has seen something 
sufficiently favorable for Him to choose such a one and 
anoint him with His Holy Spirit, what right has any one 
else to condemn him whom God has seen fit to approve? 



THE CHURCH INCAPABLE OF JUDGING NOW 

We might see in an individual certain traits which 
would seem more or less unjust, unrighteous. But we are 
not to judge. We cannot see into the heart. We might 
suppose a certain one to be an overcomer, and he might 
not be. Or we might suppose him not to be an overcomer, 
and he might be one. Therefore we are to "judge nothing 
before the time." We should avoid judging the brethren. 

This does not mean that we would not be able to discern 
acts of positive disloyalty to God. But instead of 
setting up standards of our own, we should recognize for 
ourselves and everybody else the one standard which the 
Lord has given; namely, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy 
God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all 



thy mind, and with all thy strength; and thou shalt love 
thy neighbor as thyself." ('Luke 10:27'.) This is the very 
essence of the great Law of God. We should judge ourselves 
by this Law, to see to what extent we are loving 
God thus, and are loving our neighbor as ourselves. This 
is our primary work of judging. 

The Apostle Paul, particularly, has pointed out that if 
any one in the Church is living in violation of the Law of 
God, then the matter should be taken up by the Church. 
This does not apply to any case except that of an outward 
departure from the Lord's Law. It would not apply if the 
individual happens to say "Tweedledee," when we think 

R5887 : page 126 

he should say "Tweedledum," or if he should in some way 
violate the ideas of some one else. It should be a positive 
violation of the principles of righteousness laid down in 
the Word of God. If any one is known to have done us 
a real injury, we are to go to him alone. If he refuses to 
listen, then we may take two or three others of the Church. 
If he still refuses to acknowledge his wrong, the matter 
may be brought to the attention of the Church in a 
proper manner. During all this time, however, the 
brother is not to be cut off from recognition. It is only 
if he still persists in doing the things contrary to the 
Divine arrangement, or refuses to make reparation for a 
serious wrong, that he should be cut off from fellowship. 

It is not our place to judge others, but to judge ourselves, 
to bring ourselves up to the highest possible standard. 
Let others see our good works, that thus they may 
glorify our Father which is in Heaven. It is the Lord 
who will judge His people. We are to assume, then, that 
if any one in the Lord's family should violate his covenant, 
the Lord will attend to his case. We are not to pass 
judgment upon his motives; we can only see when his 
outward conduct is wrong. And we may err even here. 
But we may not judge the heart. God alone is competent 
to do this. God gave the Law, and He is the One to 
decide whether the person is seeking to keep that Law. 



STANDARD OF JUDGMENT FOR NEW CREATURES 

The Apostle Paul says to the Church, "Ye are not 
under the Law, but under grace." ('Romans 6:14'.) But 
here in our text St. James seems to say that we are under 
Law and under the Lawgiver. How shall we harmonize 
these two texts of Scripture? We reply. When St. Paul 
said, "Ye are not under the Law," he meant the Law 
Covenant. The Law Covenant which God made with 
Israel of old was a different thing from the Law of God 
itself. It was an agreement between the Lord and Israel 
as to what they would do and what God would do. They 
were under this Law Covenant. Gentiles never were under 
this Law. They were without God. 



The Apostle Paul intimates ("Romans 8:4") that "the 
righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us who walk not 
after the flesh, but after the Spirit." Although Natural 
Israel were not able to keep the Law of God under their 
Covenant, we, the Gospel Church, are able to keep it under 
our Covenant. Under God's arrangement for the Gospel 
Age the New Creature alone is recognized; the flesh is 
reckoned dead. The New Creature, having been accepted 
into God's family, is still in possession of his imperfect 
fleshly body and must operate through it. He must do his 
best to control this body and use it to the glory of God. 
In his heart, his mind, his endeavor, he can, as a New 
Creature, keep God's Law perfectly. 

It is not the imperfect actions of the mortal body that 
will determine anything, but the heart intentions and endeavors 
of the New Creature. The body must be kept 
under and brought into subjection, as the Apostle Paul 
tells us. It is the New Creature that will live or die, so 
far as the Church is concerned, under the judgment of the 
Divine Law, the Divine Lawgiver. 

In harmony with the thought of our text, the Apostle 
Paul declares that neither the world nor the brethren were 
capable of judging him— that only the Lord, who can read 
the heart and know all the conditions, testings and weaknesses 
to be striven against, can properly judge. He even 
declares, "Yea, I judge not mine own self." ("1 Corinthians 4:3".) 
We should neither condemn others who claim to be 
walking conscientiously as children of the Lord, nor condemn 
ourselves, if we know we are truly striving to thus 
walk. We should simply press along day by day, doing 
the best we can by the Lord's assisting grace to cultivate 
the fruits of the Holy Spirit and serve our Master, leaving 
all the results with Him. 



R5888:page 126 



INTERESTING LETTERS 



SPIRIT OF A SOUND MIND 

DEARLY BELOVED PASTOR:- 

I am not giving any name or address, as I think it wiser 
not to, and please do not notice this note if you do not think 
it advisable, otherwise if you can spare a short paragraph 
in THE TOWER I should appreciate it, and others also. 

A Sister recently arrived from tells us that the Class 

there are teaching that the Church must not expect to be 
glorified until 1925, and that this is your thought; consequently 
it is producing a spirit of apathy, and many are 
taking a greater interest in business and worldly things. 
Whether or not it is so, to me it seems that I have to be 



on my guard and "watch and wait," with loins girded and 
Lamp burning, that I may be ready. 

I have realized and accepted this glorious Message of 
"Present Truth" for five years; and it grows more precious 
all the time. I grew up in the Church of England, and living 
at Oxford with the College Set, was extremely High 
Church, so you know what I have had to unlearn. 

I praise God for raising you up, dear Brother, as "that 
Servant." May He bless you still more, that you may give 
us the "meat in due season." I also thank the dear Lord 
that He brought me to this country before this awful war; 
and made me to realize "where are the dead," as all my 
people are being shot and I should have been in despair. 

There is another little matter I would like to mention. 
At the Class I attend the presiding Elder never seems prepared. 
He does not know where the MANNA Text for the 
day is, and although it is a Prayer and Testimony Meeting, 
he occupies most of the time with his views on the present 
state of affairs and the war crisis. No one else can have 
much time. 

I hope you will not think I am too critical, but in the 
little old Church I had been accustomed to reverence, and 
for an Elder to be gaping, sleeping or picking his teeth and 
nails— well it jars awfully! He also brings with him a child 
of three years that disturbs the Class very much. No one 
likes to say anything to him, as he says that he has been 
in the Truth for fifteen years. But we do not feel spiritually 
helped, especially as he is a business man. Before the meeting 
he talks business; and the moment it is over, shop. 

O dear Brother, I don't want to think evil, or speak 
evil, but this does worry us! Many of us have prayed about 
it. The children do bother us; but I dare not speak of that, 
as I am told that I have too strict English ideas. I would 
not wound his feelings in any way, so if I am in the wrong 
please ignore what I have written. The dear Lord knows 
that I am trying to follow in His footsteps, and to keep my 
pride under and make myself of no reputation, as the dear 
Master did. 

Apologizing for encroaching on your valuable time, I 
am, dear Pastor, YOUR SISTER BY HIS GRACE. 



EDITOR'S REPLY 

The Apostle declares that God gives His people the 
spirit of a sound mind— His Spirit, His Mind. But we receive 
this in proportion to our earnestness and heed to the 
Lord's Word. The longer we have been in the School of 
Christ, if apt pupils, the better we should know Him and 
the better be able to exemplify His character and teachings. 

As the letter is anonymous, we have not the slightest 
idea who the Elder may be. We will assume that he 
means well. We might also, however, assume that he has 
not been sufficiently wide-awake to well exemplify the spirit 
of a sound mind in the matter of the service of the Lord. 
Otherwise, would he not be more careful of his actions and 



words, in order that he might glorify the Lord and be 
assistful to His people? 

Lack of reverence is manifest everywhere, but it seems 
especially out of place in assemblages of the Lord's consecrated 
people. As we have said before, we may say again, 
that no matter how limited our talents we can by our actions 

R5888 : page 127 

and manner speak volumes in the praise of Him who called 
us from darkness into marvelous light. 

We cannot help it that many of the dear friends continue 
to tell what THE WATCH TOWER believes, and to misrepresent 
its teachings. Our kindest thought must be that they 
are not giving much heed to its teachings. Otherwise they 
would know from its columns that we are not looking forward 
to 1925, nor to any other date. As expressly stated 
in THE WATCH TOWER, we are simply going on, our last 
date or appointment having been passed more than a year ago. 

We believe that the dates have proven to be quite right. 
We believe that Gentile Times have ended, and that God 
is now allowing the Gentile Governments to destroy themselves, 
in order to prepare the way for Messiah's Kingdom. 
The Lord did not say that the Church would all be glorified 
by 1914. We merely inferred it and, evidently, erred. We 
see, however, that the different times and seasons which the 
Lord's providence sent to His people in hope of resurrection 
"change" correspond closely with the different places to 
which Elijah, the Prophet, was sent before his translation. 
The last place to which he was sent was Jordan, which, we 
believe, corresponds to October, 1914. After that, Elijah 
and Elisha went on without having any definite point in view. 

Our thought is that something very important to us all 
is implied in Elijah's use of his mantle in smiting the 
waters of Jordan and dividing them. After so doing, Elijah 
and Elisha continued to go on until the chariot of fire parted 
them. It was after that that Elijah went up to Heaven in 
the whirlwind. We may discuss these matters more at 
length again, but now suggest that we have no different 
time in mind from the Scriptures on the subject, and do 
not expect to have any. However, the division of the waters 
might require either years or months— who could say? 



FROM BRETHREN OF FRANCE 

BELOVED BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

I do not know whether anybody at the Tabernacle can 
read French or not; but I cannot resist the impulse to assure 
you of my entire devotion to the cause of Truth. 

You have helped me to so much joy, and been the means 
of my accepting salvation. Through your labor I have been 
brought to an appreciation of the love of our Heavenly 
Father, to such an extent that I find my sentiments aptly expressed 



by St. Paul to his brother Philemon. ("Philemon 7\) 

Being delighted at recognizing this fact, I find delight also in 

expressing it to you. 

In all my painful moments, when the cross is heavy to bear, 
I think of you and say to myself, dear Brother Russell, too, 
has suffered, and is suffering, and I must not wonder if my 
share is to suffer also. Then my soul goes up to the Father 
of Mercies in gratitude for His favors (the privilege of suffering 
with Christ), and I earnestly beg of Him ever to 
bless and guide you. 

During the past year I have appreciated much, very much, 
your excellent advice, and it has profited me greatly. 

In my present trials, after having been compelled to leave 
my wife and three children in the invaded territory of our 
dear France, the daily partaking of the Vow and of the 
Morning Resolve has helped me much. These helps alone 
have developed in me much of the love of the Father— and 
all this during the past year. Because of it I bless the Father 
through our Lord Jesus Christ. 

Therefore, let me by this message assure you that my 
petitions ascend to the Father in your behalf, that He may 
bless you abundantly, to the end that His blessing upon you 
may redound through your ministry upon every one of us. 

Yours sincerely in Him, E. LARVENT. 

P. S.— Have found here a refuge since December, 1914, 
when I had to leave my home at Denain (Nord). Am here 
with several brothers and sisters who also are refugees from 
Lens, Lieven and Denain. We have each of us signed the 
accompanying brotherly message: 

FRENCH RESOLUTIONS. 

The undersigned brethren and sisters, members of the 
I.B.S.A. (French Ecclesia of Bruay-Auchel), in meeting 
assembled this 1st day of January, 1916, send their most 
brotherly greetings to the well-beloved of the Household of 
Faith, fighting the same spiritual fight under the Captain of 
our Salvation, Jesus Christ, at the Brooklyn Bethel and 
everywhere. 

After having studied "Psalm 1 16" (especially dwelling on 
"Verse 15", "Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of 
His saints," also the motto for this year, "Strong in 
Faith"), we express the sincerest wish that each of you, 
when tried, may be found faithful unto death and then present 
at the approaching Rendezvous in eternal joy! SIGNED BY 25. 



LOVE IN THOUGHT, WORD AND DEED 

BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 
Greetings and much love to you, dear Brother, as we 

come to the end of this wonderful year. What a glorious 
year it has been for the development of the saints, particularly 

along the lines of love and patient endurance! I am incapable 



of expressing my love and appreciation of you and your service 
to me personally. I am constantly praising my Heavenly 
Father for allowing me to come in contact with your precious 
Volumes, which God used to bring me out of the kingdom 
of darkness and into the light of the glorious Gospel. 

I thank you, dear Brother, for the suggestion that we each 
pray that "God would bless us in the cultivation of love in 
thought, word and deed." I immediately acted upon the suggestion, 
and oh, joy, what grand results! I never knew that 
there was so much in "loving in thought." Now, dear 
Brother, you said we might report to you as to our success, 
and that is why I am intruding upon your precious time. 
The results with me have been away beyond my highest 
expectation. 

We thought there might be some in the class who had not 
yet taken the "Vow" nor sent in their names. So we opened 
up a sheet and to our surprise, there were fifty-two who 
wished their names sent in. Please find the same enclosed. 
Loving Greetings from Sister Heard and 

Your Brother by Divine favor, 

C. E. HEARD.-Vancouver, B.C. 



FROM THE VANCOUVER CLASS 

OUR BELOVED PASTOR:- 

We the undersigned, members of the Vancouver Ecclesia, 
take this opportunity of expressing our love and gratitude to 
you for the inestimable service you have rendered to us, in 
that through your ministrations we have been led into the 
light of Present Truth. And now recognizing that we are in 
"the evil day" and the danger of slipping is so great, we 
desire to "make straight paths for our feet," and believing 

R5889 : page 127 

that the special "Vow" is a great means to that end, we wish 
to add our names to the many who have already taken it, and 
thereby make it our own. 

Praying our Heavenly Father's rich blessing upon you. 
dear Brother, and asking a continued interest in your prayers. 
We are: [Fifty-two signatures follow.] 



THE DIAGLOTT 

DEAR SIRS:- 

I have in my possession a copy of the EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT, 
and esteem it very highly. I have compared it with the works 
of the great English commentator Clarke, and all of his 
citations to the Greek are identical with the DIAGLOTT; I 
have been comparing the Septuagint with it, and where the 
DIAGLOTT makes reference to the Old Testament, I find the 



text the same. 

The good I have received from its study, plus the increased 
value of it by comparison, has greatly endeared the 
work to me. 

I am engaged in the work of the ministry and in circulating 
sacred literature, including Bibles and Testaments. I 
would be glad to handle a few copies of the DIAGLOTT. if 
you can give me a fair commission on them. 

I have an order now for one copy. If you will 
quote me agents' terms, I shall be glad to handle some for 
you. Please include your pamphlet on ARMAGEDDON. 

Respectfully yours, REV. 



SEES GETHSEMANE EXPERIENCES AHEAD 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Just a line, dear Brother, to wish that our dear Lord and 
Master continue to bless you, as He has so richly done in the 
past. I remember you every morning at the Throne of Grace. 

We in this country seem to be on the verge of Gethsemane 
experiences, as the conscription bill has passed. 

One of my sons has now reached the age of 19. He has so 
far given a good witness for the Lord by refusing to enlist 
in the army, and if it should come that it will mean being shot 
for still refusing, I trust he will receive the Heavenly Grace to 
stand firm to the principles of truth and righteousness. 

Brother, we ask your prayers for us during this evil hour. 

Yours in the one hope, W. O. WARDEN.-Scotland. 



page 128 

International Bible Students Association Classes 
STUDIES AND LECTURES BY MEMBERS OF THE PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 129 

VOL. XXXVII. MAY 1 NO. 9 
A. D. 1916-A.M.6044 



CONTENTS 

The Christian's Warfare Against Pride . 131 

Mental Strongholds to Be Cast Down . 131 

Pride Leads to Mental Unbalance . . 131 
"Jesus Died and Paid It AH" . . .133 

Legal Phase of Ransoming Work . .133 

The Cripple at Lystra 134 

Memorial Supper Reports 136 

The Counsel at Jerusalem . . . .137 

Necessity for These Restrictions . 137 

Liberty is Not License . . . .138 
Faith Demonstrated by Works . . . . 139 

Faith Distinguished From Credulity . 139 
Preaching the Gospel a Necessity . . 140 

Many Ways of Preaching the Gospel . 140 
"Your Brethren That Hated You" . . .141 
Requests for Pilgrim Visits . . . . 141 
Some Faithful Witnesses 142 

Some Letters on the Subject . . . 142 
"How Wonderful!" (Poem) 143 

page 130 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agenciesr-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



SCRIPTURE STUDIES AND SCENARIOS-VARIOUS 

For the information of our readers we give below a list of 
the languages into which the various volumes of STUDIES IN 
THE SCRIPTURES have been translated. Most of these can be 
supplied from the head office at Brooklyn. 

Volume I. In English, German, Swedish, Dano-Norwegian, 
Italian, French, Greek, Hungarian, Spanish, Polish, 
Hollandish, Finnish, Arabic, Slovak, Rumanian, Armenian, 
Lettish, Chinese, Japanese and Korean. We have also the 
English Braille, American Braille and New York Point. 

Volume II. In English, German, Swedish, Finnish and 
Dano-Norwegian. 

Volume III. In English, German, Swedish, Finnish and 
Dano-Norwegian. 

Volume IV. In English, German, Swedish, Finnish and 
Dano-Norwegian. 

Volume V. In English, German, Swedish, Finnish and 
Dano-Norwegian. 

Volume VI. English, German, Swedish, Finnish, Greek. 

THE PHOTO-DRAMA SCENARIO is supplied in Spanish, Italian, 
Greek, Polish, Armenian, German, Finnish, Swedish and English, 
in one or more styles of binding. See WATCH TOWER, 
October 1, 1915, for prices and styles of binding. 



We are put to much inconvenience by the failure of 
our readers to promptly and plainly notify us when they 
change their address. Old as well as new address should 
be mentioned. 



R5889:page 131 

THE CHRISTIAN'S WARFARE AGAINST PRIDE 

"The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through 
God to the pulling down of strongholds; casting down 
imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth 
and bringing into captivity every thought to the 
obedience of Christ."— 2 Corinthians 10:4,5. 

SOLDIERS of the Cross are of a different kind 

and are differently armed from the soldiers 

of the world. Ours is a fight against the 

spirit of the world and against the flesh. 

It is the fight not only against the imperfections 

that came into our flesh through 

our forefather's disobedience, but against 



the natural opposition of the flesh to sacrifice. 

The flesh instinctively struggles to 

avoid sacrifice. Moreover, our fight is 

against unseen spiritual foes. The world have their 

swords and their guns as weapons of warfare. And the 

Lord has provided us an armor; namely, the breastplate of 

righteousness, the helmet of salvation, the shield of faith, 

the Sword of the Spirit, and the sandals of "the preparation 

of the Gospel of Peace." These are all weapons 

of defense, except the Sword. The Sword is an aggressive 

weapon.— Ephesians 6:1 1-18. 

In the case of the Christian, "the Sword of the Spirit, 
which is the Word of God," is to be handled to accomplish 
good, to be used in opposition to Satan and sin. 
But the thought of this Scripture seems to be, not that 
we are commissioned to fight the world, but that we are 
to strive to be loyal to the Lord, to fight sin in ourselves 
and wherever it might properly be under our jurisdiction, 
and to repel the attacks of the Adversary. The 
exercise of our powers in bringing self into subjection 
means a great deal in the way of sacrifice, much in the 
way of battling. God has given us "exceeding great and 
precious promises." The New Creature is made strong 
by these promises— strong in proportion as he perceives 
the significance of these promises, and feeds upon them. 

MENTAL STRONGHOLDS TO BE CAST DOWN 

The Apostle is pointing out that these strongholds 
which we are to pull down are in ourselves. Sin is entrenched 
in our minds, in our imaginations. Pride, selfishness 
and various other kinds of sin, are entrenched in us 
through the long centuries of the downward tendencies 
of our race. These things have dug deep trenches in 
our system; they are firmly fastened there. But, urges 
St. Paul, "Let not sin have dominion over your mortal 
body." Destroy the stronghold. Bring your entire being 
into subjection to the will of God. 

By way of pointing out what these strongholds are— 
that they are mental strongholds— the Apostle says, "Casting 
down imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth." 
Our imaginations may be of many kinds. We 
may be beset by false doctrines and superstitions that 
have come down to us from past ages. The Word of the 
Lord is the only thing that can effectually cast these down 
and make us see God's real character, make us see His 
glorious promises to the Church now and to the world in 
the future. The Word of the Lord is the only thing 
that will cast down imaginations— ignorance, superstition, 
pride, unholy ambitions, idle speculations, and every 
form of thought that would lead us astray and hinder 
the work of grace in our hearts and minds. These imaginations 
of the natural mind exalt themselves against the 
true knowledge of God, the Spirit of God— "high things," 
I lie Apostle calls them. 

We are to "mind not high things." The Apostle does 



not mean that we are not to mind the high things that 
are spiritual; for in another place he says, "Set your 
affections on things above, not on things on the earth." 
(Colossians 3:2.) In other words, Set your affections on 
the very highest things. But the "high things" of the 
world are very different; they exalt themselves against 
the things which are truly high, which are of God. The 
Lord's children are to be humble, not high-minded, not 
to be carried away by the empty honors, projects and 
ambitions of earth. The desire to have a place among 
men, to shine in society, to have wealth and influence, to 
have whatever things would bring us into high esteem 
amongst mankind, is a temptation that the disciple of 
Christ must guard against. 

It has been noted by those who have the care of the 
mentally defective that a great deal of difficulty lies in 
the imagination. It is said that if one visits an insane 
asylum, he will find one here who thinks he is a king; 
there another, who imagines that she is a queen; another 
who imagines he is fabulously rich and could draw checks 
for millions. The organ of self-esteem has been too 
large. The Lord only knows how much the individual 
himself has had to do in cultivating this tendency. But 
he has always more or less to do with the matter; the 
high imaginations and the desire to be great obtain 
dominion over him— get the mastery. 

PRIDE LEADS TO MENTAL UNBALANCE 

The same thing applies to Christians. After coming 
into the Church of Christ, they are still liable to the ambition 
to become some great one, to do some great thing, 
to find or promulgate some great doctrine, to discover 

R5889 : page 132 

some new interpretation of Scripture or some new type. 

All these are "high things that exalt." Our Lord gave 

a discourse upon this subject, telling us that when we are 

invited to a feast, we should not take a high seat, but 

a low seat— and perhaps afterward we might be exalted. 

To desire these things and to seek for them is to have 

"strongholds" of pride and unholy ambition in the imagination, 

aspirations for exaltation and honor. Then 

comes the thought that we are great, that we are worthy 

of attention, of special notice. Mental unbalance is there. 

The fact is that we are all insignificant, of very little 

importance in the execution of the Lord's Plan. 

The Lord could have done all His great work without 
us and our cooperation, probably more easily than with 
us. But He very graciously permits us to have a part in 
His work, for our own good and blessing. He is dealing 

R5890:page 132 

with us as children and is training us. Having begotten 



us of His Holy Spirit, He helps us to overcome our weaknesses 

and rewards us if we do overcome them. He 

drills and disciplines us to fit us for a noble and glorious 

future. A part of this drilling as soldiers of the King of 

kings is our fight against self-esteem and a desire for 

great things, high things, according to the standards of 

this "present evil world." 

"BRINGING INTO CAPTIVITY EVERY THOUGHT" 

The thought of casting down unholy and unprofitable 
imaginations is also borne out in the final words of our 
text, that we are to "bring into captivity every thought 
to the obedience of Christ." Whatever we do we have 
first thought about. We sometimes say, "I acted before 
I thought." What we mean is that we acted before we 
gave the matter serious thought. No thought should be 
harbored in our minds which is not in full harmony with 
the Word of God. As Christ was obedient to the Father 
in everything— saying, "Let not My will, but Thine, be 
done"— so every one of us should bring our thoughts into 
obedience to Christ. Our Redeemer is our Exemplar. 

All the members of Christ's Body must have the same 
mind that was in Christ, must manifest the spirit of our 
Master. "Let us humble ourselves, therefore, under the 
mighty hand of God, that He may exalt us in due time." 
(1 Peter 5:6.) No one can wholly follow the Lord without 
much of the spirit of humility, without bringing his 
thoughts into subjection to the Lord. This is not the 
time to exalt ourselves and to show how we can shine. 
But we are to "show forth the praises of Him who hath 
called us out of darkness into His marvelous light" 
(1 Peter 2:9), who has called us with this Heavenly 
Calling, not for our own sakes merely, but for His own 
glory and the blessing of others. God's glory is to be 
our chief concern always. We are to be efficient servants 
of the Lord, through His grace, not of our own strength. 
If we are to be great in the end, we must be humble, we 
must gladly be servants of all now. We must be glad to 
serve, not only when there is honor attached, but when 
the service is unnoticed or unknown. 

God has arranged for our learning certain lessons of 
self-control, bringing ourselves into full obedience to God 
in a voluntary way, with a view to our being His representatives 
by and by, and of then enforcing obedience to 
God's requirements on the part of the world. It is a 
generally accepted principle that no one is qualified to 
rule others who has not himself learned obedience. At 
the cost of great suffering, our Lord Jesus learned what 
obedience means. He promptly and fully submitted Himself 
to God. This Spirit of Christ is to be manifested 
and developed in us, that we shall thus be ready for the 
future work of The Christ, the work of the Millennial Age. 

In proportion as the Truth is received and assimilated, 
it brings to us the spirit of a sound mind. It does not 
bring us perfect soundness of brain; but where rightly 



received, it brings meekness, teachableness, thoughtfulness, 
seriousness. It leads us to take careful heed to the 
instructions of our Heavenly Guide. It thus gives balance 
to the judgment, greater than we had ever before known. 
This should increase as we go on in the good way and 
become disciplined soldiers in the army of the Lord. But 
if the Truth is not received in the spirit of the Truth, 
in the love of it, it might not only fail to be of any benefit, 
but might engender a spirit of pride and boastfulness. 

This quality of pride seems to be particularly associated 
with all kinds of insanity. Many of the inmates 
of insane asylums are affected with a large degree of 
self-esteem— thinking of themselves more highly than they 
ought to think. Their minds are unbalanced in that direction 
to a notable degree. We cannot be too careful 
to cultivate nearness to the Lord, which always brings 
humility and a proper realization of our own unworthiness 
and littleness before Him. 

KEEPING CLOSE TO CHRIST OUR ONLY SAFETY 

Satan is especially alert to trap the Lord's children 
in this "evil day." We might give an illustration which 
we have used before, but which seems well to picture 
wherein lies our special danger and our entire safety. 
Suppose we should consider a large circle, with Christ as 
the Center of that circle. Suppose the circle contained 
an abundance of space, so that there might be varying 
degrees of closeness to the Lord. Let the outer edge of 
that circle represent the utmost limit of God's care over 
His children. Any one, then, nearing the outside line 
would be coming more and more into a place of danger. 
We believe that in proportion as any of us live close to 
the great Center of the circle— our Lord Jesus— we are 
safe. In proportion as we fail to do this, and allow ourselves 
to drift or to wander away from Him, we shall be 
getting near the danger point, and are amenable to the 
evil influences from outside. Should we wander entirely 
over the outer line, our case would be beyond recovery. 

The Lord has in a way put around the human race a 
barrier against danger. This barrier is, largely, man's 
will. Those who have given up their wills, their minds, 
to the Lord, to have His will done in them, are particularly 
liable to severe and subtle attacks of the Adversary. 
He especially seeks to delude and entrap the 
true children of the Lord, thus again to bring them into 
bondage to sin. Upon such as come under his influence, 
the delusion is gradual. 

We are all born with unsound minds. As to the degree 
of unsoundness we need not quarrel. The armament 
which the Lord gives us is not merely a knowledge 
of how to quote Scripture. Neither is it merely to have 
the ability to dispute and to debate, though that ability 
is very good in its place. The real thing that God is 
looking for is in our hearts. He is not looking to see how 
much you know; for He could pump a good deal of 



knowledge into you in a few minutes if He so desired. 
But the Lord is looking to see to what extent you are 
meek, patient, fully submitted to His will. Let us have 
more and more of the Spirit of the Lord, the spirit of a 
sound mind, and the earnest desire to help one another. 
"The Lord shall judge His people." (Hebrews 10:30.) 
If they get into trouble through not being sufficiently 
watchful, the Lord will give them some experiences 
which will be good for them, if rightly received. 
Let us remember the warning words of the Apostle Paul: 
"If we would judge ourselves, we should not be judged" 

R5890:page 133 

of the Lord. ( 1 Corinthians 11:31.) This means that 
when we neglect to judge ourselves, He has to do it for 
us. Then we are being chastened with a view to our 
correction, that we might attain unto the Heavenly reward 
and favor that is to be ours as New Creatures in 
Christ, if we remain humble and faithful unto death. 
If we continue to be meek and filled with the spirit of 
humility, not craving present honors and exaltation, but 
willing in perfect patience to await the Lord's own good 
time, our exaltation will come; and we shall share our 
Savior's Throne and His glory forevermore. 

"O blows that smite, O wounds that pierce 

This shrinking heart of mine! 
What are ye but the Master's tools. 

Performing work Divine! 
How blest that all these seeming ills 

That draw my heart to thee 
Are each a proof that Thou hast set 

Thy seal of love on me!" 



R5890:page 133 

"JESUS DIED AND PAID IT ALL" 

THE Ransom of our race by our Savior is a 
matter of deep interest to the Lord's people, 
and one which apparently is very difficult to 
understand clearly. We view the subject 
from different standpoints. All see the same 
thing, but all do not see the details. 

God might have told us that He had arranged 
a way by which Justice and the dignity 
of His Court of the Universe could be 
upheld and man nevertheless be released 
from the sentence of death imposed upon him six thousand 
years ago. There was no need of His telling us 
anything about the Ransom. It would have been sufficient 
for us that God should have told us that He had attended 
to the matter properly. But instead, God reasons with us 



in the Scriptures, and there explains the process of His 
Government by which He could be just and yet be the 
Justifier of sinners. This process which God had all to 
do with and man had nothing to do with is Scripturally 
styled the Ransom— the giving of the perfect life of Jesus 
to be the full, complete offset for the forfeited life of 
Adam, the father of our race. 

From this viewpoint, if one went no further into the 
matter, one might say, "Jesus has died and the world 
has been ransomed"— just as the Scriptures speak of Jesus, 
even while He was in the flesh, as being the Messiah, the 
King of Glory. Even when He was a babe the angels 
sang, "Unto you is born this day in the city of David, a 
Savior, who is Christ [Messiah] the Lord." Their statements 
included not only the babe and what had already 
been accomplished in His birth, but all the great work 
which He would do in the future. As a matter of fact, 
the babe was merely called a Savior because He would 
in llie future save His people from their sins. The babe 

R5891 :page 133 

was merely called the Anointed— Messiah— because it was 
foreseen of God that He would make a consecration at 
Jordan, be begotten and anointed of the Holy Spirit, 
finish His work of sacrifice and be exalted to Heavenly 
glory, not only, during this Age, for the Church which is 
His Body, but also for the willing and obedient of the 
world of mankind during the Millennium. Thus we see 
that the babe was not the Savior except in the prophetic 
sense that He was to be the Savior. He was not King 
except in the sense that He was born and came into the 
world to that end. He was not the Deliverer then, nor 
has He even yet delivered all His Church; whereas, after 
the deliverance of the Church, comes the deliverance of 
the world from the reign of Sin and Death. 

Similarly the word ransom may be, and often is, used by 
us all in a prophetic sense— as including the entire work 
of Redemption down to the very end of the Millennial 
Age; as we read, "I will ransom [deliver by a ransom] 
them from the grave."— Hosea 13: 14. 

LEGAL PHASE OF RANSOMING WORK 

But as we come close to these various questions and 
analyze them, we see new beauties, new divisions of 
matters, which at first seem to be indivisible. We see, 
for instance, that the first step toward ransoming the 
world was taken when the Logos left the glory which He 
had with the Father and humbled Himself to become the 
Man Jesus. The first feature in the ransoming work was 
our Master's consecration of Himself at Jordan, followed 
by His life of devotion even unto death. The completion 
of His sacrifice was the completion of the Ransom-price, 
but it was not the completion of the Ransom-work. Indeed, 
the Ransom-work could not even begin until the Ransom-price 



had been provided— not paid. 

We sometimes have spoken of Jesus as having paid 
the Ransom when He died, but such expression was not 
accurate. The price of obedience to the Father's will was 
death, and our Lord's death constitutes the price. In one 
sense Jesus paid it when He surrendered His life; but in 
another and more accurate sense. He did not pay it, but 
merely placed it in the hands of the Father as the price 
to be appropriated, or made applicable later. 

The Ransom-price has been in the hands of Divine 
Justice— in the Father's hands— ever since Jesus died, 
but only as a deposit, because the time had not come for 
it to be paid over officially. If the Divine Plan had been 
for Jesus to take possession of the world and to set up 
His Kingdom at Pentecost, then it would have been proper 
for Him to have paid over to the Father the Ransom-price 
fully and completely— appropriating it as the offset 
to Father Adam's sin and sentence on behalf of all his 
race. But had that price been formally paid over, the 
proper and logical thing would have been for the Father 
to put the whole world immediately into the hands of 
Jesus, and for the Millennial Reign to begin. 

RANSOM-PRICE DEPOSITED WITH DIVINE JUSTICE 

There was, however, another feature to the Divine 
Plan: God did not wish to turn over the Kingdom to 
Jesus until the great Seventh Day, the Millennium. He 
did wish that during the intervening more than eighteen 
centuries a Church class should be called out from amongst 
the world, to be the Bride and Joint-heir of His Son in 
the Kingdom. Hence the Ransom-price for the sins of 
the whole world was merely left unappropriated, while 
Jesus dealt with the Church. 

And since the Father's Plan for the Church was that 
they should sacrifice or surrender their earthly interests 
and receive, instead. Heavenly interests and the Divine 
nature, therefore it was not necessary to give the Church 
Restitution— the thing which the Ransom-price will secure 
for the world of mankind. Hence, instead of giving the 
Church a direct share in the Ransom-price, which would 
mean Restitution, the Lord's provision for them is different; 
namely, an imputation of merit covering their blemishes, 
so that they might present their bodies a living 
sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God. 

All, therefore, that Jesus has done with the Ransom-price 
is to impute a share of that price as covering the 
shortcomings of those who desire to become His disciples 
and joint-heirs. He has not appropriated it to them 
actually, as in Restitution, but by imputation— justifying 

R5891 :page 134 

them from all sin, and thus permitting them to be accepted 
of the Father as members of the House of Sons, by the 
begetting of the Holy Spirit. 



And how beautiful is the thought that, when shortly 
our Lord will pay over the Ransom-price for the sins of 
the whole world, and have the world immediately turned 
over to Him for Restitution work, the Church will be 
with Him in glory sharing His honor and His Throne, 
as now they share in His sufferings and His ignominy! 

PRACTICAL PHASE OF RANSOMING WORK 

When the Ransom-price shall then have been given 
to justice in exchange for the world of mankind, and when 
the purchased world of mankind shall have been turned 
over to the Purchaser, the legal phase of the Ransoming 
work of Jesus and the satisfaction of Justice in the release 
of mankind from the penalty of death will be complete. 
Then, however, another part of the ransoming will 
begin and will operate; namely, the giving of the benefits 
of the ransom to Adam and his family. This phase of 
the Ransom-work will continue for the thousand years of 
Messiah's Kingdom, bringing Restitution to man and his 
earthly home— to all the willing and obedient of Adam's 
race— the unwilling being destroyed in the Second Death. 

Then the Ransomer will have completed His work of 
ransoming the human family in its two phases: First, 
its legal phase, the satisfaction of Divine Justice by the 
giving of a life for a life; second, its practical phase, the 
restoring or recovering or delivering of the redeemed from 
the bondage of Sin and Death to the liberty of the sons 
of God.— Romans 8:21. 



R5891 :page 134 

THE CRIPPLE AT LYSTRA 

-MAY 21. -ACTS 14:8-20.- 

HISTORY REPEATS ITSELF-ST. PAUL AND BARNABAS PERSECUTED- 

SLANDERED AND MALTREATED BY PROFESSEDLY RELIGIOUS 

LEADERS-A NOTABLE MIRACLE-HONESTY 

REWARDED WITH STONES-HOMEWARD BOUND-VISITING 

THE CITIES WHERE THEY HAD BEEN PERSECUTED- 

TRIBULATION NECESSARY FOR PERFECTING OF THE SAINTS. 

"He giveth power to the faint; and to him that hath 
no might He increaseth strength."— Isaiah 40:29. 

LEAVING Antioch of Pisidia, St. Paul and 
Barnabas went to Iconium, about one hundred 
miles distant. There also they preached 
the Word faithfully; and there also opposition 
was aroused and persecution threatened. 
The record is that "when there was 
an assault made, both of the Gentiles and 
also of the Jews, with their rulers, to use 



them despitefully and to stone them, they 
were aware of it, and fled unto Lystra." 
They did not permit fear to hinder them from preaching 
the Gospel with courage, neither did they fear threats; 
but when the persecution took a positive form, they fled. 
In so doing, they were following the Lord's instructions. 
He did not say, "Be fearful of persecution, withhold 
your Message and put your light under a bushel"; but He 
said the very reverse. Nor did He say, "Be fearful, and 
flee when there is no danger." On the contrary He said, 
"When they persecute you in one city, flee ye to another." 

Arriving at Lystra, they began afresh to preach the 
Gospel, as courageously as though there had been no 
previous opposition. Amongst the auditors was a cripple, 
presumably a Jew or a proselyte, who manifested much 
interest in the Apostle's words. Perceiving that the man 
had faith, St. Paul stopped in his sermon and called out to 
him, "Stand upright on thy feet!" This was a thing that 
the man had never before done; but he had the necessary 
faith and obeyed the Apostle's command. Thus a 
miracle resulted, evidently to the astonishment of the 
entire congregation. The effect upon the people was electrical; 
and they shouted in their own dialect, "The gods 
have come down to visit us!" 

The city of Lystra figured as the scene of a mythological 
event. The tradition was that Jupiter and Mercury, 
two of the gods of mythology, had once come to Lystra 
in the form of men, and had been refused lodgings everywhere 
until they came to the lowly hut of a poor man, 
who entertained them to the best of his ability. The gods 
rewarded him by turning his hut into a gorgeous temple, 
and punished the remainder of the citizens with a flood. 
This tradition was very old, and was perpetuated by a 
statue of Jupiter at the city's gate as its protecting god. 

It is easy to discern how a comparatively ignorant and 
superstitious people might jump to the conclusion that the 
visit of St. Paul and Barnabas was a repetition of this 
visit of Jupiter and Mercury, handed down to them 
through tradition. St. Paul they called Mercury, because 
in their tradition Mercury was the orator, the speaker; 
and Barnabas they called Jupiter. Forthwith the priest 
of Jupiter prepared to offer a sacrifice of oxen before 
the statue of Jupiter at their city gate, in honor of the 
supposed gods present with them as men, in the persons of 
Barnabas and St. Paul. 

NOBILITY OF THE MISSIONARIES 

The missionaries were probably quietly conversing 
with some of the more interested ones, when they heard of 
the commotion in the city and of the sacrifice about to 
be offered. Not for a moment did they think of taking 
advantage of the superstition of the people to make of 
themselves some great ones. Nor did they attempt to 
turn the event to a service of the Truth by claiming that 
God was Jupiter, that our Lord Jesus was Mercury, and 



that they themselves represented the Father and the Son. 

On the contrary, most earnestly and simply did they 
entreat the people to desist, explaining that they were 
nothing but imperfect men like the populace themselves— 
"men of like passions"— that their mission was the very 
reverse of what the Lystrians supposed, and that Jupiter 
and Mercury were only products of imagination, ignorance 
and superstition. The two ran in amongst the excited 
populace while the latter were preparing for the sacrifice; 
and even then with difficulty, amidst protests of their own 
nothingness, did they restrain the people from sacrificing 
in their honor. Noble men they were; and their faithfulness 
to the Lord and to the Truth attested the wisdom 
of sending them on this missionary tour. 

From this incident we may draw a lesson, helpful to all 
of the Lord's people who are to any extent His ambassadors, 
representatives, teachers of the Truth. The Truth 
itself, especially in the light of our day, is so wonderful, 
so brilliant, that it naturally reflects some of its brilliancy 
upon those who represent it, causing men to marvel and 
to say, as of old, "Whence hath this man this wisdom?" 
(Matthew 13:54.) In some instances it might lead to an 
undue deference, to an ascription of undue honor, and to 
a subserviency which would not be proper for the Lord's 
ambassadors to receive, and which they should as promptly 
and as thoroughly repudiate as did St. Paul and Barnabas 
refuse the honors which the Lystrian populace were about 
to bestow upon them. 

From the worldly viewpoint, however, this would be 
an unwise course. Those who will accept flattery, adulation 

R5891 :page 135 

and honor more than is due are likely to be prospered 
in this course to some extent by the Adversary, and are 
apt to find that the worldly spirit likes to worship worldly 
heroes. The only wise course for the Lord's servants, 
therefore, is that followed by these missionaries of our 
lesson— to repudiate the entire matter, to confess that they 
are men of like passions with others, and to hold up the 
Word of God, hiding themselves behind it and ignoring 
self altogether. 

Not alone will this course be profitable as respects the 
finding and the development of the true children of God, 
whom He is now gathering out of the world, but it will 
be profitable also for the Lord's ambassadors! for in this 
way they will grow in the Lord Jesus' grace and character-likeness, 
of which humility was a prominent trait. Thus 
they will best abide in the love of God. 

TRUE SOLDIERS OF THE CROSS 

In pointing out to the Lystrians the fact that their ideas 
were vanities, the Apostle well knew that this could 
not bring him the favor of his hearers; for it is not human 
nature to appreciate being told of our follies. To work his 



way into their good graces lie would have needed to tell 
them a lie— that they were very wise, that their course was 
a very proper one, etc. Therefore in his endeavor to be 
candid and to serve the Truth, he risked their disappointment 
and displeasure. Undoubtedly, as God's mouthpiece, 
he shunned not to declare the whole Message of God, 
whatever its results might be. 

Here are good lessons for all of the Lord's people. 
It requires comparatively little courage to be a soldier 
of the Cross and faithful to the Truth amongst those of 
like precious faith and obedience. But it requires great 
courage to resist improper honor of men when we know in 
advance that this resistance will not only deprive us of 
their honor and friendship, but make us ignoble in their 
sight, and turn them into enemies. True soldiers of the 
Cross still have the same trial; and it requires hardness— 
a hardening campaign of experience in the Lord's service 
—to endure these things and come off joyful in them. 

The babes in Christ, the weak, the untried, those who 
have not passed through trials and experiences, and developed 
character, are not hardened, and could not stand 
such experiences. Hence it is that the Apostle advises 
the Church that even proper exaltation to a position of 
service in the Church should not be accorded to a novice, 
lest he should be puffed up, and thus be injured himself, 
as well as be injurious to others. (1 Timothy 3:6.) It requires 
time and seasoning either to rightly accept and appreciate 
honors and dignities along proper lines, or to 
decline those along improper lines. 

St. Paul pointed out to his hearers that in times past 
God had been permitting all nations to walk in their own 
ways, and had interfered particularly in the affairs of 
only the one nation— Israel. All other nations had been 
permitted to take their own course, except in so far as 
they might cross some feature of the Divine Plan. Thus 
the Prophet had expressed the matter to Israel: "You 
only have I known of all the families of the earth." (Amos 3:2.) 
The Apostle's reference to "times past" (Verse 16) 
implies the change of dispensation which had just occurred 
in connection with the death of our Lord Jesus, the cutting 
off of Israel from any special favor, and the throwing 
open of the Gospel Call to all who have ears to hear— 
"to the Jew first and also to the Greek." 

Now God was sending a Message of instruction to all 
nations, in order that they should turn from such vanities 
and should recognize the only living and true God and 
His Son, the world's exalted Redeemer whom the 
Father had ordained to become its Ruler in due time, to 
put down sin and death and to bless with His Reign of 
Righteousness all the families of the earth. The Apostle 
also pointed out that although God had left the nations 
without the instructions of the Law Covenant and the 
prophecies, He had given them some indications of His 
care, in making provision for their necessities— causing 
the sun to shine and the rain to fall upon the just and the 
unjust, upon the evil and the good. 



STONED FOR SPEAKING THE TRUTH 

The sudden change of public sentiment which resulted 
from the Apostle's plain statements of the Truth led the 
Lystrians to look at the missionaries with very different 
eyes, now that, according to their own declarations, the 
two were only common men like themselves. We may even 
suppose that they felt rather humiliated that their superstition 
had aroused them to do reverence to men who 
repudiated it and acknowledged their unworthiness of it. 

While the populace was in this spirit, certain Jews 
came thither from Antioch and Iconium, explaining to the 
Lystrians that the missionaries were imposters, working 
upon the credulity of the people, "turning the world upside 
down," raising questions about theology, and disturbing 
the minds of the people. The populace was ready 
for just such leading in the reverse direction, and disposed 
to feel that somehow, if these two men were not 
really Jupiter and Mercury, they were pretenders and 
falsifiers, who had deceived the people and who should 
be put to death. As a result, St. Paul was stoned, dragged 
outside the city, and left for dead. 

How erratic is the fallen human mind, in its condition 
of superstition and ignorance! How easily the priest of 
Jupiter could lead the ignorant to make gods of men, and 
how readily he could lead them in an opposite direction, 
equally wrong! But although the greatest of all the Apostles, 
and one of the most remarkable orators and logicians 
which the world has ever known, was in their midst, how 
few, comparatively, could he influence in the right direction— 
for the Truth and righteousness, in obedience to God! 

In many respects the world is the same today as it 
was then, although civilization and general intelligence 
have done much to lift it out of that abject benightedness 
which leads to idol worship, although Mohammedanism, 
Confucianism, Churchianity and a certain kind of Christianity 
have put a veneer of respectability, reason and 
common sense upon it. Nevertheless, under this veneer 
the masses are still in a very unsatisfactory condition. 
They are still disposed to be humbugged, disposed to appreciate 
those who are boastful and pretend to be 
great, disposed to worship that which demands worship 
rather than that which is worthy of it, disposed to misunderstand 
God and His Plan and to consider these from 
a devilish standpoint rather than to appreciate the lengths, 
breadths, heights and depths of the Love of God. 

A REMARKABLE EXPERIENCE 

But God was not through with the Apostle Paul. He 
was not stoned because of God's indifference, nor because 
of the Almighty's lack of power to protect His servant. 
On the contrary, it is quite probable that the Lord was 
teaching the Apostle some great lesson, valuable both to 
himself and to the Church to whom he ministers even today 



in the matter of these experiences. Quite probably 
the Apostle, while being stoned, remembered afresh the 
death of St. Stephen, to which he had consented. Quite 
probably, too, the result was a fresh realization of his own 
unworthiness to be so prominent a representative of the 
Lord and of His Truth. 
Had the incident of the sacrificing not been thus 

R5891 :page 136 

followed by some trying experience, who knows but that 

the Apostle might have felt a little of self-gratulation, 

such as would be natural to any man who had renounced 

voluntarily honors thrust upon him. He might have been 

disposed to glory in his strength of character; but his 

experiences led him in an opposite direction, as he himself 

subsequently wrote. (Romans 5:3-5.) All of the Lord's 

faithful ones may learn good lessons here— learn to trust 

in the Lord's providences in all of their affairs, not only 

in those which seem favorable, but also in those which 

are apparently working disadvantage and disaster. Concerning 

St. Paul the Lord had said, "I will show him how 

great things he must suffer for My name's sake." (Acts 9:15,16.) 

From this lesson we may infer that when the 

Lord's servants are permitted to suffer for His name's 

sake— not for wrong-doing, not for anger, malice, hatred, 

strife, evil speaking, etc., but for His sake— it is an attestation 

of the Lord's favor, in the acceptance of their sacrifice, 

as in the type Abel's sacrifice was accepted with fire. 

As the disciples stood about the prostrate form of St. 
Paul, supposing that he was dead, the Apostle arose and 
returned to the city. 

HOMEWARD BOUND 

Their entire public preaching at Lystra was at an end; 
and the next day the missionaries went to Derbe, a distance 
of thirty-five miles. This implies that the Lord 
wrought a wonderful miracle in St. Paul, in that he was 
able to continue his journey on the very next day after 
having received so severe treatment as a stoning unto 
apparent death. The Lord sometimes works marvelously 
for His people, as in this instance. At other times He 
leaves them to the general vicissitudes of life as other men. 

No particulars are given regarding the ministry of the 
Truth at Derbe. We may presume thai it was without 
special incident. Having gone thus far, the missionaries 
determined to retrace their steps, instead of proceeding 
and returning homeward by the nearer route— via Tarsus, 
St. Paul's home city. Apparently their motive in so doing 
was their realization that the little groups of believers at 
Lystra, Iconium and Antioch in Pisidia would by this 
time need some encouragement and establishment in the 
Truth; that because of the fierce opposition in these 
places there would probably be more or less contention 
and trouble, and questions would arise which the new converts 



would not be competent to answer. 

This was pastoral work; and in the homeward journey 
there is no intimation that the missionaries attempted 
further mission work. They had no expectation whatever 
of converting all the people in these cities. They understood 
the Plan of God too well to have any such expectations 
as modern mission workers seem to have. They 
knew very well that the mission of the Gospel was not 
to convert the world, but to select out of the world a 
special people for His name. (Acts 15:14.) They had 
witnessed the Truth to these people, and had confidence 
that the Lord was with them and that only such as had 
the hearing ear would be reached, either by the missionaries 
or by those who had already been enlightened. 

Accordingly the two contented themselves with the 
work of upbuilding the "little flock." encouraging them 
to make their calling and election sure to a place in the 
Millennial Kingdom which, in God's due time, the Age 
to come, shall be used of the Lord in the world's blessing, 
the world's conversion, the world's uplift. 

Doubtless the brethren in these various places were 
surprised that if the Gospel were of God, its servants, its 
ministers, should be so at the mercy of the forces of 
evil. This may have tended to shake their confidence considerably; 
for the natural expectation would be that God 
would protect His servants. St. Paul explained this to 
the believers, declaring that tribulations are necessary for 
the perfecting of the saints, for the trial of faith, for the 
testing and the preparing of those who would be joint-heirs 
with Christ in the Kingdom; and that after the permission 
of evil shall thus have served its purpose of keeping 
the "little flock" separate from the world and of polishing 
and refining them for the Kingdom, then the time 
will come when Satan shall be bound, and when the 
righteous shall no more be persecuted, but shall reign as 
joint-heirs with their Lord and Head in His Kingdom. 



R5891 :page 136 

MEMORIAL SUPPER REPORTS 

The Memorial Supper seems to have been very generally 
observed on Sunday night, April 16th— the Anniversary. Reports 
mention especially a very deep spirit of solemnity 
and reverential joy on the part of the Brethren participating— 
so far as reports have yet reached us. The corroboration 
which the events of our day are giving to our 
hopes and prospects as found in the Bible seems to have a 
solidifying influence. At times faith seems almost to give 
way to sight. The fact that we may be here a year or two, 
or possibly more, before the Kingdom will be fully set up is 
not disappointing, because the Lord's people are finding so 
many opportunities for service that their hands, hearts and 
heads are fully engaged— laboring on this side of the veil in 



cooperation with the glorified members on the other side. 

The Brooklyn Congregation is henceforth known as the 
New York City Ecclesia, because our principal services are 
now held in the New York City Temple, although the Tabernacle 
in Brooklyn is also used on every Sunday by a considerable 
number. We had a splendid meeting, which, apparently, 
everybody present enjoyed with a deep spiritual zest. 
We thought together of the original Passover Supper and its 
Antitype, and the Memorial Supper instituted by our Lord 
and of the meaning of the emblems— of our eating the broken 
flesh and participating in the shed blood of our Savior, and 
how these represent also our fellowship, or common union, 
with our Master in His ignominy, suffering, death, guaranteeing 
for the faithful a share with their Master in the Heavenly 
Kingdom and Glory. 

The number participating, as shown below, does not include 
a number of suburban Classes which previously communicated 
with us, but which have now so grown that it is 
considered wise for them to have their own celebration. 

This list below shows the Classes from which we have already 
heard, whose participating numbers were above fifty. 
The figures show quite a substantial increase in the numbers 
of the deeply interested and fully consecrated ones, which rejoices 
us greatly. However, we are especially joyed with the 
thought of the deeper and deepening Christian experiences 
which are manifest amongst the Brethren everywhere. We 
trust that this earnest devotion to the Lord will continue. 
"Faithful unto death" is the term of enlistment for all the 
Soldiers of the Cross: 

New York City, N.Y 1041 Cincinnati, 188 

Chicago, 111 612 Indianapolis, Ind 184 

Boston, Mass 507 Columbus, Ohio 177 

Pittsburgh. Pa 424 Dayton, Ohio 175 

Los Angeles, Cal 422 San Antonio, Tex 175 

Philadelphia, Pa 354 Milwaukee, Wis 169 

Toronto, Can 288 Kansas City, Kan 159 

Cleveland, 258 Buffalo, N.Y 158 

Portland, Ore 255 Baltimore, Md 136 

Vancouver, B.C 253 Toledo, 127 

St. Louis, Mo 244 Denver, Col 123 

Seattle, Wash 235 Springfield, Mass 115 

Washington, D.C 221 Oklahoma City, Okla 1 1 2 

Providence, R.I 202 Spokane, Wash 1 10 

Houston, Tex 109 New Brighton, Pa 69 

Louisville, Ky 108 Hartford, Conn 68 

Roseland (Chicago), III.. 107 Rockford, 111 68 

St. Paul, Minn 100 Duquesne, Pa 67 

Worcester, Mass 98 Schenectady, N.Y 67 

Binghamton, N.Y 91 Wilmington, Del 60 

Everett, Wash 90 Reading, Pa 60 

Richmond, Va 88 York, Pa 57 

Allentown, Pa 86 Cumberland, Md 57 

St. Joseph, Mo 83 Paterson, N.J 57 

Scranton, Pa 75 Erie, Pa 53 



Grand Rapids, Mich 74 Jacksonville, Fla 52 

Pasadena, Cal 74 Wichita, Kan 51 

Altoona, Pa 70 Montreal, Can 50 



R5892:page 137 

THE COUNCIL AT JERUSALEM 

-MAY 28.-ACTS 15:22-33.- 

THE FIRST ECUMENICAL COUNCIL OF THE CHURCH-'THE 

SPIRIT OF A SOUND MIND" IN SETTLING DOCTRINAL DIFFERENCES 

-THE YOKE OF THE LAW COVENANT VS. CHRISTIAN 

LIBERTY-THE DECISION OF THE APOSTLES ON THE 

QUESTIONS AT ISSUE-LESSONS FOR OUR DAY-LIBERTY 

IS NOT LICENSE. 

"The Liberty wherewith Christ hath 
made us free."— Galatians 5:1. 

WHEN St. Paul and Barnabas had made their 

report to the Church at Antioch, both the 

congregation and their missionaries rejoiced 

in their mutual service for the Gentiles. 

The Lord's Cause was indeed quite 

prosperous everywhere for a season. But 

this period of peace, prosperity, growth in 

knowledge and in numbers was followed by 

a season of contention and differences at 

Antioch. From Jerusalem, the headquarters 

of the Lord's work, there came certain brethren, 

Hebrews by birth, who, perceiving that the Gentile Christians 

ignored circumcision, raised a great commotion on 

that score, claiming that as circumcision would not save 

without Christ, neither would Christ's salvation be operative 

without circumcision. 

The minds of many in the Church were disturbed by 
these assertions, and for a time a split in the Church 
seemed probable. But better counsels prevailed; and 
their beloved brethren, St. Paul and Barnabas, were 
sent to Jerusalem, as a committee to confer with the 
Apostles and Elders there. Today's Study tells of this 
conference and its results. 

Incidentally we remark upon the wisdom shown by 
these early Christians. They had "the spirit of a sound 
mind." (2 Timothy 1:7; James 3:17,18.) They had 
indeed great confidence in St. Paul and Barnabas, and 
realized that under the administrations of these two 
faithful brethren the Church at Antioch had already 
received great blessings from the Lord; and that this 
fact rather contradicted the idea that they could not be 
esteemed proper subjects for Divine favor without circumcision. 
They acted wisely, therefore, in considering 
that the Lord's will on the subject was positive; and 



that His will would be indicated through the Apostles, 
to whom He had said, "Whatsoever ye shall bind on 
earth shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever ye shall 
loose on earth shall be loosed in Heaven." (Matthew 16:19; 
John 20:21-23.) The Apostles might therefore 
properly be expected to know whether or not the Gentile 
Christians were free from that obligation which had 
been placed upon all the descendants of Abraham. 

THE JERUSALEM CONFERENCE 

At the Conference, the kindly deference of the Apostles, 
one to the other, is quite marked. It is also noticeable 
that they based their conclusions on what they found 
written in the Old Testament Scriptures and on their leadings 
of Divine providence. For several years the Truth 
had gradually become more and more plain to them. 
They saw that the special favor of God to the Jews had 
given place to a general favor toward people of every 
nation, so that all men everywhere who believed in the 
Lord, accepted His promises and consecrated their lives 
in harmony therewith, might henceforth have equal privileges 
and advantages with those of Hebrew birth. They 
knew of God's covenant relationship with the nation of 
Israel; and it took time for them to become convinced 
that the Divine Program had taken another step forward. 

Similarly, in the end of this Age there are many who 
realize that only a "little flock" has been called of God, 
and has responded, sacrificed under that High Calling. 
It is difficult for these to grasp the thought that a change 
of dispensation is at hand; and that God purposes to 
complete the work of this Age for the Elect and then 
to inaugurate a new work for the non-elect— for the benefit 
of "all the families of the earth." 

The conclusions of the Conference are given us in few 
words; namely, that so far as God is concerned. He had 
recognized believers of Gentile birth by bestowing upon 
them His Holy Spirit in just the same way in which He 
had recognized believers of Hebrew birth, and "put no 
difference between us and them, purifying their hearts 
by faith." (Acts 15:9; 10:44-47.) What more could be 
asked? These Gentiles had received all this favor from 
God without having come under the bondage of the Law 
Covenant. Why, they wisely asked, should they put a 
yoke upon the Gentiles when God had made no such 
requirement? They realized that the Law Covenant 
was indeed a yoke so heavy that neither they nor their 
fathers had been able to bear it. Christ had relieved 
them of the yoke of the Law Covenant. Why should 
they put it upon brethren to whom the Lord had not 
given it?— Romans 3: 19. 

Even going beyond this, they recognized that in some 
respects the Gentiles held the superior position; for they 
were free from the Law, never having come under that 
yoke. Hence the statement, "We [Hebrews] believe that 
through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ we shall be 



saved, even as they [Gentiles]." 

THE CONCLUSION OF THE MATTER 

In Verses 22-29 of today's Study we have the decision 
of the Apostles on the question at issue. They not only 
wrote it out, but sent it at the hand of two of their trusted 
brethren— Judas Barsabas and Silas— with St. Paul and 
Barnabas, that the Church at Antioch might have the 
matter in both written and oral testimony. The declaration 
was that the disquieting teachings had not been 
authorized by the Apostles at Jerusalem. Then they 
briefly summed up, not as law, but as "necessary things," 
the following: (1) Abstain from meats offered (sacrificially) 
to idols; (2) And from blood; (3) And from 
things strangled; (4) And from harlotry. 

It was not intimated that abstinence from these things 
would make one a Christian; for nothing but faith in 
Christ and consecration to Him and endeavor to walk 
in His steps could constitute any one a Christian. By 
these recommended abstentions, they declared, "It will 
be well with you"— you will find these recommendations 
profitable to you as followers of the Lord. As a matter 
of fact, the Apostle Paul has pointed out most forcefully 
that "Love is the fulfilling of the Law" (Romans 13:10); 
for love for God would control the life as respects holiness, 
and love for our neighbor as for ourselves would 
control as respects earthly justice. 

THE NECESSITY FOR THESE RESTRICTIONS 

The things recommended by the Conference were necessary 
to a preservation of the Body of Christ, composed 
of Jews and Gentiles of different education and sentiments. 
Without discussing whether or not harm could 
come to the meats sold in the markets, by reason of pagan 
ceremonies in connection with the killing of animals, the 
Conference advised that these be abstained from, because 
Jews would certainly consider the eating of such meats as 
participation in heathen idolatry— even though from the 
broad standpoint of fact the idol, being nothing but wood 
or stone or metal, could neither profit nor injure the food. 
Nevertheless, it was advisable that the Gentile Christians 
abstain from the use of their liberty in this direction, 

R5892 : page 138 

out of deference to the weaker brethren, Jews and Gentiles, 
who could not so deeply philosophize and whose 
consciences might be injured. 

A similar thought attaches to the prohibition of the 
use of blood. To the Jew it was forbidden. (Leviticus 17:10-14.) 
Under the Law Covenant, blood was made 
a symbol of life; and to partake of it would therefore 
imply responsibility for the life taken. Moreover, in 
the typical ceremonies of the Law the prohibited blood 



was used as a symbol to represent the sin-offering; for 
atonement for sins was effected by the blood. To emphasize 
these typical lessons the Jew had been forbidden 
to use blood. There may be other reasons, sanitary or 
otherwise, connected therewith, but not yet known to us. 

These prohibitions had never come to the Gentiles; for 
they had never been under the Law Covenant. But so 
deeply rooted were the Jewish ideas on this subject that 
it was necessary to the peace of the Church that the 
Gentiles should observe this matter also. The things 
strangled meant animals taken in traps, whose blood was 
not shed, or drained out by bleeding to death, as the 
Jewish Law required of all meats that were to be eaten. 
This restriction was necessary to the harmony between 
the two branches of Spiritual Israel— that which came 
from Judaism and that which came from the Gentiles— 
previously separated by the Law Covenant. If the Gentile 
brethren did not wish to be contentious and cause 
division in the Church, they would surely be willing to 
restrain or sacrifice their liberty respecting these matters. 

The last restriction specified was harlotry. The idol 
worship which prevailed at the time of our Study had 
connected with it a great deal of sensuality, which would 
be contrary to the Spirit of Christ in every sense of the 
word. It is difficult, however, to understand why one 
moral precept should be thus separated from others and 
placed on the list with ceremonial requirements. We 
incline to ask why were not included profanity, drunkenness, 
idolatry, adultery, false witness, murder, etc. Are 
we to understand that the Gentiles are free to commit all 
crimes not stipulated by this Conference? 

Surely not! Rather, all the requirements of the Law 
are included in the one Law of the New Creation- 
Love for God and man. Love would cover profanity, 
murder, theft, false witness, adultery; but the Law of 
Love would not so thoroughly cover the items enumerated 
by the Council at Jerusalem. We are to recognize 
that the Apostles were Divinely authorized to bind things 
on earth; and that they were so guided in their public 
utterances that they bound nothing unnecessarily, nothing 
contrary to the Divine will. It is our opinion, therefore, 
that these items thus superadded to the Law of 
Love should be observed by all Spiritual Israelites as 
representing the Divine will. As a matter of fact, nearly 
all the butchering for our markets is in harmony with the 
Jewish regulations, although many Jews decline to recognize 
this, and eat only such meats as have been inspected 
and approved by their rabbis. 

GOOD RESULTS FROM THIS WISE COURSE 

The message sent by the Conference to the Church at 
Antioch was received in faith by all, and caused great 
rejoicing in the Church. Harmony prevailed, unity of 
spirit, fellowship amongst the members. The secret of 
this lay in the fact that the Lord was recognized as having 



the supervision of the affairs of the Church, and as 
guiding her course and directing her way through the 
appointed channels, the Apostles. 

Similarly today, where honesty of heart prevails 
amongst the Lord's peoples, schisms, divisions, should be 
unknown. The Lord's guidance and instruction should 
be sought— His Word through His Apostles. Moreover, 
since the Apostles fell asleep, the Lord has been pleased 
to use faithful brethren in the Church as finger-boards 
to indicate the right path, in harmony with His Word 
through the Apostles and Prophets. The thing necessary 
to each is the honest conscience, the humble spirit, and 
the pure heart. 

We rejoice at the evidences that in the early Church 
there was such a spirit of broadmindedness as is represented 
in today's Study. We rejoice to know that when 
an important subject was to be considered, with a view 
to discerning the mind of the Lord, there was full liberty 
granted for as much dispute or debate, in a proper manner, 
as was necessary to bring the entire subject before 
those who had it under consideration. There is a difference, 
however, between discussion inside the pale of faith 
and disputes outside that boundary. As St. Paul says. 
"Him that is weak in the faith receive ye, but not to 
doubtful disputations"— do not receive him to dispute his 
doubts— what he does not believe. (Romans 14:1.) Let 
him have a full opportunity for hearing the faith discussed. 
If his doubts do not then disappear, he will 
probably drop out of the assembly. 

AS TO WHO COMPOSE THE CHURCH 

In harmony with this we are not to recognize disputes 
respecting the FOUNDATION PRINCIPLES of the Gospel 
of Christ. The Church is composed only of those who 
recognize the foundation— that Christ died for our redemption 
from sin and its penalty; that all who would 
share His blessings must accept the simple facts of His 
death for us and His resurrection by the power of God for 
our ultimate deliverance; and that then, in harmony with 
the desire to be His disciples, they must consecrate themselves 
fully to Him, to do His will and to serve His cause. 
These foundation principles of the Church of Christ are 
not subject to dispute. Those who reject these principles 
are not of the Church, and should not be heard in the 
Church. They are intruders— doubtless wolves in sheep's 
clothing— of evil intentions and ultimate results. 

But as respects discussions amongst those who are 
truly the Lord's, opportunity for freedom of discussion 
on any point of importance, within reasonable limits, 
is absolutely necessary to spiritual health and progress. 
To shut it off means to crush proper activities of thought, 
and in many instances means to accumulate a force which 
would ultimately result in an explosion, which would be 
damaging in some respects at least. Let us remember the 
Golden Rule in this matter. Let us accord to others the 



same reasonable liberty, inside of foundation principles, 
that we would like to have them accord us, if our positions 
were reversed. 

LIBERTY IS NOT LICENSE 

Our Golden Text is a precious one. The value of 
true liberty amongst the Lord's people cannot be over-estimated. 
It becomes a part of their very life. But because 
of a wrong conception of union, the spirit of true liberty 
was crushed out of the Church shortly after the Apostles 
fell asleep in death; and the Dark Ages resulted, with 
all their ignorance, superstition, blindness, persecution, 
etc. The Reformation movement of the Sixteenth Century 
was only a re-awakening of the spirit of liberty 
mentioned in our Text— liberty to think inside the foundation 
lines of the doctrines of Christ, liberty to believe as 
much or as little more, in harmony with this, as mental 
conditions and circumstances will permit, without being 
branded a heretic or persecuted by brethren, either in 
word or in deed. 

R5892 : page 139 

Strange to say, a peculiar combination of too much 
liberty and too little liberty is creeping over Christendom 
today. The too little liberty feature objects to any discussion 
of the doctrines of Christ and the teachings of the 
Apostles, for fear that some difference of opinion should 
be manifested. This is an endeavor to have an outward 
union without a union of heart and of head. The general 
trend along this line favors the covering over, the concealment, 
of truths as well as of errors, in the wrong assumption 
that the appearance of union will serve the 
purpose of real union, and will be really effective as respects 
the prosperity of the true members of the Body of 
Christ. Such a false union is coming, however, and will 
cause prosperity in the nominal Church, but only for a 
brief season. The culmination of the Time of Trouble 
will overwhelm all. 

On the other hand, the too great liberty feature is 
that represented by the teachings of Higher Critics and 
Evolutionists. Any attempt to contradict these unscriptural 
doctrines is tabooed, as tending to stir up strife and 
thus to destroy the unity of the Church. Thus the too 
great liberty and the too great bondage features are 
working together in the nominal church systems to expel 
and ostracize the Truth and all who love it, all who wish 
to "stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made 
us free." Let all who are the Lord's people and who have 
tasted of true Christian liberty see to it that they stand 
fast in that liberty; and as soon as an attempt is made to 
restrain their liberty, if not sooner, let them get completely 
out from all the bondages of human systems, in 
order that they may stand firmly and loyally with the 
Lord, our Redeemer, our Instructor, our King. 



R5892:page 139 

FAITH DEMONSTRATED BY WORKS 

"I will show thee my faith by my works."— James 2:18. 

FAITH is a mental conviction respecting things 

not positively proven to the senses, but received 

on supposedly good authority. There 

is another quality that seems very closely 

allied to faith; namely, credulity. The difference 

between these two appears to be 

that faith requires, and inquires for, good, 

sound evidence and authority for its basis. 

There are people who are very much prejudiced, 

and who seem to reason very little 

about anything. Sometimes they are credited with having 

a great deal of faith, whereas the truth is that they have 

a great deal of credulity. The faith that is of the responsible 

kind is that which the Christian is called upon to 

exercise. He exercises faith in God. If he doubted God's 

existence, God's character, he would not be in any sense 

prepared to receive the Message which the Father has to 

send at this time. 

Having gotten a glimpse of the great Divine Character 
through the Book of Nature, we properly enough, 
before exercising faith in the Bible, make inquiry into the 
personnel of the writers— who they were, what were their 
characters, who did they claim to be, what evidences are 
there that they were true, and do these evidences agree. 
In other words, faith does not jump at conclusions, but 
makes investigations and sees that it has some reasonable 
ground for its existence. If it were solid ground, it 
would be knowledge. Faith is not knowledge. Therefore 
Faith inquires for reasonable ground upon which to build. 

FAITH DISTINGUISHED FROM CREDULITY 

With the Bible open, the Christian has before him a 
field of faith-knowledge— knowledge of things not seen by 
the natural eye— all of which he may continually be proving. 
While ever satisfied with what he has been demonstrating, 
he must necessarily be manifesting his faith by 
the way, proving that which is good. His mental processes 
being active, he should realize how one feature of the 
Divine Plan fits into another. Thus his faith grows into 
larger faith, deeper faith, stronger faith. In time his 
faith becomes a conviction so strong that he might be 
willing to stake his life on what he believes to be the truth 
in the Divine promises. He accepts those promises as 
something real, something that he knows about— not something 
received in a vague, unsatisfactory manner. 

On the other hand, credulity is prejudice. The heathen 



are credulous; for they are blindly prejudiced. Many 
Christian people seem to be beset by the same spirit of 
credulity, and seem to mistake it for faith. We are not to 
forget that there are two great powers at the present time 
—the power of Good and the power of Evil. We are not 
to forget that for six thousand years the power of Evil 
has had the upper hand on earth. God has permitted 
Satan to have a great deal of power in the world. But 
it is a deceptive power. To Satan's misleading spirit 
powers we accredit much of the superstition that has 
fastened itself upon humanity. 

For instance, there was a time when we thought it a 
manifestation of great faith to see three gods in one God, 
and one God in three gods. From our mistaken viewpoint 
we said, "One cannot reason this out; it is all of 
faith." The fact that somebody had said that there are 
three gods in one God, and one God in three gods, was 
not a basis for faith. So then, it was not faith that we 
had in a Trinity, but credulity. With many other things 
it was the same; we were not exercising faith. And so it 
would seem to have been with very many in the past. 
They must have swallowed many things with a very 
slight amount of mental mastication. We believe that such 
conditions still exist. 

We notice our Christian Science friends. Many of 
them are very noble people, very estimable people in some 
respects; yet in our judgment they hold certain doctrines 
that are not matters of faith, but of credulity. They have 
theories respecting sin, respecting error. Because these 
theories seem to fit certain experiences in life, they have 
accepted these as a basis for what they call faith, and 
have seemed to receive them aside from all processes of 
reasoning. The basis for their doctrine seems to be that 
they have experienced healing as a result of faith. They 
do not seem to see that Satan has power to mislead. We 
fear that many of them are being misled by Satan's deceptions. 
We see a similar condition amongst Mormons. 
They too have theories, and have healing. It is the same 
with the Seventh Day Adventists. The Adversary is misleading 
all these people as respects the Call of this present 
Age; they are being side-tracked. They are not, therefore, 
to receive the highest blessing, which goes only to 
the faithful who walk in the footsteps of Jesus. 

COMBATTING WRONG DEDUCTIONS IN EARLY CHURCH 

The Apostle in our text says, "I will show thee my 
faith by my works." This is part of an argument that he 
has been putting up. There was a theory prevalent in 
the days of the Apostle, that works amounted to nothing 
—that it was faith which counted. The Apostle James is 
combatting that thought. Faith is all very well; but you 
must have works also! The Apostle says, "You show me 
your faith without works, but I prefer to show you my 
faith by my works." There was some perversion of St. 
Paul's teachings that had gotten into circulation at that 



time. St. Paul had said that by the works of the Law no 

R5892 : page 140 

flesh could be justified. The Jews, who had the Law, 
had not been able to keep that Law; neither would St. 
Paul or any other human being be able to keep that Law, 
in order to justify himself in God's sight. The only way 
to do this was by faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, and not 
by the Law of works. 

We are not to understand St. James as in any sense of 
the word opposing St. Paul in this thought, but rather as 
opposing the wrong deductions from St. Paul's teaching; 
to wit, "It does not matter what kind of works I have. I 
have strong faith; God will not pay any attention to the 
works. I can work the works of the flesh; and having 
plenty of faith in God, I shall be all right." St. James 
points out that this is not true. Faith in God and in 
Christ and in the forgiveness of sins is proper; but there 
must be works to accompany it. Just as surely as we have 
faith it will manifest itself in some way, and these works, 
if not good, will be bad works, indifferent works. A good 
tree will produce good fruit. A pure fountain will send 
forth pure water. 

This seems to be the Apostle's argument. Surely we 
all agree with him, and are all seeking to show forth our 
works. The world cannot appreciate our faith, because 
they cannot read our hearts. But God appreciates our 
faith. Abraham was the father of the faithful. God 
loved him and treated him as a friend. He was called the 
"Friend of God." But, says the Apostle, God required 
that Abraham should show his faith by doing some works; 
he must have some works to prove that he had faith; he 
will test us by our works as to the strength of our faith. 



R5893:page 140 

PREACHING THE GOSPEL A NECESSITY 

"Woe is unto me if I preach not 
the Gospel."— 1 Corinthians 9:16. 

WOE is a word not so often used today as 

formerly. It was a common word in the 

old English; but there is a meaning attached 

to it at present, we think, that was 

not in the original word. Nearly all who 

read the parable where the Lord speaks of 

"weeping and gnashing of teeth" seem to 

have the thought that it means eternal torment. 

Woe, when used in the Bible, means 

the same to some minds. So these construe 

our text to mean, "I shall go to eternal torment if I do 

not preach the Gospel." This is because of the creeds. 



traditions and customs that have come down from the 
Dark Ages, when the people were forbidden the Bible. 

We understand the Apostle to mean here: "I should 
be very unhappy if I could not preach the Gospel; it 
would be a cause of great distress to me. In view of 
my former course of persecution, and the Lord's great 
mercy to me, it would mean a loss of His favor and 
blessing should I refrain from proclaiming His Message." 
The context seems to bear out this thought. So it should 
be a great distress to those to whom the Lord has granted 
the illumination of His Truth, if the opportunity of 
preaching this glorious Gospel were taken from them. 

From one standpoint, the Apostle's words would apply 
only to the public ministry of the Word. From another 
standpoint, any one of God's consecrated people is a 
minister, ordained to preach; for ordination means commission, 
right, authorization. This commission to preach 
the Gospel is mentioned by the Prophet Isaiah. (Isaiah 61:1-3.) 
There the Church is brought to our attention 
through the great Head of the Church, Christ Jesus, who 
is represented, primarily, as the speaker. We read: "The 
Spirit of the Lord is upon Me; because the Lord hath 
anointed Me to preach good tidings unto the meek; He 
hath sent Me to bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim 
liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to 
them that are bound; to preach the acceptable year of the 
Lord, and the Day of Vengeance of our God; to comfort 
all that mourn; to appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, 
to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for 
mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness; 
that they might be called trees of righteousness, the 
planting of Jehovah, that He might be glorified." 

MANY WAYS OF PREACHING THE GOSPEL 

Here the commission of the Holy Spirit to Messiah 
was prophetically announced, long in advance. The Body 
members of the Messiah, who have received the same 
anointing through Him, have also received this commission 
to preach the Gospel. If the disciple of Christ 
properly appreciates the privilege of being a messenger 
of God, an ambassador for God, it would be a woe indeed 
to him if he could not proclaim the Message, to the extent 
of his ability and opportunity. 

There are some who have the thought that there is 
no way to preach except by a public discourse from the 
platform. But this seems not to be the Bible thought of 
preaching. Jesus talked to the people by the seaside, and 
along the way; sometimes He sat upon the edge of the 
well and preached the Message of salvation; He preached 
to His disciples up in the mountain; sometimes He journeyed 
with them and talked. And so with us. Whatever 
way or time we may have for preaching the Good Tidings 
we should use. 

The word Gospel means glad tidings, good news. We 
are to tell the "good tidings of great joy." This may be 



done in the daily walk of our life, as we meet the butcher, 
the baker and the grocery man, or our neighbors and 
friends. It may be done by literature sent through the 
mails, or by handing out a tract, a book, or by preaching 
from the platform. All of this is preaching the Gospel, 
making known the Good Tidings; for preaching means 
merely to make known, and does not relate to the manner 
in which the knowledge is imparted. 

BASIS AND SUPERSTRUCTURE OF THE GOSPEL 

Many tracts contain no Gospel; they contain tidings 
of great misery. These we would not wish to circulate; 
for the more we spread such tidings the less preaching of 
the Gospel we would do. We are to remember that our 
Lord Jesus especially identified the Gospel with the 
Kingdom. Therefore we should preach the Good Tidings, 
the Gospel of the Kingdom. This has been God's 
method for gathering the Church, and is to be the witness 
to the world. We still have the opportunity for making 
known this good Message of the Kingdom. The Basis 
of this Gospel is the death of our Lord Jesus Christ as a 
Sacrifice for sinners. His resurrection and His ascension 
to the right hand of the Father. Its superstructure is 
the salvation of the Church and of the world— "whosoever 
will." The blessings of God are all through Christ. 

The rich blessings of the Lord for both Church and 
world are to follow the Second Coming of Jesus. Then 
the Church is to be glorified and exalted; and the world 
will enter upon the Era of Blessing God has promised 
shall come with the full establishment of His Kingdom. 

Whoever, therefore, understands this real Gospel, and 
appreciates his own ordination to preach it, must necessarily 
feel unhappy if he should be hindered from preaching 

R5893 : page 141 

it. Some can preach in several ways. Others can 

preach in nearly every way. Some can preach in very 

few ways; but all can preach in some way. The more 

we do, the more happy we should be. So we thank God 

that we have so many helps in our day— books, free literature, 

Bible Concordances, etc. We greatly appreciate 

all these and are seeking to make good use of them to 

the blessing of others as well as for our own upbuilding. 



R5893:page 141 

YOUR BRETHREN THAT HATED YOU 

"Your brethren that hated you, that cast you out for My 
name's sake, said. Let the Lord be glorified; but He shall appear 
to your joy, and they shall be ashamed."— Isaiah 66:5. 



HOW beautifully reasonable is the Message of 

God's Word ! Many of the followers of 

Jesus, young in faith and possessed of but a 

small measure of the Holy Spirit, would be 

inclined to threaten their enemies with dire 

vengeance from God, even as the Apostles 

James and John at first desired to call down 

fire from Heaven upon the Samaritan city 

because the people had refused to sell them 

bread for the use of Jesus and His disciples. 

Where in the Bible do we find one word of threatening 

in respect to those who persecuted Jesus unto death, or 

those who have persecuted His followers? The simple 

statement is, "They shall be ashamed." The Lord's declaration 

through Daniel's prophecy is, "Many of them that 

sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake." some to shine 

as the brightness of the firmament— the saintly, the Church 

of glory— others to be ashamed— to have shame and lasting 

contempt.— Daniel 12:2,3. 

And even here our Common Version Bible oversteps 
the matter and declares, "Everlasting shame and contempt," 
whereas the Hebrew text says merely "lasting 
shame and contempt." The shame will last as long as the 
wrongdoer continues to be in his shameful condition of 
opposition to the Lord and to His Message. The contempt 
will last as long as the individual's course shall be a contemptible 
one. But as soon as reformation sets in, the 
shame will begin to depart; and eventually there will be 
neither shame nor contempt to those who will manifest a 
proper appreciation of the character of our God and the 
principles of His Government, when under the instructions 
of the Kingdom they shall come to understand them. 

So then, dear brethren, since the Messianic Kingdom 
will be administered by those who have suffered for the 
name of Christ, receive persecutions patiently, joyfully. 
As the Lord advised, "Rejoice and be exceeding glad." 
Everything that we may suffer for the Lord's sake, for 
the Truth's sake, will. He assures us, eventually bring us 
an everlasting reward, if we are rightly exercised by it, 
if we become character copies of God's dear Son. 

The names of all who suffer for righteousness' sake, 
we are assured, are written in Heaven; but we shall be 
glad to have a little memorandum on earth, too, from 
those who desire to send their names in to us. Make the 
record just as brief as possible, head it I.H.S., and 
crowd it down into a few words on a postcard, even 
though you enclose the postcard in an envelope. We want 
your address on one side and this brief review on the 
other side; and we will keep these cards on file. 

In addition to telling us very briefly something about 
what the Truth has cost you, you may add one line about 
your family, and then a brief word respecting your talents, 
abilities and experience. Who knows but that we might 
be able to suggest something for you in future? 

In addition to this card, we suggest that any brothers 
or sisters who have special literary talents as writers or 



as editors, and other special education, or such as are 
lawyers, doctors, or fluent preachers, send us a brief letter 
respecting their financial standing— accompanying the 
above mentioned card. 



page 141 

REQUESTS FOR PILGRIM VISITS 

AS THE WATCH TOWER list includes thousands of 
new readers we make the following explanations 
afresh: 

THE WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
out of donated funds sends forth instructors, 
lecturers, styled "PILGRIMS." It pays their 
expenses of every kind. Thus they become in 
a special sense its representatives, meeting with 
Bible Students everywhere. Some of these are 
specially qualified for public service as well as 
for semi-public studies with the friends; others 
are less qualified for public service, but excellent 
in Class meetings. The SOCIETY uses great care in the 
selection of these to the intent that their presentations of the 
Truth, expositions of the Scriptures, etc., may be along helpful 
lines— profitable every way and especially for the upbuilding 
of the Lord's people in the most holy faith. 

It is expected that the Classes inviting such Pilgrim service 
will provide for the Pilgrim's necessities at one of their 
homes, or otherwise, during his brief stay of from one to 
two days. Luxurious or extraordinary preparation for these 
Brethren is not expected, but merely their comfortable provision. 
By this we mean a clean, comfortable bed and wholesome 
food. Any one not being able to furnish these reasonable 
requirements should not propose to entertain the Pilgrim. 
The Class inviting Pilgrim service should consider itself 
responsible and should see that these reasonable comforts 
are provided. The Pilgrims are expected to address 
meetings every night, also afternoon meetings wherever these 
are possible— or otherwise to visit the Brethren who may be 
sick either spiritually or physically. The morning is often 
necessary for traveling. The Pilgrim should not be kept up 
too late at night. "Moderation" should govern, in this as in 
all things, as the Scriptures direct. 

We invite Classes desiring Pilgrim visits to send in their 
requests at once, addressing the SOCIETY, care PILGRIM DEP'T. 

We desire that post-cards be used in making applications 
for these visits, and specially desire replies to all of the following 
questions. The questions need not be repeated, but 
merely indicated thus: (a), (b), etc.: 

(a) How many Bible Students in your vicinity use the 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES? 

(b) Are weekly meetings held? 

(c) How many are usually in attendance? 

(d) Where do you now meet on Sunday? (Give full street 



address and name of auditorium.) 

(e) At what hours are the Sunday meetings held? 

(f) Was a vote taken on the Pilgrim invitation? 

(g) How many voted for the invitation to be sent? 

(h) Do you desire Sunday for Special Public Lectures? 
(i) How frequently do you desire such Special appointments? 
(j) Give seating capacity of Auditorium you could secure, 
(k) What attendance do you think could be secured for well 

advertised public sessions in good Auditorium? 
(1) Would a suitable place be found for meetings not specially 

advertised? 
(m) Have the members of your class chosen leaders in accordance 

with suggestions of SCRIPTURE STUDIES, Volume 

VI., chapters 5 and 6? 

If so, give name and full address of each. 
(n) Give full names and full addresses of the two (2) to 

whom notices of Pilgrim visits should be sent. (Please 

notify Pilgrim Dept. as to any change or removal.) 
(o) If your town is not on a railroad give the name of 

proper railroad station at which to stop, 
(p) How many miles from station is meeting place, and 

which direction from station? 
(q) Would Pilgrim be met at station? 
(r) If not, how should Pilgrim go from said station? 
(s) Give writer's full name and address. 
(t) Any additional remarks. 



R5894:page 142 

SOME FAITHFUL WITNESSES 

FROM an English newspaper. The Rugby Observer, 
March 3, we quote the following:— 

The first conscientious objectors to come 
before a Rugby Tribunal made their appearance 
yesterday before the Rural Authority. 
There were three claims. Two were made by 
Colporteurs living at Biltonhill and in the employ 
of a Tract Society, and their objection 
was to either combatant or non-combatant 
service. 

The first, a widower, on his application 
wrote that while he appreciated the noble 
sacrifices that had been and were being made on 
behalf of King and country, the reason of his application 
was that five and a half years ago he became a 
Christian, and that he then vowed to God that he would 
give himself to His service and work out his life to the best 
of his ability on the principles of Christianity. He would 
regard employment in any branch of military service as a 
complete violation of his oath to the King of kings; he 
would feel that in his own conscience he would have broken 
a sacred oath to the Almighty. 

Addressing the Tribunal, applicant said when he accepted 



the principles of Jesus Christ he knew that sooner or later 
it would cost him something, and he had realized that as the 
spirit of militarism had permeated all the institutions of the 
country, it would need courage to hold to those principles. 
But while he realized that militarism had no room for conscience, 
he was determined to be guided by his conscience in 
the matter. He had sworn allegiance to the King of kings, 
and while he had all respect for those who had sworn to 
England's King, he was bound in honor to the Lord. 

"I HAVE NO COUNTRY" 

The President: "Don't you think it is quite compatible 
with the Christian life to defend your country?" 

"I have no country, sir. I gave up my citizenship. While 
I have always realized the privileges of being born in this 
country, and have been surprised at the privileges granted 
by the conscience clause in the Military Act, and had decided 
to stand to my principles even if that clause had not been 
added— yet my oath of allegiance is to the King of kings." 

Replying to further questions appellant said the instructions 
of Jesus Christ were that they were to use no violence 
to any man. Jesus Christ instructed: "It is said you should 
love your friends and hate your enemies; but I say unto you, 
love your enemies." 

Rev. Challenor: We are aware of the Sermon on the 
Mount, but there is non-combatant service you could take up. 

Applicant: Do I understand that I am discussing whether 
I am to take up non-combatant service? 

Rev. Challenor: In the R.A.M.C. your work would 
be like that of the Master, to alleviate suffering. 

Applicant: In this I should consider what the Master 
would do. It may seem to be very good to alleviate the sufferings 
of the brave soldiers at the front, but I hear them 
say on coming back, "It is ten hells in one." Take a man 
who is in the jaws of death, and I am asked to nurse him 
back to life. For what purpose? To send him back to those 
ten hells in one. No, I am of the opinion that it would be 
better to let him die and await the Lord's coming. 

Mr. Flowers: Do you refuse to take the military oath? 

Absolutely. I have taken my oath to the King of kings. 

Rev. Challenor: Many other people have taken an oath to 
the King of kings. 

Applicant: I hope they will have determination to keep it. 

Mr. Wratislaw: Suppose a burglar entered your house, 
would you not resist him? 

I have no house here. 

But suppose you had? 

Well, a burglar usually enters a house to look for wealth. 
If I saw a burglar in my house, I should ask him what he 
was after. If he said "wealth," I should say, "Well, I am 
going to help you find it, because I have none." 

Yours is a paid service, surely. 

I receive nothing in the form of wages from the Society. 

Does not the Tract Society pay a commission to its men? 

That is so. If I do no work I get no pay. 



Replying to ;i question as to whether he would not defend 
his mother from violence, applicant quoted the incident of the 
betrayal of Jesus Christ when Peter was reproved for taking 
up a sword. No cause, he said, was grander than that, but 
Christ rebuked Peter for using the weapon. 

Mr. Wratislaw: You will not fight and you will not tend 
the wounded. Are you prepared to go to one of the military 
prisons in Germany and say, "I am willing to put myself in 
this prison that one of those wounded soldiers may go back?" 

Applicant: I should ask myself, "What would the Master 
do?" I remember that while our Lord was on earth John 
the Baptist was in prison, but our Lord did not release him; 
He allowed him to be beheaded in prison. I am prepared 
to go to prison. I am prepared to go to prison for my own 
conscience. If a man is imprisoned unjustly the Lord will 
deal with his captors, not I. 

But you do not mind seeking the shelter of this country? 

If this country denies me the privilege of living in it I am 
quite prepared to take a passport to leave it. 

I hope you would accept it. 

Exemption from combatant service only was granted. 

Applicant: My conscience will be the final decider in this 
matter, and I shall keep to my conscience at all costs. 

SHARP PASSAGE WITH APPLICANT 

The previous applicant's companion sought exemption on 
similar grounds. He said he had consecrated his life to the 
Lord's service from the age of 14 years, and participation in 
any form of military service would violate the principles of 
Christian truth to which he had pledged himself. He said 
his views were identical with those of the previous applicant. 

Asked by the Rev. Challenor if he did not consider it his 
duty to alleviate the sufferings of the wounded, he replied 
that if he did not undertake such service he would not be 
there to attend to the wounded. 

The President: If you were in that incident in the Bible 
you would not be the good Samaritan? 

To my understanding the parable is not applicable to military 
service. I would gladly help any one who needed it, but 
to work in non-combatant service is to assist those engaged 
in combatant service. He added that the citizenship to which 
he belonged was the citizenship of Heaven. 

Exemption from combatant service was granted. 

Applicant: I would like you to understand that my determination 
is not to serve in any branch of military service, 
and you as a Tribunal, have a right to give me the exemption 
I claim. You have been instructed by the Local Government 
Board to give me exemption in such circumstances. At the 
same time, I shall appeal if you will not grant it. 

The President: You can appeal to the County Tribunal. 

Applicant: You have the power and you have the intelligence 
to judge my claim. 

The President: Perhaps the County Tribunal will have 
more intelligence than we have. 

Applicant: It might be so of course. 



SOME LETTERS ON THE SUBJECT 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

As you are aware, compulsory military service has been 
enacted in this country within certain limits. I come under 
the provisions of the act and would like to have your advice, 
which for the past fourteen years I have esteemed and sought 
to follow as presented in the DAWNS and TOWERS. 

I applied for total exemption from all forms of military 
service, but succeeded in getting exemption from combatant 
service only. A special non-combatant corps is being formed 
for conscientious objectors to combatant service. Do you 
think a properly educated conscience would be violated by 
engaging in such a service, if compelled to do so? A number 
of the brethren in Glasgow have been refused even exemption 
from combatant service at the first appeal court, but 
I expect all will get recommended at the second and practically 
final appeal court for non-combatant service. Not to 
appear when called by the military authorities would mean 
trial by a civil court as a deserter and then a handing over 
in charge of an escort to the army officials. To refuse to 
drill, etc., after that, I suppose, would mean repeated punishments, 
ending probably in a court martial and a sentence of 
death. Do you think a properly educated conscience would 
make us endure all that rather than engage in non-combatant 
work? I would be deeply grateful for an early reply, as I 
may be called upon to decide for myself very soon. With 
fervent love as ever, 

Your brother in Christ, ALEX. KIRKWOOD. 

Reply by the Editor 

The question is one for the conscience of each individual. 
For our part, it would seem to be a participation in the war 
if one were to engage in laying out and digging trenches, 
putting in foundations for cannon, etc.— the things implied 
in the term "engineering." 

It would seem to the Editor a somewhat different case if 
a soldier of the Cross were demanded by an earthly government 
to enter the hospital work— such as the Red Cross— 
for relief of the sick and wounded, etc., even if the care of 

R5894 : page 143 

the wounded and the nursing of them back to health would 
the sooner prepare them for slaughter. 

The Editor's conscience would not balk at Red Cross hospital 
work. 



DEARLY BELOVED PASTOR:- 
Greetings in the name of the Lord from all of like precious 

R5895 : page 143 



faith in this place, who are anxious to assure you of a deep 
and constant love for you. 

At the suggestion of these we are writing to inform you 
of a wonderful manner in which the Lord has used His 
people here to witness His glorious character and Plan— in 
a way so unexpected and with such clear evidence that we 
are but instruments in His hands. 

You are aware of the position in which many of our dear 
younger brethren are now placed by reason of governmental 
legislation, and we are assured, beloved Pastor, that you are 
entering into these experiences with us, in that if one member 
suffer the others suffer with that one; even as it has been 
our privilege to enter (in spirit) the measure we have known 
to be laid upon you. 

It was necessary for six brethren to appear before a local 
Tribunal three days ago, this particular tribunal being regarded 
as one of the "warmest" in the country; and it was 
therefore with the expectation of a rough time and with no 
anticipation of an opportunity of witnessing to any appreciable 
extent that these brothers faced the ordeal. 

But the Lord has His hand in matters, and His power 
was manifested in a most wonderful way. It was our conclusion 
that here also was fulfilled, "Take no thought what 
ye shall speak, for in that hour it shall be given unto you," 
as the brothers in turn, young in years and young in the 
Truth (most of them only two or three years old "in the 
Lord"), stood up to these mighty ones (which they surely 
were, having years of knowledge behind them, and being 
lawyers and business men, all of them city counselors, or 
aldermen. Truly, "Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings 
Thou hast perfected praise"! 

The power of the Truth confounded the mighty, too. The 
whole was something they had not met before, and had not 
reckoned with. To see these youths standing up to the 
learned ones, meeting their arguments with a reasonable answer, 
and replying in the spirit of the Master, was a witness 
most effectual— by far the best extension work we had done 
for some time. 

In quietness and confidence is surely our strength. The 
applicant had no control of the subject; he had simply to 
answer questions put to him in rapid succession by several 
members of the Tribunal; but it was remarkable what a 
comprehensive witness was given. The first brother's main 
theme was the errors of Christendom, whilst the second 
pointed out the Law we are under— not the Mosaic, but the 
Law of Christ; whilst the third had no alternative but to 
cover the terms of our covenant, and what it means to us; 
the next the establishment of the Kingdom; and the last 
emphasized the answers of the one preceding him and dealt 
with the destruction of the present order of things to make 
way for the better one under Messiah's Kingdom. 

"God moves in a mysterious way His wonders to perform" 
and a great witness has gone forth to a class we could not 
hitherto reach. And, then, all the papers have published 
something upon the subject. The Truth has thus been 



brought into prominence more than ever. 

The decisions are against the brethren, so we take it to 
be the Lord's will that another witness should be given. I 
am glad to tell you that all the brethren are one in mind 
and attitude in the matter, and are rejoicing in the privilege 
of sharing experiences so like the Lord's and in having such 
opportunity of demonstrating their faithfulness to Him. 

And now, dear Brother, we must thank you for your able 
ministry of the Truth of God to us, and we thank Him for 
the knowledge received through you, our beloved Pastor. 

How valuable is the knowledge the Lord has permitted 
us to have! We are appreciating it more and more as the 
days go by, for so many do not know the things of which we 
have knowledge, and consequently the strange happenings of 
today disturb them much and they have not the "peace which 
passeth knowledge." 

Be assured, dear Pastor, that we continually bear you up 
at the Throne. May the Lord sustain you to the end! We 
rejoice with you in the increasing evidence that our deliverance 
draweth nigh. With fervent love from all, 

Yours in the Lord, .—England. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Greetings in our Lord Jesus! As you will no doubt have 
been informed, the Military Service Act has been passed in 
Great Britain, which gives the Military authorities power to 
call to military service every able-bodied man in the country 
between the ages of 18 and 41. It is Conscription pure and 
simple. Provision was made for conscientious objectors to 
be partially or totally exempted from the Act, if their objection 
was proved to be a bona fide, conscientious one. Many 
of the dear brethren throughout the country have already been 
up before the appointed Tribunals, claiming exemption from 
military service, either combatant or non-combatant. In eveiy 
case that I know or have heard of the claim for total exemption 
has been disallowed, but mostly all have been granted 
to have non-combatant military duties. As the desire of the 
brethren is to be outside of the Act entirely, believing that 
it is only another way of engaging in military operations, 
most of them, I understand, are appealing to the Appeal 
Tribunals for the full benefits of the total exemption clause, 
which was provided in the Act for conscientious objectors. 
I myself have appealed and am waiting to appear before this 
Second Tribunal, the Appeal Tribunal. The Act provides for 
a third or Final Tribunal to be held in London, but it is 
within the power of the second or Appeal Tribunal, to keep 
any case from going further than the Second Tribunal. 

When up before the First Tribunal held in the Town Hall, 
Newcastle, on seeing that I was showing from the Scriptures 
that a Christian was breaking the Law of his God to engage 
in warfare with carnal weapons, the military representative. 
Colonel Hicks, asked me the question, "What did Jesus mean 
when he told his disciples to sell their garments and buy 
swords?" Wondering just how to put the matter in few 



words so that they could understand the meaning of the incident 
recorded in Luke 22:36, the first sentence I uttered was 
interrupted by two or three members of the Tribunal, and the 
question was waived by further questions. 

Requesting your prayers for myself and all the dear 
brethren who are being severely tried, and with much love. 

Your brother in our dear Lord. JAMES HAMILTON. 



NO DISCOURAGEMENT AMONGST THEM 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Greetings in our Lord and Head! 

You are probably conversant with the trend of matters 
here in regard to the Military Act. So far as we are aware, 
all the brethren affected have asked for exemption in accordance 
with the conscience clause embodied in the Act. 

The Tribunals to determine the validity of these claims 
are now sitting; but up to the present none of the brethren 
have succeeded in obtaining a complete exemption. There 
seems to be an entire disregard of the letter of the law in 
most of these cases. The brethren are, however, appealing 
to a further Tribunal in the hope that eventually they may 
obtain the full benefits of the Act. 

You will be glad to know that though present circumstances 
are proving a test to all, and especially to the younger 
brethren, yet so far as we know there is no discouragement 
amongst them. Most are glad to have this privilege to witness 
openly and to suffer for the Lord and the principles of 
the Truth. With continued love as ever. 

Yours sincerely in His service, W. CRAWFORD.— England. 



CANADIAN CONSCRIPTION IMPOSSIBLE 

A brother of considerable information on this subject 
writes us to the effect that Canada, being a Colony and not 
a sovereign State, could not legally conscript her citizens for 
overseas service. She could, however, conscript for home 
service— for defense of Canada. 



R5895:page 143 

"HOW WONDERFUL!" 

"He answered all my prayer abundantly, 

And crowned the work that I had brought. 

With blessing more than I had thought— 
A blessing undisguised, and fair, and free. 
I stood amazed and whispered, 'Can it be 

That He hath granted all the boon I sought? 

How wonderful that He for me hath wrought! 



How wonderful that He hath answered me!' 
"O faithless heart! He said that He would hear 

And answer thy poor prayer, and He hath heard 
And proved His promise. Wherefore didst thou fear? 

Why marvel that thy Lord hath kept His Word? 
More wonderful if He should fail to bless 
Expectant faith and prayer with good success!" 
—Selected. 



page 144 

International Bible Students Association Classes 
STUDIES AND LECTURES BY MEMBERS OF THE PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 145 

VOL. XXXVII. MAY 15 No. 10 
A.D. 1916-A.M. 6044 



CONTENTS 

Machinations of the Evil One— How 
to Vanquish Him 147 

Two Classes of Elect 147 

How to Resist Satan's Attacks . .148 
Non-Resistance of Evil 149 

Christians Not to Exact Justice . .149 

Appeals for Justice Sometimes Proper . 149 

The Divine Law of Love . . . .149 
Witnesses to the Truth 150 

"God's Plans Like Lilies White Unfold" 150 

The "Truth People" 150 

The Macedonian Appeal 151 

Be Ready, For the Days Are Evil (Poem) . 152 
We Reap What We Sow 153 

What It is to Sow to the Flesh . .153 
Some Pastoral Counsel on Marriage . .154 

Character Development 155 

A Blind Boy's Wisdom 157 

Interesting Letters 158 

page 146 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 



Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED, 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDER, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA, 



1916-BIBLE STUDENTS' CONVENTION- 19 16 



We have arranged for four General Conventions this year: 

One at Sioux City, Iowa, four days, July 6 to 9. 

One at Newport, R.I., eight days, July 9 to 16. 

One at Norfolk, Va., nine days, July 22 to 30. 

One at Long Beach, near Los Angeles, California, nine 
days, September 2 to 10. 

If possible, we will arrange for still another Convention- 
convenient to northern Kentucky, southern Indiana and Ohio 
—provided some suitable place can be found where the Conventioners 
could have good accommodations, large Auditorium 
and a welcome. Thus many will have an opportunity for 
attending good, large-sized Conventions without going a very 
great distance or involving a very heavy expense. 

In every instance it may be expected that accommodations 
will be arranged for at a cost of from $1.25 per day upward. 
It would not be safe for any one to calculate on any less 
expense than $ 1 .25 per day over and above the cost of transportation. 
We urge nobody to attend, and we especially urge 
that no one either borrow money or use up his last dollar in 
this way. If the Lord wishes you to come. He will, no doubt, 
make it reasonably possible for you. If not. His blessing 
will be upon you as you seek to learn the Truth and to enter 
into heart-fellowship with the Brethren who will be assembling. 
We can journey more and enjoy more in our minds, 
when they are wisely and properly exercised along loving, 
generous, sympathetic lines. 

Sioux City claims to be an ideal place for the Convention. 
One of these claims is that it is central to a considerable 
population. We shall expect at least a thousand in attendance. 



Newport, R.I., is too well known to need description. It 
is an ideal summer resort of high class, to which are attracted 
many from New England and Eastern States. We 
shall hope to meet fully two thousand Conventioners here. 

Norfolk claims a splendid climate with delightful sea-breezes 
in summer. The friends there promise us good accommodations. 
The locality will be a desirable one for very 
many. It is near several good summer resorts— Old Point 
Comfort, Virginia Beach, etc. Their popularity seems to bear 
out the claims that Norfolk has a salubrious climate. We 
shall hope to meet nearly two thousand Conventioners here. 

Long Beach, Cal., near Los Angeles, is said to be an ideal 
place— doubtless the most suitable that could be found on the 
Coast. We shall hope for a thousand Conventioners here. 



INTERESTING QUESTIONS FOR MATURE BIBLE 
-STUDENTS- 

The Society is sending out to all Pilgrim Brethren a 
series of questions respecting the teachings of the Bible. 
They are not difficult for those who are well informed respecting 
the Divine Plan of the Ages. The Society wishes, 
however, to see how clearly and concisely its representatives 
can answer such queries. The suggestion has come to us 
that others would like to have copies of these questions and 
to have the opportunity of presenting their answers. We 
would be pleased to have the matter so, and will send the 
questions to any of our subscribers, on request. We believe 
that the suggestion is especially good in respect to those 
who are occupying any position of influence or service 
amongst the Brethren. It does us all good to think, and 
helps to establish us as respects what we know well and 
what we do not so clearly know, and thus leads on to a 
clearer knowledge of the Truth and to the graces which, 
properly, should accompany every step of knowledge. 



THE WATCH TOWER FREE LIST 

Strictly speaking, we have no free list; that is to say, the 
Postal Laws require that all subscriptions be paid for. However, 
many desire to read our journal who are in dependent 
or very poor circumstances. Some kind friends have provided 
a fund out of which these may be supplied according 
to the law. Now is the time to send in your renewal of the 
requests, if you are on the poor list, in order that your subscription 
may be renewed, as though you sent in the money. 
A post-card will do. The following words will be understood 
to mean that you are not so circumstanced as to be able to 
pay for the journal, but desire it. Say: "Your offer of 
THE WATCH TOWER for the ensuing year is noted, and accepted, 
with appreciation." (Sign.) 



R5896 : page 147 

MACHINATIONS OF THE EVIL 
ONE-HOW TO VANQUISH HIM 

"Resist the Devil, and he will 
flee from you."— James 4:7. 

THE word Devil represents that evil one who 

through unholy ambition became the first opponent 

of God, who attempted to set up a 

rival government to that of the Almighty, 

and who was cast out of Heaven and cut 

off from all association with holy beings. 

His name, which was once Lucifer, shining 

one, was changed to that of Satan, meaning 

the hater, the accuser. He who was once 

called, "Son of the Morning," became the 

Prince of the "rulers of darkness." (Isaiah 14:12-16; 

Ephesians 6:11,12.) Not only did he do evil to himself 

and cease to be an angel of light, a "morning star," but he 

became the instigator of evil, a leader into evil. According 

to the Scriptural account, he has succeeded in leading 

astray from God, not only the entire human family, by luring 

our first parents into disobedience, but has also misled 

a large number of the Heavenly hosts of angels into sin 

and opposition to Jehovah. 

This may upon the surface appear to be a great triumph 
of Satan over the Almighty God; but such is not the case. 
God has at all times been Master of the situation. He 
has purposed to permit all this deflection to teach a great 
lesson to both angels and men. It is His purpose, "in due 
time," to judge all these sinners, both angelic and human, 
by a company that He is now preparing, and to restore to 
harmony with Himself all who have properly learned their 
lesson as to the exceeding sinfulness of sin and the desirableness 
of righteousness and of obedience. We understand 
that the only exceptions to this rule are Satan himself 
and some who after having been clearly enlightened, 
will deliberately choose sin. Satan has become inseparably 
connected with sin; and his destruction is plainly 
declared in the Scriptures, as is also that of those who 
have so imbibed his spirit as to make it impossible to 
renew them again to repentance— whether in the Gospel 
Age or in the Millennium.— Hebrews 2:14; Matthew 25:41; 
Hebrews 6:4-6; 10:26-29. 

God has promised to deliver mankind from Satan's 
power and his blinding influences. He has promised to 
open all the blind eyes, and to unstop the deaf ears, and 
to take away the veil that is spread over all nations. 
(2 Corinthians 4:4; Isaiah 35:5; 25:7,8.) This work is 
soon to be inaugurated in the Messianic Kingdom, which 
God has arranged to establish upon earth, under Jesus 
Christ His Son. Jesus taught us to pray for that Kingdom, 



saying, "Thy Kingdom come; Thy will be done on 
earth, as it is done in Heaven." When this Kingdom is 
set up, the Lord Jesus will bind that "old Serpent, the 
Devil," with a great chain, that he may deceive the nations 
no more for a thousand years, while Christ will be 
lifting up all mankind from sin, degradation and death— 
up to the perfection originally lost in Adam. The interim 
between the time of man's fall into sin and the time of 
his deliverance and restoration from that fall has been 
utilized in preliminary features of God's Plan leading 
step by step to this glorious outcome. 

TWO CLASSES OF ELECT 

In shadows and types the Lord has prefigured the 
great work which He is to accomplish for all mankind. 
During these ages of types, He was preparing a class of 
elect ones who should rule over the world as "princes in 
all the earth," during the Millennial Kingdom. During 
the present Gospel Age, God has been selecting, or electing, 
a very choice class to be exalted with Christ as 
Divine, spiritual beings, to reign with Him as His immediate 
associates in this Kingdom for the blessing of 
all the world. These are to give instructions to those 
who shall have charge of the earthly phase of the Kingdom. 
These are the special Elect, who suffer with Jesus 
now, following in His footsteps, that they may be exalted 
with Him to the highest position to which God has ever 
called any of His intelligent creatures. 

This Church of Christ have had their eyes opened in 
advance of the world, to see the great difference between 
righteousness and sin, between the character of God and 
that of Satan. They have unqualifiedly taken their stand 
on the side of God. They have therefore escaped from 
the domination of the great Enemy of God. No longer 
is he their Prince. These have "passed from death unto 
life." They now have a standing with God, the relationship 
of sons. 

No other members of the human race since the fall of 
Adam have been sons of God. These are not earthly sons, 
as was Adam, but spiritual sons. Theirs is a Heavenly 
Calling, the distinctive offer of the present Age. They 
still have some of the fleshly weaknesses which they inherited 
as members of the fallen race, but they have become 
New Creatures in Christ, with new hopes, new aims, 
new aspirations. They are begotten of God's Holy Spirit 
to a new nature, to be a New Creation; and their unavoidable 
blemishes are covered by the white robe of their 
Savior's perfect righteousness. His perfection is thus 
imputed to them, that they may be acceptable sacrifices 
with Christ, as members of His Body. 

R5896 : page 148 

THE WILL A STRONG DEFENSE AGAINST SATAN 



Satan, who is the opposer of God and who has led 
astray some of the holy angels, opposes these who have 
escaped from his thraldom and who have these new 
hopes and aspirations. He does not need to make such 
attacks upon the world; for they are already in his power 
—"The whole world lieth in the Wicked One." (1 John 5:19, 
Diaglott.) He attacks only those who are trying to 
get free from him. When the spider perceives that the 
fly which he has entrapped is struggling and is about to 
get loose from the web, he instantly hastens to throw additional 
webs around his victim. So when Satan sees 
any of his subjects endeavoring to free themselves from 
his entanglements, he at once sets about throwing stronger 
coils around them, to prevent if possible their escape. 

But Satan cannot overcome a decided human will. 
God has given every creature this defense; and whoever 
does not break down this defense by a persistent yielding 
up of that will to evil influence, can resist the power of 
sin and of Satan to a considerable degree. But poor humanity 
need Divine help to free themselves entirely from 
this great Adversary and his hosts of evil. The position 
of the Christian is invulnerable so long as he keeps close 
to the Source of his strength. Greater is He that is on 
our part than all that can be against us. If the time were 
come for the binding of Satan, our Lord would attend 
to it at once. But it has not yet fully come. God's children 
need not feel, however, that they must flee from 
Satan and his hosts. They have no such power that we 
need to strive to get away from them. But rather we 
should stand our ground, and should firmly resist their 
influence, knowing that with every temptation God has 
promised and provided a way of escape. With this knowledge 
we may be strong in the presence of any adversary. 

MAMMON-THE IMPERSONATION OF SELFISHNESS 

The Apostle Paul says that we war not against flesh 
and blood merely, but against spiritual wickedness, or as 
the margin reads, "wicked spirits" in high positions— the 
great army of fallen angels under the captaincy of the 
Devil, the prince of demons. (Ephesians 6: 12.) He is 
the powerful leader of fallen angels and fallen men, of 
all who may be on the side of wrong. Many are fighting 
on his side because they are deluded, blinded. They are 
unwittingly rendering him service. There are two masters: 
one is God and the other is Mammon. Jesus said, 
"Ye cannot serve God and Mammon." (Matthew 6:24.) 
We must serve either the one or the other. 

Mammon was the name of an ancient Syrian god— 
the god of riches, of cupidity, the impersonation of worldliness. 
Today mammon means the spirit of the world, 
selfishness, with its avarice and love of wealth. Satan is 
the promoter of this mammon spirit. St. Paul tells us 
how we may know which master we are serving. He 
says, "His servants ye are to whom ye render obedience." 
(Romans 6:16.) If we are giving time and thought to 



grasping after riches and worldly honors, if our influence 
is for war and strife, for selfishness in any form, if our 
sympathies and affections are tending earthward rather 
than Heavenward, then we are serving mammon, the 
worldly spirit, and are thus serving Satan, whether we 
realize it or not. Close and careful scrutiny of his 
thoughts, words and doings in the light of the Word of 
God will soon show any Christian whether he is rendering 
service to his rightful Master or to the Adversary. 
Whoever is serving the Devil is his servant, is in his army. 
If we are serving the cause of righteousness, and that 
only, we are on the Lord's side. 

HOW TO RESIST SATAN'S ATTACKS 

The Lord's children are to see to it that they are not 
deluded into sin and into the service of sin; to that extent 
they would be deserting their colors and taking their 
stand as opponents of the Lord. When Christians take 
a decided stand against Satan and his wiles, they are relieved 
from his attacks— not that he flees from them in 
the sense that he is fearful of harm to himself, but that 
he will leave them. He will retreat just as a general of 
an army would retreat from a city after having found 
that its gates were strongly protected and that attack was 
useless. If the Adversary finds one well protected and 
resisting him with a firm will, he will at once retreat. 
But if there be any parley with sin, any tendency to consider 
a matter when it is seen to be sin, an entrance is 
at once made for the Adversary; and he will renew the 

R5897 : page 148 

attack and press the matter, placing it in the most alluring 
light, in order that he may take control, that he may 
enter the heart where he has found the weakness. 

Hence it is of the utmost importance that the child of 
God should make a positive and prompt decision when he 
realizes that he is being enticed to evil. A moment's 
hesitation is very dangerous. Those who take their stand 
for the Lord, who give themselves fully and unreservedly 
to Him, He has agreed to protect. He may permit them 
to be assailed for a time, but He will deliver them so long 
as they remain loyal and true; and they will be made 
stronger as the result of the temptations. 

THE ADVERSARY'S METHOD OF ATTACK 

The attacks of the Adversary are usually made through 
his angels. We are not to suppose that the Devil himself 
is in every part of the world at the same time, or in the 
minds of all the people of the world— nor even in the 
minds of all God's people. We are to suppose that 
wherever any of Satan's agents are there is activity. The 
fallen angels are ever ready to intrude upon the rights 
and liberties of humanity, and to bring them more fully 



into subjection, if possible. But they particularly endeavor 
to entrap the Lord's children. The Adversary 
seems to be always on the alert to enter the army of the 
Church and to try to make havoc in its ranks. 

Satan acts upon the minds of humanity. The mind, 
being imperfect through the fall, has thus inherited tendencies 
toward sin. The assaults of the Adversary may 
come through human beings that suggest wrong thoughts 
to others. He probably gets in his work more often in 
this way than in any other. The Apostle urges all the 
children of God to let no evil communication proceed out 
of their mouth. Evil communications often have the 
effect of tearing down character, and every Christian 
should be on the alert, not only for his own protection, 
but also for the protection of others. Each child of God 
should see that his own heart is kept pure and so free 
from guile that he will be in no danger of communicating 
evil of any sort to another by his words. We should carefully 
guard our conduct, that no thoughtless act of ours 
should be a cause of injury to any one or bring a reflection 
upon the Truth, which we love so well, and to the 
service of which we have committed ourselves. 



"He is come to claim His Throne, 
And to make thy life His own. 
Voices of this passing earth. 
Echoes of its praise or mirth. 
Reach not where the heart hath heard 
Golden music of His Word. 
All for Jesus' henceforth be! 
Live for Him who died for thee!" 



R5897:page 149 

NON-RESISTANCE OF EVIL 

"See that none render evil for evil unto any man; but ever 
follow that which is good, both among yourselves, and to 
all men." "Resist not evil."— 
1 Thessalonians 5:15; Matthew 5:39. 

PERHAPS every well-balanced man has a natural 

disposition to exact justice from those 

who do him harm. There is a sense of justice 

apparently in all people, which leads 

them to feel that, if they have been unjustly 

treated, some punishment should be meted 

out to those who mistreated them; and their 

first impulse is to exact justice. God's Law 

is based upon justice, "an eye for an eye 

and a tooth for a tooth." Our minds instinctively 

recognize this Law of Retribution. 



During the existence of the Jewish nation, their Law 
required that justice should be done. If the ox of Shimei 
the Benjamite gored the ox of Eliab the Zebulunite, 
then Shimei's ox was to be killed or the full amount of 
damage met by him; for the owner of the gored ox must 
be fully recompensed. And so it was in all matters. 

The principle of justice is a proper one. It would be 
ill for the world if justice were not recognized. In the 
world's courts there is an attempt to give justice, so 
that if one's ox is gored the owner could go to the courts 
and have redress. We see the righteousness of this arrangement, 
the wisdom of it. But in the case of the 
Church, the Lord has made a new provision. The Church 
is called out of the world, and its members are to realize 
that they are no longer of the world. They are to follow 
in the footsteps of Jesus. They are to suffer injustice. 
Jesus gave Himself up to suffer for the unjust. 
Those who are followers of Jesus are to have His spirit 
of sacrifice in the interests of others. Whoever does 
not follow His example in this respect demonstrates that 
he has not the Spirit of Christ. And whoever has not 
the Spirit of Christ would better not start to follow in His 
footsteps; for such will not be sharers in His glory. 

CHRISTIANS NOT TO EXACT JUSTICE 

"Even Christ pleased not Himself." When He was 
evil entreated. He did not say, "Do not harm Me or I 
will retaliate." Such was not the Lord's spirit. He 
knew that He would be maltreated. He remembered 
the commission which the Father had given Him. He 
bore in mind that those with whom He had to do were 
fallen. He did not seek to get justice from them. He 
submitted the whole matter to the Father; and on behalf 
of the whole world, even of those who were doing Him 
injustice. He died, that by and by all might be reconciled 
to God through His death. 

As followers of Jesus, we, like Him, resign our rights 
rather than try to get them. So we are different from 
others. We have a knowledge of God's Plan for the forgiveness 
of sin. We are suffering as members of the 
Body of Christ, filling up that which was left behind of 
the sufferings of our Head, and we are to rejoice in the 
privilege of doing this. But if we were to render evil for 
evil and to exact justice from everybody, we would be losing 
our privilege of sacrificing for righteousness' sake; for 
the Divine arrangement is that if we suffer with Jesus 
in the interest of the same truths for which He suffered, 
if we become dead with Him, we shall live and reign 
with Him. If, therefore, we should have the independent 
spirit of the world, and should say, "If you do injury to 
me I will surely get even with you," we would not have 
the Spirit of Christ. 

Jesus knew that it was the Father's will that He 
should be a Sin-Offering, that He should suffer "the Just 
for the unjust." And He invites us to walk with Him 



in this way, to be sharers of His sufferings, and thus be 
sharers in His glory in the Kingdom. It behooves each 
of the Lord's followers therefore to see that he does not 
render evil for evil. The Apostle might have been understood 
to mean. Let no man render evil for evil to the 
brethren; but he makes it broader and says, "unto any 
man"— not merely among yourselves follow that which is 
good, but among all mankind. 

APPEALS FOR JUSTICE SOMETIMES PROPER 

This does not mean that it would not be proper under 
some circumstances to appeal for justice to the law, in 
whatever country we might be living; but it means that 
when the law has decided the matter against us we should 
submit. If the law should take away your coat and your 
cloak, be submissive to the law. To a certain extent we 
are to permit ourselves to be imposed upon. If the case 
be one merely of personal feelings, there would be no 
proper ground for resistance. If the case be one that 
affects the Lord's Cause, it would seem to be a matter 
of appeal for relief, that we might get whatever the 
world is willing to give us which would be for the 
furtherance of the Gospel. 

We see that in our Lord's case, when He was unjustly 
sentenced. He inquired respecting the justice of 
the matter. He put the matter to the Court. This was 
not resistance. In the case of St. Paul, we remember 
not only that he fled from some places where they persecuted 
him, but that in other cases he appealed, which it 
was wise to do, to a higher tribunal. In one instance, 
perceiving that the whole matter was one of injustice, 
and seeing that the mob around him were of two kinds- 
some being Sadducees and some Pharisees, with the 
Pharisees being in the majority. He called out, "I am a 
Pharisee, the son of a Pharisee. For the resurrection 
of the dead am I called in question!" Thus he appealed 
to the Pharisee element of the crowd, and set them more 
or less at variance with the Sadducees. He said, I am 
like the Pharisee in my belief of a resurrection from the 
dead. He did no evil to the Sadducees, but merely 
sought to bring to his sympathy and support those who 
had some faith and interest in the resurrection, that thus 
he might dissuade them from persecution of himself. In 
another instance, the Apostle was about to be beaten unjustly; 
and as they were binding him he said to a centurion 
standing by, "Is it lawful for you to scourge a 
man who is a Roman, and uncondemned?" This immediately 
brought the Apostle release from his distressing 
circumstances. He did not say, "If you beat me, I 
will make it a sad day for you!" We do not know that 
St. Paul would even have reported the matter, if he had 
been unjustly treated. We have every reason to suppose 
that he would not have done so. On another occasion, 
when he was beaten very sorely, we have no knowledge 
that he endeavored to prevent the injustice. He merely 



R5898 : page 149 

accepted it as of the Lord's permission. 

In the case in which he referred to his Roman citizenship 
and asked. Does the law give you the right to do 
me harm? we are given a clue as to our own proper 
course under similar circumstances. We, likewise, could 
say, if unlawfully arrested or interfered with in doing 
the work of the Lord, "Are you acting according to the 
instructions of the law? Am I violating any of its provisions? 
Have I not the rights of a citizen of this state?" 
And if the officer was exceeding his authority, the provisions 
of the law should be pointed out in a reasonable 
manner, without any manifestation of a retaliatory spirit. 

THE DIVINE LAW OF LOVE 

Coming back to the matter of rendering evil for evil: 
we might be asked. Suppose that a burglar entered our 
house and we could find the burglar, should we put him 
in prison? One view would be, "Yes; put him in prison 

R5898 : page 150 

Make it a sore day for him." Another view would be, 
"No; we have no desire for revenge. We do not wish 
to do him injury in return." At the same time here is 
a man at large, violating the laws and menacing the safety 
and interests of the community. So we would feel that 
we should report the man to the authorities and turn him 
over to justice. We would wish to shield the public and 
also to check the evil-doer in his wrong course. 

This seems to be the thought of the Scriptures— that 
so far as our hearts are concerned we are to be perfectly 
willing to endure evil for righteousness' sake; for we are 
called to suffer for the cause of righteousness. We are 
not to return evil for evil. We are not to resist evil, in 
the sense of trying to retaliate and get revenge for injuries 
done us. Rather let the evil be repeated. This 
was the Master's course; and it is a part of our covenant 
with the Lord to share in the persecution and sufferings 
of our Head, to endure opposition and injustice for the 
Truth's sake, for Christ's sake. 

The more of this unselfish love we have, the more 
Godlike shall we be. God is unselfish, whereas the whole 
world is selfish. It is but natural that mankind should 
be selfish after six thousand years' experience with sin. 
Would it not be strange indeed if the whole world were 
not marked with selfishness, with the desire to advance 
the interests of self at the expense of others? But this 
course is contrary to the Divine Law of Love. We, therefore, 
as children of God. are to endeavor to rid ourselves 
of personal selfishness and of merely seeking our 
own good. We are to try to do good to every one as 
far as possible, according to the course of wisdom and 



our opportunities, especially to those who are fellow members 
of the Body of Christ, those traveling the same narrow 
course of self-sacrifice. 



R5898:page 150 

WITNESSES TO THE TRUTH 

"Pilate therefore said unto Him, Art Thou a King, then? 
Jesus answered. Thou sayest that I am a King. To this end 
was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, 
that I should bear witness unto the Truth. 
Every one that is of the Truth 
heareth My voice."— John 18:37. 

WE RECALL that these words of the Master 
were uttered when the Jews brought Him 
before Pilate and accused Him of setting 
Himself up to be a King. Pilate asked 
Him, "Art Thou a King, then?" His answer 
was, "To this end was I born"— For 
this purpose was I born— "for this cause 
came I into the world." 

God had arranged that there should be 
a King Emmanuel, a Priestly King, who 
would put an end to sin and restore sinners (as many 
as were willing) to God's favor. It had been foretold 
through the Prophets that the time would come when a 
King should reign in righteousness, when princes should 
rule in judgment (Isaiah 32:1.), and when every knee 
should bow and every tongue confess, to the glory of 
God. So our Lord Jesus now declared in answer to 
Pilate's question, that He had come into the world to 
this end. If there had been no world to be redeemed, 
no world to be brought back into harmony with God, the 
Logos would not have needed to come down to dwell 
among men. If God had not purposed that there should 
be a Kingdom and a King, it would have been wholly 
unnecessary that our Lord should die, for there would 
have been no world to be blessed and lifted up as a result 
of His great work. 

The latter part of the text says, "that I should bear 
witness to the Truth." While all of our Lord's utterances 
were, of course, truths, there was a certain great 
Truth to which He was bearing witness. Not only was He 
speaking truthfully, but He was also upholding the Truth. 
God had created man. He had turned out badly— was a 
discredit to his Creator. The reign of Sin and Death 
was a discredit to God and a disgrace to all good government. 
Under such circumstances it would seem a 
reasonable question to ask, "Why not destroy creatures 
so unworthy and discreditable?" Because Jehovah had 
declared that the curse resting upon man should be 
rolled away, and that a great blessing should come to 



the world, through Abraham's Seed, and not one jot or 
one tittle of God's Purpose could fail of accomplishment. 

"GOD'S PLANS LIKE LILIES WHITE UNFOLD" 

Hundreds, yes, thousands of years had passed since 
God's Promise to Abraham; and no blessing had come, 
no rolling away of the curse! But God had remained 
true. His Word had not been broken, could not be broken. 
He purposed to bless the world, and He would 
surely accomplish all His design. This is the great 
Truth— that Jehovah God has provided salvation for "all 
the families of the earth." The types of the Law foreshadowed 
it. The Prophets testified to it; "Yea, all the 
Prophets from Samuel and them that followed after, as 
many as have spoken, have likewise foretold these days" 
of blessedness to come. Our Lord Jesus while in the 
flesh bore witness to this Truth. He declared the fact 
that God had not misrepresented Himself and His Plan. 

Our Lord had come into the world for the very purpose 
of being that great King who was to bless all of 
Adam's fallen race. He came proclaiming this Kingdom, 
and the Jews said, "How can He be a King? He cannot 
accomplish anything!" And now, here He was before 
Pilate, still declaring Himself to be a King. For three 
and a half years He had borne witness to the great Truth 
that God's will should be accomplished, that God's Kingdom 
should yet be established under the whole heavens. 
And it will be fully consummated, through the great One 
who was there crucified as a malefactor. Verily, 
"God moves in a mysterious way 
His wonders to perform!" 

The rejection of Jesus made it seem as though God's 
whole Plan had been turned aside. It seemed as though 
those unbelieving Jews had triumphed over the great 
Jehovah. Yet we see that the crucifixion of Messiah was 
the very thing necessary to the accomplishment of God's 
Purpose. It was necessary that Christ should redeem 
the human family by His own death before He could restore 
them through His Millennial Reign. But to the 
world at large this great Truth is still obscure. Jesus 
assures His disciples that to them it has been given to 
know the mysteries; but to all outsiders, all not in fullest 
harmony with God, these things are given in parables 
and dark sayings; and hearing they do not understand, 
and seeing they perceive not. 

THE "TRUTH PEOPLE" 

It seems rather remarkable to the Editor that without 
any effort on our part this word "Truth," and the term, 
"Truth people," are identified with ourselves. What we 
have is the Truth— nothing else but the Truth, the Bible 
Truth! This is the only word we could use. The denominations 
have taken up the other names, and we have 
left us simply this term— "the Truth." And without any 



preconcerted action in any way that we are aware of, this 
expression, "Truth people," seemed to get about as applied 
to us. We are, indeed, bearing witness to the 
Truth— the same Truth to which our Master bore witness 

R5898:page 151 

even unto death— about the Kingdom, about Jesus' 
leaving His glorious prehuman estate and coming into 
the world, about His going into the Heavenly glory again, 
to a far higher station than was His before. We are 
bearing witness to the truth that God is not a vicious 
God, a cruel God— that He never purposed to doom man 
to eternal torture, but has promised that the curse of sin 
and death shall be swept away forever. The witness is 
just the same today, along the same line, as proclaimed 
by our Lord and His Apostles. 

All who are of the Truth hear the Truth, and love to 
bear witness to the Truth. Yet in our case, as in the 
Master's case, the world knoweth us not. It knows us 
not because it knew Him not. The world, especially the 
religious world of Christendom, is disposed to crucify 
us as it crucified Him, only we are living in a more civilized 
time and the Scribes, the Pharisees and the Doctors 
of the Law apparently find it more difficult today than of 
old to incite the people to destroy our lives. But by God's 
grace we will continue to bear witness to the Truth until 
the dark night comes "wherein no man can work," should 
our lives be spared till then. 



R5903:page 151 

THE MACEDONIAN APPEAL 

-JUNE4.-ACTS 16:6-15.- 

ST. PAUL'S SECOND MISSIONARY TOUR-MARKED EVIDENCE 
OF DIVINE SUPERVISION OF ALL THE INTERESTS OF GOD'S 
CHURCH-GOSPEL SENT TO EUROPE-PREACHING IN PHILIPPI 
-LYDIA OF THYATIRA AND HER HOUSEHOLD BELIEVED. 

"Come over into Macedonia and help us."— Verse 9. 

FOR some time after the Conference at Jerusalem, 

St. Paul and Barnabas remained at 

Antioch. But seeing that there were many 

laborers there and that a larger field was 

little worked, they planned a second missionary 

tour. Barnabas and his nephew 

John Mark went in one direction, while St. 

Paul went in another with Silas, with whom 

he had become acquainted at the Jerusalem 

Conference, and who is reported to have 

been a Roman citizen, as was St. Paul. It is with these 



two that we have to do in today's Study. 

Their course lay through Syria and Cilicia to the 
cities of Derbe and Lystra. In these places they confirmed 
the faith of such as had already been accepted of 
the Lord through the Apostle's first missionary tour and 
through the working of the Truth during the interim. It 
was at Lystra that they found Timothy, a young man of 
Jewish mother and well trained in the Word by her and 
his grandmother— his father being a Greek.— 2 Tim. 1:3-5. 

We note that amongst the things presented to the 
Churches was the decision of the Jerusalem Conference 
that the Jewish Law should not be considered binding 
upon the Gentiles, except in certain features noted in our 
last Study. To some it has seemed inconsistent that at 
the same time when the Apostle was calling this decision 
to the attention of the brethren he should cause Timothy 
to be circumcised. But when properly understood, St. 
Paul's conduct was thoroughly consistent. Circumcision 
was no part of the Mosaic Law, but was instituted with 
Abraham, centuries previous, as a mark or sign upon all 
the children of Abraham. (Genesis 17:9-14.) The Council 
at Jerusalem did not decide that no Jew should be 
circumcised thenceforth, but that circumcision should not 
be considered necessary to a Christian. 

The thought is that the fact that one is a child of 
Abraham according to the flesh is not sufficient to make 
him a New Creature in Christ; and therefore circumcision 
of the flesh will not accomplish this. Since the New 
Creature is received of God as a member of the Body of 
Christ, he must as a New Creature have the circumcision 
of the heart in order to be a Spiritual Israelite, whether 
previously he was a Jew or a Gentile. Circumcision of 
the heart signifies a cutting off— a separation from the 
flesh, its aims, hopes, desires, etc. 

We see, then, that there could be no objection to 
the circumcision of Timothy— that it would neither help 
nor hinder him spiritually— if done with the clear understanding 
that it was only a figure, and not the real circumcision 
which constituted Timothy a member of the Body 
of Christ, the Church. Timothy's mother being a Jew, 
he was a Jew, even though his father had been a Greek. 
And this fact becoming known to Jews in general with 
whom they would come into contact while traveling, inquiry 
might be made as to whether Timothy had been circumcised. 
If he had not been, the implication would be 
that he had been a renegade Jew. If he had been circumcised, 
this would grant him correspondingly greater 
influence with them— a closer access to their hearts. 

THE GOSPEL SENT TO EUROPE 

After good success in the mission up to the point 
where today's Study begins, the Apostle had in mind a 
journey through Asia Minor. But apparently things went 
unfavorably until he concluded that the Lord was hindering 
their efforts; and in perplexity he began to think of 



other fields of labor. His moment of uncertainty was the 
Lord's opportunity for directing him. He dreamed that 
he saw a man dressed in the costume of the Macedonians, 
who beckoned to him and said, "Come over and help us." 

The Apostle accepted this dream as of Divine leading, 
and promptly began the journey which took him into 
Europe. We have here an evidence of God's supervision 
of all the interests of His Church. He was not averse 
to permitting the Message to go into Asia Minor; for it 
went there later, possibly at a more opportune time. But 
this was the time for sending the Gospel to Europe. Evidently 
the Lord could have directed His Message southward 
through Africa and away from Europe; but there 
is a "due time" connected with every feature of the Divine 
Plan. And now, by Divine arrangement, the Message 
of God's grace in Christ was to go to the Greeks, 
who were recognized at this time as the foremost people 
of the world in literature and the arts. 

It is supposed that about this time Luke, the physician, 
became attached to St. Paul's company. A man of 
education, a scribe as well as a physician, the Lord evidently 
provided him as St. Paul's amanuensis, that 
thereby the Apostle's letters should reach many of the 
churches of that time, as well as the Lord's people from 
then until now. Thus it came that Luke wrote not only 
a version of the Gospel, but also the Book of Acts and 
nearly all of St. Paul's Epistles. 

Here we have another illustration of the privileges 
of the various members of the Body of Christ. Luke 
could not be the Apostle Paul, nor could he do St. Paul's 
work. But he could be used of the Lord honorably and 
efficiently in a greater spread of the Truth. So it is 
with us. We cannot be Apostles. We cannot do anything 

R5903 : page 152 

very great. But if we are filled with the Spirit 
of the Lord, it is our privilege to be used to some extent 
in some service of the Truth. And any service for the 
Lord and for the brethren, even to the washing of feet 
or to any menial service, is an honorable privilege. 

PHILIPPI HONORED WITH THE GOSPEL 

The first place in Europe for the preaching of the 
Good Tidings appears to have been Philippi, one of the 
chief cities of Macedonia. On the Sabbath day, as usual, 
the Apostle and his companions sought for some who 
worshiped God, and who hoped for the Kingdom that 
God had promised. They knew that such would be the 
better prepared to receive the Message which the Apostle 
had to deliver— that Jesus had appeared as the Redeemer 
and had laid the foundation for the Millennial Kingdom in 
the sacrifice of Himself; and that ultimately the blessings 
of His sacrifice would be made available to every creature; 
but that now, in advance of the Divine dealing with the 



world in general, the Lord is calling out a Spiritual Israel, 
a "little flock," to be His kings and priests with Jesus 
in the administration of the Millennial blessings. 

Apparently there was no synagogue in Philippi; and 
matters may have looked very unfavorable to St. Paul 
and his companions. However, they heard of a little 
religious meeting held every Sabbath by the riverside, 
outside of the city gate. It was principally a prayer meeting 
and a place of Divine fellowship. Not having the 
facilities of a synagogue, they probably had no Scripture 
parchments, and hence no reading of the Law, but merely 
prayer and worship. 

All this was favorable to the Gospel Message which 
the Apostle had to present. He spoke to those who resorted 
thither, commending the importance of their worshipful 
condition of heart and of praise to the Giver of 
all good. Then he proceeded to declare the Good Tidings 
of the Sacrifice of Jesus, of His death and resurrection, 
and of His Second Coming in power and great glory. 
He showed surely that the invitation now being given 
was for joint-sacrificers with Jesus, and that their reward 
would be joint-heirship with their Lord in His Millennial 
Kingdom, as members of His Body, the Church.— Romans 8: 17; 
2 Timothy 2: 1 1, 12; Galatians 3:29. 

However many or few were at the meeting, there was 
one present whose heart was in the right condition to 
receive the Message. This one was a woman named 
Lydia, a dealer in purple. She was from Thyatira, from 
the very district— Asia Minor— into which the Apostle 
had not been permitted to enter and preach. Probably 
she was in Philippi temporarily, engaged in merchandising— 
perhaps of purple dyes or possibly of purple-dyed 
cloth. Dyes were much more expensive in olden times 
than now, and the secret of how to make them was 
turned to financial profit. Thus it is supposed that Lydia 
was in quite comfortable circumstances financially. Not 
only did the Truth open her heart, enlightening the eyes 
of her understanding, but she was prompt to obey it in 
full consecration and to symbolize that consecration in 
water baptism— "she and her household." 

Not always do religious parents have religiously inclined 
children. Several instances of the kind are mentioned 
in the Scriptures. Personal experience teaches us 
also that the parent who is earnestly consecrated to the 
Lord and guided by His Word has generally a good influence 
upon those nearest to him and directly under his 
care. Such an influence should be hoped for, prayed for, 
sought for, by every parent. But it can be obtained only 
by carefulness, circumspection of word and of deed. 
These in subjection imply that the very thoughts of the 
heart have been brought into captivity to the will of God. 

Nevertheless, parents who have failed to discern the 
Truth and to recognize its responsibilities until their children 
have outgrown parental instruction must not chide 
themselves unmercifully if their children do not respect 
them and their religious convictions. Rather they should 



remember that the Lord is thoroughly acquainted with 
the situation, and will hold them accountable only for 
what they do or fail to do after they have come to know 
Him and to have an opportunity for understanding the 
instructions of His Word respecting their own lives and 
the training of their children in the nurture and admonition 
of the Lord.— Ephesians 6:4. 

"AND SHE CONSTRAINED US" 

The fact that Lydia's household believed implies that 
she was the mother of adult children; and that these were 
so thoroughly under her influence that they worshiped 
with her the true God, neglecting the idolatries prevalent 
in Philippi. Since her husband is not mentioned, we 
may infer that she was a widow. Hence it was her right, 
without conference with anybody, to invite the Apostle 
and his companions to share the hospitality of her home. 
She seems properly to have realized that, instead of 
honoring them, she was honoring herself and her household 
by having such guests— the ministers of God, the 
brethren of Christ— under her roof. Note her language 
when inviting: "She besought us, saying. If ye have 
judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my 
house, and abide there. And she constrained us." 

The latter statement implies that the Apostle was not 
too ready to force himself upon anybody, that he did not 
urge, saying, "Surely myself and my companions, who 
have preached to you, should be served by you in temporalities" 
though this was the truth. Rather the 
Apostle made no reference to temporalities. Indeed, after 
Lydia's suggestion had been made, apparently it was not 
too quickly accepted, but with the indication that the 
disciples of Jesus had no desire to intrude upon others. 
This is implied in the statement that they were constrained— 
gradually drawn or led to accept the invitation. 
How beautiful it is to see God's children wisely 
exercised in such matters! How much more is their 
influence upon one another for good! 



R5899:page 152 

BE READY-FOR THE DAYS ARE EVIL 

Let me suffer wrong without complaining. 
While myself from doing wrong abstaining, 

Through Thy grace and strength, O Lord, I pray! 
Let me never smite the hand that smites me, 

But do good to him who ill requites me; 

Thus prepare me for the evil day. 

Into Thine own image. Lord, transform me. 
To Thy gentle Spirit so conform me 
That this lesson never may be lost; 



Not the poor oppressed, but the oppressor. 

Not the injured, but the proud transgressor. 

Is the one who needs our pity most. 

My true Peace and Savior, be Thou near me. 
That in suffering I may ne'er grow weary; 

Be Thou near me to direct my way; 
Strengthen Thou my soul when foes assail her. 
That Thy patient spirit may not fail her; 

Thus prepare me for the evil clay. 

That herself in patience still possessing. 
She may find e'en woes to be a blessing. 

Nor account them strange when they arise; 
Point her to the happy realms above her. 
Prepared by Thee, who dost ever love her; 

And gave Thyself for her in sacrifice! Unknown. 



R5899:page 153 

WE REAP WHAT WE SOW 

-JUNE 1 l.-GALATIANS 6:1-10.- 

NOT THE WORLD, BUT THE CHURCH, REFERRED TO-POOR SOIL 
AND INVOLUNTARY WEEDS HEREDITARY-SOWING REPRESENTS 
A VOLUNTARY ACT AND PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY 
-WHAT IS SOWING TO THE FLESH7-WHAT IS IT TO 
SOW TO THE SPIRIT7-WHAT SHALL THE HARVEST BE? 
-THE CONTEXT. 

"God is not mocked; for whatsoever a man 
soweth, that shall he also reap."— Verse 7. 

IT IS true that every person has a responsibility 

for his every wilful act and word. It 

is true, in a sense, that every human being 

will have a harvest considerably in accord 

with his own wilful course in life. Evidently, 

therefore, every human being could 

take a profitable lesson from the words of 

our Golden Text and receive a blessing in 

proportion as he would follow the spirit of 

that Text. 

However, we are not to forget that the Apostle is not 
addressing the worldly, but the saintly. He is addressing 
the Church; and the Church is composed exclusively of 
persons who have left the world, turned their backs upon 
sin, accepted the Lord Jesus as their Savior and Advocate 
with the Father, and who have consecrated their lives 
wholly and unreservedly to the doing of the Divine will. 
Such, begotten of the Holy Spirit, are in the Bible styled 
New Creatures in Christ. (2 Corinthians 5:17.) To 
these, "old things have passed away; all things have become 



new"— new hopes, new aims, new ambitions, new 

prospects, new standards. These spiritually begotten children 

of God, and no one else, are addressed by the Apostle. 

According to the Bible, God has great and precious 
provisions for the world in the future, but not in the 
present time. Now the Church of Christ, the saintly Bride 
class, is being selected from the world to constitute the 
Royal Family of the future, when completed and perfected 
by the First or Chief Resurrection. (1 Peter 2:9.) 
Then this Royal Family will, as God's Kingdom, deal with 
the world of mankind, ruling, instructing, uplifting, blessing, 
all the willing and obedient. Then the world will 
have its chance for sowing and reaping.— Acts 3: 19-23. 

THE SOIL AND THE SEED 

The heart of the Christian is consecrated soil from 
the start— from the time that God accepts him as a child. 
Under Divine instructions special flowers and fruits are 
to be cultivated. These are styled fruits and graces of 
the Holy Spirit. All Christians obedient to the Voice 
from Heaven are seeking to eradicate and destroy the 
weeds of sin and selfishness, which spring naturally in 
their flesh because of heredity. 

Originally, Father Adam's flesh was perfect. The 
weeds of sin had not yet been planted. But now, there 
is no pure soil; sin-weeds are everywhere. Every Christian 
who would have the consecrated garden of his heart 
fruitful, pleasing to the Lord, must wage a vigorous and 
continuous battle against the weeds of sin, in order that 
his heart may be in the condition to receive the good 
seed commended in the Divine Word. 

Vigilance is necessary, not only to keep down the 
weeds, but also to keep the soil in proper condition, that 
the seed may enter, germinate and bring forth good fruitage. 
The Christian must also battle against the thorns, 
which our Lord Jesus mentions as illustrating the cares of 
the present life and the deceitfulness of riches, which 
would choke the Word and make the life unfruitful, unprofitable. 
-Matthew 13:22. 

The Christian who would expect to receive the reward 
of the Master's "Well done; enter into the joy of thy 
Lord!" must be very diligent in the sowing of the proper 
seeds in the garden of his heart. Acts, words and 
thoughts are the good seeds; and they must be sown 
carefully and persistently. They will yield the peaceable 
fruits of righteousness— meekness, gentleness, patience, 
long-suffering, brotherly-kindness, love. And these fruits 
and flowers of the Holy Spirit abounding in the garden 
of the heart, St. Peter tells us, will make such a Christian 
ready for an abundant entrance "into the Kingdom of 
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ."— 2 Peter 1:11. 

It is important that we sow good seed; and there is 
just one storehouse from which this is supplied— the Word 
of God. Whoever gives most attention to the words of 
our Lord Jesus through the Apostles and the Prophets, 



and whoever keeps this seed pure, free from contamination 
with worldly wisdom— science falsely so-called— and 
from the traditions of men— creeds— is best prepared to 

produce fruits and flowers to the Master's approval. 

WHAT IT IS TO SOW TO THE FLESH 

A mistake made by some of the Lord's people is that 
of sowing to the flesh, after having consecrated themselves 
to the Lord and having agreed to sow merely to 
the Spirit— in harmony with the Lord's will. Sowing to 
the flesh does not mean a thorough rebellion against the 
Lord, but rather the procurement and the sowing of bad 
seed— unprofitable seed. The spending of time, energy, 
money, etc., in the pursuit of pleasure or of earthly things 
or riches, whether successful or not, is sowing to the flesh. 

The tendency of all such neglect of the Christian's 
covenant with his God is toward corruption— toward 
death. Many, indeed, may retrace their steps after finding 
that they have spent their talents improperly. But in 
such cases they have wasted time, energy and opportunity, 
and if they gain eternal life at all, it will doubtless be on 
a less glorious plane than if they had been faithful from 
the very beginning. Let us exhort ourselves and our fellows 
to sow to the Spirit— in accord with the glorious 
promises which God has made to us, which we have accepted, 
and to which we should be bending every energy 
in the development of the fruits and graces of the Spirit. 

TREATMENT OF FELLOW CHRISTIANS 

In the context the Apostle urges that each individual 
Christian should seek to bear his own burden rather than 
to lean upon the brethren. Each is to remember his own 
personal responsibility and not to get weary in well doing. 
Each is to remember the reaping time, the harvest time, 
when all who do not faint, all who do not grow weary, 
but who persevere, will receive their reward. 

Additionally, the Apostle urges that while seeking to 
do, each for himself, we should be tender-hearted toward 
each other, yea, toward all men. "As we have opportunity, 
let us do good unto all, but especially to them who 
are of the Household of Faith." 

Respecting those who are of the Household of Faith 
the Apostle urges that if we find a brother overtaken in 
a fault, we should show our own spirituality in the manifestation 
of the spirit of meekness and kindness toward 
the one at fault. We should bear each other's burdens, 
and so fulfil the Law of Christ. We should cultivate the 
spirit of meekness by remembering that we ourselves 
might at some time be overtaken in a fault— in the future, 
if we had not in the past. We should learn to think 
humbly of ourselves. We are really nothing when compared 
with that which is perfect. Our standing with the 
Lord is not because of human perfection, but because of 
proper wills— good intentions— fully consecrated hearts. 



R5900: page 154 

SOME PASTORAL COUNSEL ON MARRIAGE 

GOD Himself performed the first marriage 

ceremony, by simply bringing together our 

first parents, Adam and Eve. Mother Eve 

was already bone of Adam's bone, and flesh 

of his flesh, but the two had been separated 

by God Himself. They were two in body, 

but one in heart; for He purposed that the 

entire race should be born from this one 

pair, in order that when sin should enter 

and involve the whole human family, the 

death of one person would suffice to redeem the entire 

race. "By man came death; by man also came the resurrection 

of the dead.-l Cor. 15:21; Rom. 5:12,19. 

The Bible clearly teaches that, when the great Plan of 
God shall be completed by bringing Restitution to the 
world, this Restitution will bring humanity to that condition 
in which Adam was previous to the separation 
of the woman from him. And so we have the words 
of Jesus to the effect that "Those deemed worthy to 
obtain that Age, and that resurrection from the dead, 
neither marry nor are given in marriage, because they 
are like the angels." (Luke 20:35.) In other words, in 
the Times of Restitution, males and females will all lose 
their distinctive features, and become again as Adam 
was in the beginning— each complete in himself— when the 
earth shall be filled with people. God does not design 
to over-fill the earth, but simply to fill it. 

But while the union of man and woman is a matter 
of love between themselves, the Law steps in and says 
that there must be suitable regulations and some formal 
way of authorizing their union before others as witnesses, 
so as to avoid trouble in the future. Consequently there 
are certain specifications regarding licenses, etc., all of 
which we believe is quite proper. 

A SPECIAL MEANING IN MARRIAGE 

However, as Christian people who have the Word of 
God, and who as Bible students have come to some appreciation 
of that Word, we see in marriage a 
special meaning which God purposed when instituting 
the rite. Marriage between man and woman is a picture, 
or illustration, of the union to take place between Christ 
and the Church; and God so ordained that it should be. 
The Apostle in referring to marriage as a picture, goes 
on to say that as Christ loved the Church and gave Himself 
for it, so also should men love their wives as their 
own body.— Ephesians 5:25-32. 

Great love is this— that a man should do for his wife 



what he would do for himself! So Christ did all this 

for His Body, the Church. He did even more than this— 

He laid down His life for us. This should further suggest 

that husbands should lay down their lives for their 

wives, and consequently should provide not only for her 

food and clothes, but for her mental and moral interests 

as well. These should all come under the care of the husband; 

and a good husband should see that his wife is 

well cared for, even at the sacrifice of some things for 

himself, as circumstances might suggest. 

Then, turning to the other side of the matter, the 
Apostle says that as the Church reverences her Lord, so 
should wives reverence their husbands. Only as mankind 
has caught the spirit of this Divine lesson, only in 
that proportion do they understand how to get the best 
out of life. Those who follow strictly the Lord's arrangements 
get the most out of the marriage relation. 
The husband who loves his wife to the neglect of his own 
preference at times is the one who is likely to be appreciated 
most; and the wife who does what she can to 
serve her husband's interest and is devoted to him is an 
illustration of what the Church does for her Lord. 

In this statement we are not undertaking to contradict 
the Apostle when he says. "He that marrieth doeth well, 
but he that marrieth not doeth better." (1 Corinthians 7:38.) 
He is not here addressing the world, but those 
who have devoted their lives to the Lord. If their marriage 
would not interfere with their consecration to the 
Lord, then they might marry. If it would interfere with 
their consecration, then for them to marry would be putting 
a mortgage on their lives. But there are cases in 
which both brethren and sisters have been benefited by 
marriage, not only personally, but in their relationship 
to the Lord and others. 

We would not be understood to mean that those who 
marry are going contrary to the Lord. All who desire to 
please the Lord should be very careful in such a matter, 
however; and others should not attempt to criticize those 
who marry. This is the liberty with which God has made 
us free; and this is the liberty which we should both maintain 
for ourselves and grant to others. 

"FOR BETTER OR FOR WORSE" 

Those who marry should have in consideration the 
fact that they are probably not marrying a person who 
is perfect; for the Bible tells us that "there is none perfect, 
no, not one." Neither one is perfect; and for one 
who is imperfect to ask that another shall be perfect, 
when neither one is or can be perfect, is manifestly 
wrong. However, each should endeavor to cover up his 
own weaknesses. There are those who are unwise in 
this matter. Our minds being perfect, we should live up 
to that high standard of mind as nearly as we can. We 
should hide every defect as quickly as possible, that there 
be no hindrance. It would be a mistake to think, when 



one is entering into marriage, that he is marrying somebody 
who is perfect. He has kept back his weakness 
from the other, and that one has kept back her weakness 
from him; and well might it be that they keep back their 
weaknesses throughout life. 

The married should not inquire into the things of each 
other's past; for at the moment of the marriage each 
takes the other for better or for worse; there should be 
no looking back. So it is when the Lord accepts us; He 
does not go back to make investigations. Neither should 
we. If married couples should find that there are difficulties, 
they should not permit any one to interfere between 
them by endeavoring to straighten out their difficulties 
for them; for all such attempts make trouble. 
What God has joined together, let no one attempt to interfere 
with. Marital difficulties invariably cause a great 
deal of talk; and knowing this, we should be on guard 
lest we should do anything to increase difficulties in the 
lives of others. We are not even to sympathize. We are 
to leave them alone. Give them advice whenever they 
ask for it, but do not interfere. After they have married, 
it is for better or worse as long as they live. 

So, then, marriage is a serious matter, and should be 
undertaken only after serious consideration. It is a very 
sacred obligation. The contracting parties bind themselves 
for the remainder of life. All marriages would 
be more satisfactory if this thought were fully appreciated 
and followed. 



"Master, speak! and make me ready. 
As Thy voice is daily heard. 

With obedience glad and steady- 
Still to follow every word. 

I am listening. Lord, for Thee: 

Master, speak, speak on, to me!" 



R5900:page 155 

CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT 

BY BROTHER TOOLE, WITH EDITOR'S COMMENTS 

The subject that we have been studying somewhat during 
the week has been that of Character Development. 
This is one feature of the Plan of God. Your part and my 
part in the eternal Plan of God depends upon our Character 
Development. God's Plan is going to be carried out. He 
will have a class selected from this earth who will worship 
and serve Him on the spirit plane of existence. He will ultimately 
have this earth inhabited with human beings who also 
will live in harmony with His holy Law. But whether we 
are to be of the Heavenly number, who will eternally love and 



praise Him and eternally enjoy His favor and blessing, or 
whether any one of us is to be of the earthly number, who 
also will eternally love and praise Him and eternally enjoy 
His favor and blessing, depends upon Individual Character 
Development. So after getting acquainted with the various 
features of the Plan of God in a general way, our minds seem 
naturally to fix upon that one thing upon which the enjoyment 
of God's eternal blessings depends. 

The great questions that confront us then are: What is 
the standard of character that we must develop in order to 
have the assurance of enjoying the Plan of God in its consummation 
throughout the endless ages of eternity? Is it possible 
to develop such a character; and how is it developed? 

Let us notice the standard that God has set. Romans 8:29 
says: "Whom He did foreknow. He also did predestinate 
[determine or decide] to be conformed to the image of 
His Son." This shows the standard; God has decided that this 
class, whom He did foreknow to be joint-heirs with Christ, 
should be character images of Christ. 

That same thought is given to us inEphesians 4:1 1-16, 
when it speaks of the Lord's providing of evangelists, teachers, 
pastors, etc., for the perfecting of the Church, for the edifying 
[instruction] of the Body of Christ. For how long? Until 
they come to the unity of the faith, unto a perfect Man. 
What is the perfect Man? "Unto the measure of the stature 
of the fulness of Christ." You see from this last clause that 
the full measure of Christ's character is the standard. 

Again, take Ephesians 5:25-27. It says: "Husbands, love 
your wives, even as Christ loved the Church, and gave Himself 
for it; that He might sanctify and cleanse it with the 

R5901 : page 155 

washing of water by the Word, that He might present it to 
Himself a glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or 
any such thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish." 
Now you can see that if the Church would be presented 
in His presence without blemish, without spot or wrinkle, or 
any such thing, she would be Christlike; wouldn't she? 

What does it mean to be presented without fault or without 
blemish? It means that every imperfection of character 
is to be overcome. Every unholy quality of disposition is to 
be cleansed away. He washes us from our past sins by His 
blood; but it takes the Word and constant obedience to the 
Word to sanctify us. 

For example, take pride. Pride is an unholy quality of 
character. It is the disposition of self-exaltation in heart or 
in act. Of a king it is written, "His heart was lifted up unto 
destruction." Humility is expressed in the exhortation: "Let 
each esteem others better [more important] than themselves"; 
and, "Not unto us, not unto us, but to Thy Name give glory." 
Now to be presented without fault and without blemish would 
mean that this disposition of pride would be so completely 
eradicated that no temptation, however strong, would ever 
in the heart in the least degree arouse self-importance or self-exaltation. 
This passage says that Christ can and has undertaken 



to save His people as completely as that. Now if He 
can purify us so completely from pride, could He not as completely 
cleanse us from any other blemish of character? Yes, 
we are to be presented without fault and without blemish- 
perfect characters. 

Further, since Christ makes the Church holy by making 
the individuals holy, this passage would read: Christ loved 
me and gave Himself for me that He might cleanse me by 
the Word, that He might present me unto Himself a glorious 
character without spot or wrinkle, but that I should be holy 
and without blemish. Here again holiness, or Christlikeness, 
is set as the standard. 

Additionally, this passage also shows the possibility of 
reaching that standard. It says, Christ so loved the Church, 
not that He may do an impossible thing; for if it were impossible 
to become Christlike, if it were impossible that we 
could be presented holy and without blemish, do you think 
that Christ would have died and attempted it? No. Therefore 
the very fact that Christ died and attempted to sanctify 
the Church and present it holy and without blemish reduces 
it to a glorious possibility. 

There are still other texts that teach the same thing. Take 
Ephesians 3:14-19: "For this cause I bow my knees unto the 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the whole family 
in Heaven and in earth is named, that He would grant you, 
according to the riches of His glory, to be strengthened with 
might by His Spirit in the inner man; that Christ may dwell 
in your hearts by faith; that ye, being rooted and grounded 
in love, may be able to comprehend with all saints, what is 
the breadth and length and depth and height; and to know the 
love of Christ, which passeth knowledge, that ye might be 
filled with all the fulness of God." What does it mean to be 
filled with the fulness of God if it does not mean to be filled 
with Godlikeness? That is the only reasonable way that we 
can be filled with the fulness of God while in the flesh. 

Here again the possibility of becoming Christlike is 
taught. God knew that our weak faith and our terrible 
depravity and our failure to make ourselves holy by our oft-repeated 
efforts would cause us to doubt the possibility of 
becoming Christlike by becoming filled with all the fulness of 
God. Yes; the thought of becoming a complete overcomer 
seems clear beyond the range of possibility. I once asked a 
brother, "Do you think it is possible to obtain the experience 
described in these verses?" He replied, "It is for some." 
Another replied to the same question, "According to their 
capacity." You see how they doubted the possibility. But 
now note carefully, thoughtfully and believingly every word 
of the 20th verse, and note that it is referring to the grand 
experience described in the previous verses. "Now unto Him 
who is able to do exceedingly abundantly above all that we 
ask or think, according to the power that worketh in us." 
You see He can do not only as much as you can conceive or 
ask, but abundantly more. It takes real faith to believe God 
can make you holy or Christlike. But the Scriptures say He 
is able. If we cannot find words with which to pray, we can 
point out these verses to the Lord and in faith ask Him to 



fulfil them to us. 

Again, "Blessed are they who hunger and thirst after 
righteousness [righteous heart or character] for they shall be 
filled"— made holy. (Matthew 5:6.) "And sin [sinful disposition] 
shall not have dominion over you, for ye are not 
under Law, but under grace."— Romans 6:14. 

So we see there is no question as to the standard now. 
It is Christlikeness or holiness. And it is possible. And we 
can scarcely overestimate the importance of being thoroughly 
convinced of these two truths. If we are fully and deeply 
persuaded that we must become Christlike, or we cannot inherit 
eternal life, or the Kingdom, and if we are also fully 
persuaded that we can become like Christ in character we will 
arouse ourselves to seek to attain it. If we indulge the 
thought that our desire to be good, to be holy, to be Christlike, 
is all that is necessary, we will never be willing to seek 
to become holy with sufficient earnestness, or willing to endure 
the trials and take the crosses that will perfect us in love. 
Do not let the enemy deceive you. But let this thought ring 
in your ears; I must become Christlike and I can. There 
is a path that leads to it and I will find and follow it. 

Now we will consider a few Scriptures that show the 
necessity of developing Christlikeness. Since Christ's character 
is the standard to be reached, and since it is reached 
gradually, we must get busy developing this character; or 
sooner or later we shall become completely and forever separated 
from our relationship with the Lord. (John 15:2.) 
"Every branch in Me that beareth not fruit." You see the 
branch was in the vine and yet did not bear fruit— did not 
make the effort to become Christlike. What shall become of 
such branches? "Every branch in Me that beareth not fruit. 
He taketh away." Your standing in the Lord is not because 
of your knowledge simply, but because you are becoming 
Christlike. Are you growing? Are you bearing increasingly 
the fruits of the Spirit? Do you know what it means to become 
like Christ? Do you have a clearer insight into what 
Christ's character is like? Wake up, brother, before you are 
cut off! If you have not been developing the various qualities 
of Christlikeness, start now by surrendering fully to the Lord 
and begin active obedience to God's Word. No more excuses! 

Again, we must develop more and more the Spirit of the 
Lord in order to be useful now. First, by example. "Be thou 
an example of the believers in word, in conversation, in 
charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity." (1 Timothy 4: 12; Titus 2:7,8.) 
Are you growing? Are you becoming an example to 
others? Is the life, or spirit, of Christ being manifest in your 
mortal body? (2 Cor. 4:10.) God expects this of you. The 
brethren need such an example and stimulus as you can give. 

Once more: In Ephesians 6: 18, we are told to pray one 

R5901 : page 156 

for another with all prayer and supplication; and in James 5: 15, 16, 
we are told that the prayer of faith shall save the 
(sin) sick, and that the prayer of the righteous man availeth 
much. You see it is the prayer of a righteous man and the 



prayer of faith that is to bring results. A righteous man is 
not necessarily yet perfect, but he is obedient and growing. 
In John 15: 16, you will notice that Jesus points out that the 
more we bear fruit (grow in holiness) the more successful 
will we be in prayer. Christ has chosen us to bear fruit, that 
whatsoever we ask the Father in His name He may give it us. 
You see, the more we develop in character the more we can 
serve the brethren by obtaining blessings and enlightenment 
and mercy for them through prayer. Have you the love that 
gives you the longing to thus help the brethren? or are you 
cold, critical and indifferent? If you are. you are in a dangerous 
position. Do you pray the prayer of faith and the prayer 
of the righteous man in behalf of the brethren? Does your 
love prompt you to this? You can have such a love if you 
will. (1 Thessalonians 3: 12.) "The Lord make you to increase 
and abound in love one toward another." 

Once more: The great work that the Lord has for us to 
perform in the coming Age demands that we become Christlike. 
No other character would do. We see how hard it is 
to deal with one another now owing to our lack in courage, 
faithfulness, patience, mercy, humility, firmness, etc. Nothing 
but the love described in 1 Corinthians 13 will fit us to deal 
with the fallen race. "Herein is love (to be) made perfect 
in us, that we may have boldness in the Day of Judgment, because 
as He is, so are we (to become) in this world." (1 John 4:17.) 
God has a love that is not discouraged with the deepest 
moral degradation in His object, but follows the welfare 
of the sinner with an unchilled devotion, though He hates 
the sin with a hatred no less than infinite; and we are to be 
"filled with all the fulness of God." You must grow, grow, 
grow into Godlikeness. 

One more reason: The very character of God demands 
that we become holy. Habakkuk 1:13 says: "Thou art of 
purer eyes than to behold [look on with approval] evil; Thou 
canst not look upon [countenance] iniquity." You see we must 
be purified from all iniquity and evil before we can have the 
approval of God. Every defect in our character is evil. So 
you see we must perfect character before God could eternally 
endure us. (Psalm 5:4,5.) "For Thou art not a God that 
hath pleasure in wickedness; evil shall not dwell with Thee— 
Thou hatest all the workers of iniquity"; not only in its grosser 

R5902 : page 156 

and outward forms, but in its finer, more polished inward 
forms. God detects the smallest deflection in our hearts, and 
His character is so holy that He cannot but hate it. And 
this fitness of character to meet God's approval must be 
accomplished while in the flesh. Death and the resurrection 
will not make any change in our characters. The new body 
will only give us a better medium of expressing our true 
selves. This argument can be summed up thus: God, being 
holy, could not eternally endure an imperfect character. 
Therefore we must in this life become Christlike, or perfect 
in character; or else we cannot eternally dwell with God. 
"Be ye holy, for I the Lord your God am holy." 



The foregoing article in many respects is excellent, and 
fully in accord with our presentations in STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES— with but a few exceptions. In presenting the 
matter of holiness, perfection of character, Christ-likeness, we 
have been careful, in STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, to point out 
that this does not signify a perfection in the flesh, which, the 
Bible shows us everywhere, is an impossibility. We have 
shown that it does mean a perfection of heart, of intention, 
of will, of endeavor. "Blessed are the pure in heart, for they 
shall see God." "Sanctify the Lord God in your hearts." 
"Be ye transformed by the renewing of your minds."— 
Matthew 5:8; 1 Peter 3:15; Romans 12:2. 

All this may be exactly what Brother Toole had in mind; 
but since he has not stated the matter thus, there is, we believe, 
a danger that some might misapprehend his meaning. 
Some might think that he meant perfection in the flesh and 
might go to the extreme to which people have gone in the 
past of claiming that in act, in word, in thought, they were 
perfect as the Lord. This might lead to a kind of spiritual 
pride which would be very injurious, as it is unscriptural. 
On the other hand, some of the more conscientious of the 
Lord's people, realizing the imperfection of their flesh— their 
conduct, words, thoughts— might become wholly discouraged 
and give up the nice entirely. 

Some might even go to the length of imagining that they 
would become so perfect in the flesh that they would no longer 
need the Robe of Christ's Righteousness. This would be a 
serious mistake, as illustrated in the parable of the Wedding 
Garment— which shows that the taking off, or the rejection of 
the Robe of Christ's Righteousness would work the rejection 
of the individual from the company of the Lord's people. 
He would be cast into the outer darkness of the world— be 
cut off from the knowledge and illumination of Present Truth. 
We should always remember the force of the Apostle's statement, 
"Ye are complete in Him" (Colossians 2:10), and the 
Master's words, "Without Me ye can do nothing," and again, 
"If ye abide in me."— John 15:5,7. 

The subject is a difficult one to many for various reasons. 
When first we heard the Gospel call we were "children of 
wrath even as others." (Ephesians 2:3.) As we sought to 
reach the Heavenly Father we found that He would not receive 
us except as we would come through the appointed 
Doorway— Jesus. We found next that Jesus would not accept 
us and become our Advocate and make it possible for 
us to come into the family of God unless we would make a 
full consecration of our lives to Him— surrendering our own 
wills, engaging to bear the cross, and following in the Master's 
footsteps. When we made such a self-surrender our 
Redeemer imputed to us His own merit, covering all our 
blemishes and making us acceptable to God. This, His gift, 
is figuratively styled the wedding garment. 

But this imputation of the Savior's merit was not given to 
the New Creature, but to the old creature. It was when we 



were thus robed by our Savior that we were acceptable to 
the Heavenly Father, who justified us in spirit, in mind, and 
begat us with His Holy Spirit. From that moment we were 
embryo New Creatures, but without any proper spirit bodies. 
The Lord left us in the fleshly bodies covered with the Robe 
of Christ's Righteousness. It is the Father's will that while 
we as New Creatures thus tabernacle in the flesh, we should 
grow in grace, grow in knowledge, grow in love— grow in all 
the fruits and graces of the Holy Spirit. 

It is not the flesh that is to grow up into the Anointed in 
all things, but the New Creature. And the New Creature 
never was a sinner. From its very start or begetting it was 
holy. The New Creature, therefore, does not pass from sin 
to righteousness, but from one degree to another degree of 
knowledge and appreciation of righteousness. Every step of 
the New Creature is progress in Christ— progress along spiritual 
lines. The Lord has provided spiritual bread and spiritual 
water for the New Creature in the Bible, and its progress will 
be in proportion as these are recognized and assimilated. 

Character-development is thus a daily, yea, an hourly, experience 
to these New Creatures. The character of Jesus becomes 
more and more their spirit, their disposition. If they 
maintain their original consecration, if they practise the lessons 
of the Lord's Word, and if they grow strong in the Lord 
through partaking of the Lord and His Spirit, they are thus 
becoming more and more copies of God's dear Son. They 
were copies of Him, so far as purity and consecration were 
concerned, at the very start. Their testing is along the lines 
of continued obedience, continued devotion, as they reach 
larger degrees of knowledge of the Word of God, of the Plan 
of God. Like their Redeemer they must demonstrate that 
they are faithful, even unto death— fully submitted to the 
Heavenly Father's will, fully loyal thereto. 

But we must not mistake these New Creatures and too 
closely identify them with the flesh. "Ye are not in the 
flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in 
you." (Romans 8:9.) The flesh has its natural tastes, appetites 
and disposition through heredity. These will never be 
overcome entirely. Hence, as the Apostle says, there is continually 
a warfare between the flesh and the Spirit in the 
New Creation. The flesh warreth against the Spirit and the 
Spirit warreth against the flesh; and the two are contrary. 
(Galatians 5: 17.) The New Creature fights his good fight 
of faith in that he stands loyal to the Lord and continues 
to seek in every way the will of God, as did the Savior. 
This may mean various encounters with his own flesh. As 
St. Paul says, it signifies brow-beating himself— keeping his 
body under. According to the Bible, it will be a fight to the 
finish. If the flesh conquers, the New Creature dies— and 
that will mean the Second Death. If the New Creature conquers, 
it will be by the death of the flesh. 

It is impossible for us to judge one another in this matter. 
Some of the Lord's most loyal people may have a great fight 
with their flesh. On-lookers might be inclined to judge them 
severely and to think that they were not sufficiently loyal. 
But God alone knoweth the heart. In some instances, as St. 



Paul intimates, it is difficult even for one to judge himself 

R5902 : page 157 

aright— difficult to know to what extent the New Creature has 
done all in its power to war a good warfare against the flesh, 
and to what extent the New Creature may have been partially 
excusable for some failure to come up to its highest 
ideals. St. Paul says, "It is a light thing that I should 
be judged of you or of any man, yea, I judge not mine own 
self. There is One that judgeth me." ( 1 Corinthians 4:3,4.) 
Sometimes the battle is so closely drawn, sometimes the New 
Creature is so beset by the world, the flesh and the Adversary, 
that his victory may seem to outsiders to be rather ignoble. 
God alone knows to what extent better results were possible. 

Every Christian, however, has recognized that, if his heart 
has been faithful to the Lord and the victory has been only 
a partial one even, nevertheless valuable lessons have been 
learned by the New Creature, and its faithfulness and endurance 
have demonstrated its loyalty to the Lord and the principles 
of His righteousness. His government. We would 
be perfect; but we, as New Creatures, have this treasure 
in earthen vessels, and they are imperfect; hence our 
results are not satisfactory according to the flesh. They are 
satisfactory, however, to the Lord, if we are loyally striving 
for righteousness, laying aside weights and hindrances and 
seeking by every failure to make ourselves the stronger to 
endure further temptations, tests, trials. 

The test of Jesus' character was humility, resignation to 
the Father's will in everything, even unto death, even the 
death of the cross. This demonstrated His love to the Father, 
His loyalty to the principles represented in the Father's character 
and government. These are the tests upon all the followers 
of Jesus. Whoever has this love and this loyalty is, 
to that extent, a copy of God's dear Son— not in the flesh, 
but in the spirit. 

Let us all be fully agreed as to the grand perfection of 
character of the Heavenly Father and of our Savior and as 
to the fact that this heart-desire must be in us if we would 
have the mind of Christ. It is for the Lord to permit increasing 
trials and tests to come upon us as we grow older 
and stronger. Sometimes He permits a great fight from 
within or without, or both; and the New Creature is put to 
the test of endurance. It is not the Lord's intention that 
these trying experiences shall crush the New Creature; but, 
on the contrary, that the putting forth of endeavor to resist 
the Adversary and every evil shall make the New Creature 
the stronger. We have the promise, "He will not suffer you 
to be tempted above that ye are able, but will with every 
temptation provide a way of escape."— 1 Corinthians 10:13. 

Thus it was with our dear Redeemer: At the very close 
of His ministry came His most severe tests, and He cried in 
an agony of spirit, "If it be possible, let this cup pass from 

R5903 : page 157 



Me." The triumph of the New Creature is shown in the 
succeeding sentence, "Nevertheless, not My will, but Thine, 
be done." As with the Savior, so with the disciple— there is 
a struggle, a fight, to the end of the journey. With the Master 
every trial brought a victory. With His followers, because 
of their inherited weaknesses of the flesh, this is not 
so except as the Lord by His grace turns a partial defeat 
into a victory. 

The New Creature, even partially defeated, is exhorted 
by the Apostle to come with courage to the Throne of 
Heavenly Grace, to obtain mercy and find grace to help for 
future needs. In doing this, he is doing what God intended 
and foreordained for him. But "if we say we have no sin 
[and as respects our flesh, no imperfection of act, word, 
thought] we deceive ourselves and the truth is not in us. 
[But] if we confess our sins [our shortcomings]. He is faithful 
and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from 
all iniquity." (1 John 1:8,9.) He is just, for this is His 
Plan. This is the arrangement He has made, that He might 
be just and yet be the Justifier of him that believeth in Jesus. 

In making this provision for the weaknesses of our flesh, 
God is not compromising with sin. And in accepting 
this provision, we as New Creatures are not compromising 
with sin, either. It is not the New Creature that sins. Its 
hopes, aspirations, desires are proper. But because of the 
weaknesses of the flesh and surroundings of evil, the New 
Creature cannot do all it would, but must be continually 
striving, attaining and setting its mark higher and higher, as 
clear knowledge of the Divine will is gained. This is fruit-bearing, 
character-development, acceptable in the Lord's sight 
through Jesus Christ, but not acceptable in any other way; 
for our very best endeavors are more or less blemished by 
the imperfections of our flesh. 

Thus we perceive the necessity for our continuing under 
the robe of Christ's righteousness— wearing the wedding garment 
which He has provided— until our glorious "change" 
shall come, the resurrection change. Then we shall be 
through with our flesh and through with every provision which 
God has made for the covering of its blemishes; for we shall 
be New Creatures complete, spirit-bodied as well as spirit-minded. 
The Apostle emphasizes this, saying, "Flesh and blood 
cannot inherit the Kingdom of God." We must all be changed. 
He explains the change, saying, "Sown in weakness, raised 
in power; sown in dishonor, raised in glory; sown an animal 
body, raised a spirit body."— 1 Corinthians 15:42-44. 



R5903:page 157 

A BLIND BOY'S WISDOM 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have been thinking of writing to you since coming into 
the wonderful light of God's Plan, through a young blind 
brother, Arthur Page, 19 years old; but I have so far refrained 



from doing so lest I might infringe on your time. 
However, on reading the article in THE WATCH TOWER of 
March 1st, "Philip and the Ethiopian." I was so struck with 
the comparison between Philip and Brother Page that I can 
no longer refrain. His directness and quite apparent sincerity 
arrested my attention and interest from the first. 

Perhaps I may briefly tell what was clearly the work of 
our loving Father; After working for three years as a lay 
missionary of the Church of England, in Canada, in lumber, 
railroad and mining camps, under the Church Camp Mission 
(Winnipeg), I was returning last November from Dawson, 
Yukon, where I had been amongst the miners in the Klondike 
District. Previous to going to Canada I had been four and 
one-half years at Trinity College, Dublin, finishing my divinity 
course there. My object in returning was to be ordained for 
a curacy in the city of Belfast, Ireland. 

There being no Chaplain on board, I was asked to act in 
this capacity, and after the evening service in the third class 
dining room on our first Sunday at sea, I was told that a 
blind boy would like to see me. I was introduced to Brother 
Page, who asked if I would read to him during the voyage. 
I was glad of the opportunity, and on the following morning 
we began. He asked to have only the Bible. Beginning at 
The Acts of the Apostles, I read the first chapter till, in 
verse 16, I came to a mention of David, when he asked me 
pointedly, "Where do you think David is now?" Not knowing, 
I said so, and he asked further, "Where do you think 
Adam is?" As I couldn't make out the point of the question 
I told him that I didn't think Adam's whereabouts was of any 
importance. He smiled, and quietly pointed out his belief 
in the matter, and I felt drawn by its reasonableness. 

We discussed little more that morning, and for the remainder 
of the week we had no opportunity for reading, owing 
to rough weather. However, on the following Monday morning 
about a dozen passengers asked if they could be present 
during our reading, as tremendous interest had been aroused 
by the blind boy's knowledge of the Bible, especially when it 
was discovered that twelve months previously he couldn't 
have quoted half a dozen texts. None of the hundreds on 
board had been able to puzzle him on any point, so they 
seemed anxious to see how the "parson" would fare. 

For the five remaining days of the voyage there was such 
interest that we had to have studies three times each day, beginning 
immediately after breakfast. The study went on till 
the steward came to lay the tables for dinner; then we adjourned 
till after the meal, when we usually began again at 
2, continuing till "table-laying" again, when several invariably 
asked what time the evening meeting began. Seven-thirty was 
the usual hour, and the time seemed to fly till a steward came 
at 1 1 o'clock to put out the lights. A couple of evenings we 
were allowed to continue till 12, provided we spoke low. 

Every denomination seemed to be represented; all brought 
forward the various "pet" doctrines. Brother Page did the 
answering, while I endeavored to keep pace with him in looking 
up the numerous passages he cited. Right from the beginning 
not one was able to contradict his reasoning. Of 



course, I was very much astonished, but I saw that he could 
reason on points that we daren't touch. Once I grasped the 
fact that we are souls, instead of the former idea of our 
possessing a mysterious something, I seemed to realize how 
wrong had been my former view of this. Soon I was supporting 
Brother Page, unconsciously, against my own views. 

There were always from 20 to 50 at the studies, and so 
keen was the interest that on one occasion so many crowded 
on the table the pressure broke the supports. There was a 
young, unlearned blind boy, calmly answering questions as 
fast as they could be put, from those who had been professing 

page 158 

Christians for probably 20 years or more! Yet he 
was quite clear and convincing. Occasionally some one would 
attempt frivolity; Brother Page would rebuke him very directly, 
but lovingly, and his frivolity ended. It was easy to see 
from the faces of many who attended regularly that we all 
had similar thoughts— the Holy Spirit of God was his guide. 

We got to Tilbury on Saturday evening, and on Sunday 
I spent the afternoon and also the evening at the Tabernacle 
with Brother Page. When I saw the whole congregation 
going down for tea between the meetings I could scarcely 
believe my eyes; and the fellowship with all there felt like 
a foretaste of Heaven. Before crossing over to Ireland I 
got Volumes I. and V. from Brother Hemery, whose kindness 
was an inspiration. 

I had a rather stormy interview with the Bishop, under 
whom I had arranged to work. I felt a bit nervous as I went 
into his study to suggest what seemed very heretical, and I 
found myself quite confident when with him. It was very 
sad to listen to his arguments. The interview resulted in my 
being advised to read three books. I tried to do this, but I 
found that once having started Volumes I. and V., the old, 
foggy "creed" books were an impossibility, every page seeming 
full of error. I felt no pleasure in the old books— rather 
a feeling of forced medicine. But with the Volumes I could 
scarcely realize that I wasn't dreaming, everything seemed so 
reasonable and delightful. Subjects that we read books on, 
and were lectured on for weeks in College were made beautifully 
clear in a few pages. 

I have now left the Church of Ireland, and feeling that I 
could not offer the Lord less than my whole time, I have 
decided to take up the Colporteur work here, as the brethren 
feel there is work to be done. I have been at it for a week, 
and enjoyed it immensely. But as I hadn't read Volume VI., I 
decided to do so before continuing. Words cannot express 
what a help and pleasure the reading of this volume has 

R5904:page 158 

been! I have many a time put it down during reading to 
try to realize the wonderful love of God that it opens up; 
and how clear it makes such points as Baptism, Passover, etc! 
Brother Lloyd is coming over from England to give me 



a few lessons in Colporteuring, so I am looking forward with 
much joy to this. 

There seems to be no end to the Lord's goodness. He 
opened up the way for my going to Liverpool a few weeks 
ago to see the PHOTO-DRAMA, and this was very delightful, 
as well as meeting with and being strengthened by the 
brethren there. 

Brother, I fear I have trespassed too much on your time. 
I find it very hard to write briefly, so this letter has grown 
beyond bounds; and even then I haven't told the half of 
the Lord's great goodness! 

I feel glad that I had to give up a little in the world in 
order to be with His followers. I feel I am a weak runner, 
but I long to run so as to obtain the Prize. It is grand to 
be a "babe" with such loving, helpful elder brothers and 
sisters! I would dearly love to thank you personally; but 
if I win in the glorious Race I hope to do so then. Meanwhile 
I give all the thanks to the Lord, and all will be 
His forever. I have been asked to send you the enclosed 
cuttings regarding the "two horns" of the Image. 

That the Lord may bless you and all at Bethel with 
the fulness of His peace, is the constant prayer of 

Your brother by His grace, T.H. BROWNE. 



R5904:page 158 

INTERESTING LETTERS 

NO PEACE TILL GOD SPEAKS IT 

DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

It is only because I know your time is precious that I 
refrain from time to time to write you telling of our appreciation 
of your faithful and untiring service. We wonder 
more and more, dear Brother, as we note the broadening 
avenues of service into which our Heavenly Father privileges 
you to enter while the enemies of the Truth are being hampered 
on every side— the waters of trouble rising higher and 
higher about them. We rejoice for you, and for the privileges 
which are ours through your faithful ministry. 

We note your confession of some trepidation with regard 
to what you find it your duty to say through THE WATCH 
TOWER from time to time relative to the conduct of the war. 
We feel assured that those who have grasped clearly the 
Harvest Truth, and who still love it, will generally agree that 
you are fair and impartial. They will realize that your grasp 
of the history the nations have written, and of the principles 
supposed to underlie the conduct of international affairs, 
together with the course the different belligerents are all 
taking, require that you, as a faithful steward, speak as you 
believe the Lord regards the course of the nations. We feel 
that your utterances are Heaven-directed in order that those 
who know the Truth, and all Truth-seekers may see the more 
clearly why the nations are at war, the necessity that all who 



are heart-proud, in their own interest as well as that of 
others, be humbled; and the absolute impossibility of peace 
until God speaks with authority. 

Gratitude fills our hearts more and more for the privilege 
of knowing something of the Lord's plans, as a safeguard 
against pessimism, bitterness or discouragement, as we see 
these sentiments fastening themselves upon so many of those 
who do not know. 

The war comes pretty close to us in Canada. The methods 
being employed in the recruiting campaign, every possible 
lever being pulled without regard to individual conviction as 
to what is right— in a fight which is claimed to be against 
Militarism, and in a land where every citizen is supposed to 
be free— is an interesting study. We can, especially of late, 
hear a rising murmur of dissatisfaction— a revulsion of public 
sentiment— which in the light of the Scriptures we see to be 
the sure harbinger of coming trouble along other lines. The 
"little finger" of clerical power is rapidly marshalling secular 
pressure to its support, and correspondingly becoming the 
"heavy hand" of oppression. 

Canada, as a whole, you already know is not lagging behind 
the United Kingdom. St. John is keeping well to the front, 
with a continual change of tactics. A strong coercive method 
at first was employed through recruiting meetings in auditoriums 
and in the open, at which dire threats were handed 
out to the people. Because of public resentment this gave 
place to something more like inciting the scorn of the gentler 
sex for what they termed "slackers." Then came criticism of 
the gentler sex because they did not get into line as fully as 
was desired; also criticism of their position as lacking the 
spirit of patriotism and of self-sacrifice. Then came "bill-posting" 
on telegraph poles and everywhere, and a freezing-out 
of men eligible for service from the various industries. 
Now we have a body of French-Canadian soldiers billeted 
here who are commissioned, individually, to button-hole young 
men everywhere, using whatever methods may be considered 
effective; those methods include the use of intoxicants. (I 
am not in position to say the use of intoxicants is authorized 
—but it is practised.) 

I have just mailed to the office (File H) newspaper report 
of recent Charge of Bishop Richardson (Episcopal), representing 
him as following the lead of the Bishops of London 
in debarring the clergy (so far as expression of sentiment 
goes) from the privilege of becoming actual combatants, but 
stating that it is their duty to "heap scorn upon any suggestion 
of selfishness or slacking" on the part of others. I do 
not know how long the temper of Canadians will stand this. 
I thank God for the power of the Truth in my own case. I 
have felt that I could bear injustice toward myself with considerable 
grace, but the wholesale measuring out of injustice 
to others has always brought to my notice an element in my 
make-up the effect of which would give me serious concern, 
in this day of aggravated injustice, were it not for the power 
and spirit of the Truth. Even while thus fortified and 
guarded I feel that probably my strongest test will come right 
along this very line. 



How secure we are in our "Strong City"! How safe from 
any threatening storm! The friends in the Provinces are of 
a good courage. The participation in DRAMA and Convention 
privileges of the past two seasons, especially, has been rich 
in blessing to us all. 

Sister Black joins me in expression of increasing love for 
you, dear Brother, remembering you ever in our prayers, and 
asking a continued interest in your prayers that we may be 
faithful unto death. 

"We will rejoice in Thy salvation, and in the name of our 
God we will set up our banners." 

Your brother by Divine favor, W. W. BLACK. 



STRANGE STATEMENTS OF PREACHERS 

DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

It has fallen to my lot to have had not a few clergymen in 
audiences that I have been privileged to address, but to have 
had presiding elders and bishops among them has been rare; 
yet in at least three cases this has occurred. In each instance 
a special experience marked the occasion. It has occurred to 

R5904: page 159 

me that it may be of interest to you to hear a report of the 
experiences; therefore, I will write you a short account. 

The first experience was with an U.B. bishop. The discourse 
was on The Resurrection. He took elaborate notes. At 
the end of the service one of the brethren, recognizing the 
bishop, asked him how he liked the lecture. He replied: "I 
liked it first rate, but do not agree with the speaker. I would 
like to divide time with him before an audience. I can quote 
ten verses to his one on the subject." (I had cited by book, 
chapter and verse over a hundred verses to prove our position 
as Scriptural) 

At this remark the brother told him that the speaker would, 
if the bishop desired it, enter a debate with him. Leaving the 
bishop the brother came to me, telling me of the bishop's remark. 
Thinking that it would give the Truth a wide hearing, 
I said I would be pleased to debate with him. The brother 
then returned to the bishop and asked to introduce him to me. 
After the introduction the bishop, assuring me that he had 
taught Greek thirty years, said that he wanted to correct an 
ungrammatical remark that I had made on the Greek text. It 
turned out that the bishop was mistaken, and admitted that 
the mistake was his. After several criticisms of the thoughts 
of the lecture, and his manifest inability to meet my replies, 
in response to my query as to time, place, etc., of the debate, 
he said that he thought no good would come from a public 
debate, but a private talk over the matter might yield good! 
With this he left. His attempt to undermine the influence of 
the address miscarried. 

The second case was that of a presiding elder, who attended 
a lecture on The Two Salvations. Introducing himself 



at the conclusion of the lecture he invited me to call on 
him. During the call he assured me that he did not believe 
in eternal torment, though he preached it. Asked why he 
so preached, he answered that the people were not yet enough 
enlightened to be given the Truth on the subject without injury 

R5905 : page 159 

to themselves, the church, the clergy and society. Asked 

why this was, he answered, "They would forsake the churches, 

leave the ministry unsupported, and commit all sorts of excesses, 

unrestrained by fear of torture." What a commentary 

on the moral effects of the ministry's work! He confided in 

me the statement that he was a Universalist as well as an Evolutionist 

and Higher Critic; yet he rebuked me for preaching 

against eternal torment! 

The third case was that of an Episcopal bishop, who attended 
a semi-public meeting that I addressed this week on 
The Overthrow of Satan's Empire. Before the service, in 
a conversation that he held with the elder of the class that 
gave the meeting, he very strongly defended the doctrine of 
Apostolic Succession and the Divine Right of the clergy. In 
this particular lecture the latter doctrine is attacked from 
many points of view. During the course of the lecture I did 
not deviate from my usual way of presenting the doctrine of 
the Divine Right of the clergy. My remarks on the subject, 
though delivered very kindly, seemed deeply to cut the bishop. 
His face became redder than the red in the Stars and 
Stripes that decorated the stage from which I spoke. The 
way he squirmed in his chair one would have thought that he 
was seated on pins. He remained throughout the entire lecture, 
but did not wait to meet me. I could not but think that 
we are now judging the kings and princes! 

By the way, there is another matter that I think might be 
well to bring to your attention, i.e., the friends by letter asking 
the Pilgrims to answer questions. You will recall that 
some time ago, in view of the fact that they travel on one-day 
appointments, which scarcely leaves them time properly to 
do the work at the places they visit, as well as in view of the 
fact that the dear Lord, mindful of the needs of His dear 
flock, has through the Correspondence Department at the 
Tabernacle arranged for the answer of just such questions, 
you wrote the Pilgrims a letter, which you afterwards published 
in the TOWER, asking them to refer the brethren who 
asked them questions by mail to the page in the STUDIES 
where the subject is treated, or better still, to write their 
questions to the Correspondence Department at the Tabernacle. 
Judging from the number of letters that I receive asking questions, 
I have concluded that a large number of the friends 
have either overlooked or forgotten your letter on the subject. 

Feeling that it is for me to abide by your suggestion contained 
in the above-mentioned letter, I do not answer these 
questions, but write to them telling them the condition. This, 
of course, consumes time for them and me, and is doubtless 
disappointing to them. Is there not some way in which this 
matter can be brought to their attention, whereby they can be 



spared disappointment, as well as save the Pilgrims' time, and 
receive their answers all the sooner? I am glad to note their 
zeal to learn the good Word of God, and would gladly answer 
their questions if this were in harmony with the Lord's will; 
but under the circumstances it is of profit to nobody for them 
to write to the Pilgrims for their information. For this 
reason I thought it might be well to bring it to your attention, 
trusting that it may result in larger blessing to all concerned 
in the matter. 

The dear Lord has been blessing me richly in many ways 
both by toward and untoward circumstances. Was very much 
pleased by the reports of the year's work of the Society. My 
prayer to the Lord is that He continue to bless His cause, 
people and servants, especially yourself among them. Rejoicing 
that I am privileged to be associated in this the best of 
fellowship and service with you, and sending you much Christian 
love, with the assurance of my continued prayers for, 
and cooperation with you, I remain 

Your brother and fellow servant, PAUL S.L. JOHNSON. 



"ABRAHAM SAW MY DAY AND WAS GLAD" 

MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Greetings and love in the dear Lord! I take this opportunity 
of expressing my love for you, and for the service 
in which you are engaged so faithfully. 

It was in the year 1908 that I began to read the STUDIES IN 
THE SCRIPTURES. From that time on I have not failed to find 
something to encourage, strengthen and uplift even though 
I have gone through many trials that have appeared more 
than I could bear, from outward observation. 

I am continually reading the STUDIES, and the "Old, Old 
Story," which their pages forthtell with no uncertain sound, 
always appears new. I find each time I go through them 
something I never saw before. Recently I have been going 
through TABERNACLE SHADOWS again, and have been particularly 
struck with the thought that Abraham was Justified 
by Faith in Christ. 

I should be glad, dear brother, if you will explain just 
how it was possible for this to be. The question has been 
raised several times here and I have not been satisfied with 
the answers given at any time. 

Some have suggested that "If Brother Russell were writing 
TABERNACLE SHADOWS now he would not put those words 
in..." Is this correct? 

I have also heard on various occasions, when studying 
the Volumes, that Brother Russell has left various points 
without a full explanation in order that we might study for 
ourselves. I am, dear brother. 

Yours in the Anointed. , 



EDITOR'S REPLY 



Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see My Day; he saw it and 
was glad."— John 8:56. 

Abraham knew that God's promise to bless all the families 
of the earth was sure to be fulfilled. He saw the Day of 
Christ— the Millennium— and its glorious work by the eye 
of faith. Similarly he saw the great Messiah the King by the 
eye of faith; yea, more, by the same eye Abraham saw the 
millions of Adam's race blessed of God by the Messiah, His 
Seed, during the Millennium. 



THINKS IT UNEQUALED 

DEAR BRETHREN AND SISTERS :-- 

With the enclosed renewal of my subscription to THE 
WATCH TOWER I cannot refrain from an expression of 
appreciation. For clearness of thought, cohesion of ideas 
and strength in "The Word," it is surely not equaled in any 
present-day religious publication. I look forward to each 
issue and read it with avidity, and am deeply grateful to 
each of the dear brothers and sisters who are assisting in 
its publication. With sincere thanks to all who have assisted 
in opening to my view a horizon of promise more 
glorious than the splendor of the setting sun. I remain. 

Your brother in hope, J. H. BENNETT. 



I. B. S. A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR THE MONTH OF JUNE 

QUESTIONS FROM 
MANUAL ON SERIES THIRD 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
STUDY VI.=="THE WORK OF THE HARVEST" 

Week of June 7..Q. 29 to 35 Week of June 21..Q. 43 to 49 
Week of June 14..Q. 36 to 42 Week of June 28..Q. 50 to 56 

Question Manuals on Vol. Ill STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
5c each; or 50c per dozen, postpaid. 



page 160 

International Bible Students Association Classes 
STUDIES AND LECTURES BY MEMBERS OF THE PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 161 

VOL. XXXVII. JUNE 1 No. 1 1 
A.D. 1916-A.M.6044 



CONTENTS 

Training Our Affections Heavenward . .163 

Setting Affections Above a Gradual Work 164 
"The King in His Beauty" (Poem) . . .165 
The Philippian Jailer 166 

A Weil-Timed Earthquake . . . .167 
Finally, Brethren, Think! .... 168 

The Power of Thought 169 

Questions for Self-Examination. . .169 
Scope of the Abrahamic Covenant . . .169 
Harvest Gatherings and Siftings . . .170 

Sketch of Development of Present Truth. 170 

First Faint Gleam of God's Plan . .170 

Chronology Seen to Be Valuable . .171 

An Important Discovery . . . .171 

The Beginning of the Harvest Work . .171 

Denying the Ransom 172 

"The Watch Tower" Begun . . . .172 
"Tabernacle Shadows of Better Sacrifices" 173 

Further Light on the Scriptures . .174 

Doth This Offend You? 175 

page 162 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



A POPULAR BOOKLET ON HELL 

No booklet of ours is so much in demand as the one entitled, 
WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES ABOUT HELL? We have 
these in good supply at 5c each. By the dozen, in booklet, 50c; 
in TOWER form, 40c per doz., 25 for 75c, $2 per hundred, 
postpaid. 



BROTHER RUSSELL AT THE TEMPLE 



Answering many inquiries, we announce that Brother Russell 
endeavors to serve at the New York City Temple on the 
first Sunday of each month. In the forenoon of such days 
there is a baptism, with every provision for those finding 
it convenient to be immersed at that time. 



WHEN ordering books, etc., please consult November 1st 
WATCH TOWER for price. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR JULY 

After the close of the hymn the bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
July follow: (1) 20; (2) 60; (3) 257; (4) 293; (5) 85; (6) 
324; (7) 1 19; (8) 267; (9) 46; (10) 130; (1 1) 91; (12) 105; 
(13) 455; (14) 28; (15) 285; (16) 72; (17) VOW; (18) 218; (19) 
272; (20) 160 (21) 213; (22) 98; (23) 172; (24) 260; (25) 
325; (26) 165; (27) 183; (28) 130; (29) 19; (30) 57; (31) 281. 



R5905 : page 163 

TRAINING OUR AFFECTIONS HEAVENWARD 

"Set your affection on things Above, not 
on things on the earth."— Colossians 3:2. 

IN THE natural make-up of humanity there is 
a certain tendency which we all recognize 
as a sort of mental sacrilege, although we 
are unable to philosophize upon it or to explain 



it. So surely as we are men and 

women we have certain impulses of affection, 

certain powers that go out toward other 

creatures, other things; and it is very important 

that we see where they are tending; 

otherwise they will lead to idolatry. Just 

as the little tendrils of a vine will take hold of whatever 

is within reach, so our affections go out to various earthly 

objects; and they need to be pruned and trained, just as 

a vine needs to be. When you desire to have your vine 

grow a certain way, you turn it in the proper direction, 

tie it if need be, and see that its tendrils take hold of 

the proper supports. 

VARIOUS WORLDLY OBJECTS OF AFFECTION 

Thus it is with each of us. These affections are 
proper, they are good; but they need guiding, training. 
If we did not have these affections, we could not love God. 
We must have them in order to a proper balance of 
character. Without them we could not hold together. 
The need for their proper guidance is manifest when we 
see some lady setting her affections on a little dog, giving 
it much time, care, choice food, etc. Some of the wealthy 
set their affections on poodle dogs, bull dogs, bird dogs 
or Angora cats. Some make pets of Canary birds, rabbits, 
white mice, etc. They spend upon those pets much 
valuable time, thought and care that might be much 
better spent in other ways— often treating them as if they 

R5906 : page 163 

were children, and lavishing as much affection upon them 
as if they were human. Some do the same with flowers. 

Although we believe in having a very kindly feeling 
toward dumb animals, and although we greatly admire 
flowers, yet we hold that as the Lord's people we should 
not treat any of these as if they were human beings, nor 
set our affections upon them to our injury and [he neglect 
of much more important things. There are plenty of children 
to care for; and we should not put flowers, dogs 
and toys in place of them. Although it is very proper for 
us to think how good is our Heavenly Father to give us 
all these things for pleasure, yet we should be on guard 
that we do not set our affections upon them and give them 
too large a place in our hearts. Where people do this, 
something valuable has been lost in their lives. If they 
are grown people, perhaps it would have been better if 
they had had children, rather than to set their love upon 
dogs and cats, and to waste precious time upon them. 

As we look out upon the world of mankind, we see that 
some are much better balanced than others. We sympathize 
with the world; for most of them do not know 
the Lord. They are not Christians. Very many of them 
have poor, meager lives with little to fill their hearts and 
to brighten and enlarge their mental horizon. Many who 



spend little or no time upon pets, set their affections and 
thoughts upon a home. It is a great pleasure to them to 
be able to say, "I have a good home of my own." This 
longing for home is a natural craving of our beings. 
Phrenologists call this natural trait, inhabitiveness— love 
of habitation. But we are not to permit our affections to 
center even here. As children of God we should have 
far higher aspirations than the world has. 

Many set their hearts upon having a large bank account. 
We have known people whose minds are so unbalanced 
that they would do almost anything to secure 
a good bank account. And when this is gained, they 
still are not satisfied. They continue to grasp after more, 
often resorting to very questionable or very dishonest 
methods to gain their ends. Such people are mentally and 
morally deranged. But we are to remember that the 
human family in their fallen condition are all more or 
less deranged. Only a thorough and radical course of 
treatment can remove the difficulty. The Lord alone can 
cure the malady that affects the entire human race. 

LEGITIMATE AFFECTIONS LIABLE TO PERVERSION 

There are still higher affections than those we have 
named which are also dangerous unless properly trained 
and guided. These are the affections of man for woman, 
woman for man, man for man, woman for woman, etc. 
All this is proper, of course, but we are to avoid inordinate 
affections, and are to have only that which is ordinary— 
that is, reasonable, proper. We are to beware of going 
to extremes. In His Word God has given us the proper 
outlines of conduct for His children; and we can know 
these only when we study His directions. Otherwise we 
are sure to take a wrong course. "Set not your affection 
on things on the earth." 

It is God's arrangement that even husbands and wives 
should not set their affections too much upon each other. 
Thus the Apostle Paul enjoins, "The time is short; it 
remaineth that they that have wives be as though they 
had none." (1 Corinthians 7:29.) The intimation seems 
to be that we should not reckon our earthly relationships 
as being the highest and best of all things. It is a great 
thing to have each other's support in the trials and difficulties 

R5906 : page 164 

of life. We are not wishing to say anything to 

weaken this blessed bond. But it should be held in accordance 

with knowledge of and in harmony with God's Word. 

It should not be permitted to be in any wise a hindrance 

to our running the Heavenly race successfully. It should 

not become an earth-born cloud to veil from us the 

Father's face and approval. 

By natural tendency we would all be inclined to go 
wrong; therefore we need to give careful heed to the 
admonition to set our affection on things Above. Let 



each of us look around carefully and sweep before our 
own doors. We are not here simply to have a good time. 
We are here for the purpose of learning certain principles, 
certain lessons that the Lord would have us learn, 
so that we may more than ever shape our lives in harmony 
therewith, that we may be able to see all the things of 
life from God's viewpoint. God's Word does not go into 
every detail of life; but it lays down important principles 
that touch our lives at every point; and it is for us to 
learn more and more how to apply these principles, to see 
what we need to restrain, what we need to cultivate, etc. 
The Lord wishes us to be intelligent children. 

"GOD FIRST" 

Those who come into harmony with the mind of the 
Lord have that wisdom from Above, which is first pure, 
then peaceable, easy of entreatment, full of mercy and 
good fruits. (James 3: 17.) Each of us should scrutinize 
the affairs of his own life and observe whether to any 
extent he is setting his affections upon earthly objects 
or things, even upon things which are in themselves 
right and proper. One cannot love his wife too 
much, unless he permits her to come into the Lord's place 
in his heart. If he should love her so much that he would 
please her rather than the Lord, then he is doing wrong. 
God must be first. Everything must be subordinate. 
Everything should be brought into line with this: GOD 
FIRST-His will. His Plan, His ways. 

As husbands and wives, kindred and friends, there is 
a certain degree of love that is in full harmony with the 
Heavenly love, the Father's will; and there are other 
affections or degrees of affection that are not in accordance 
therewith. Beware of these latter. Every one is 
imperfect, and each has tendencies whereby he might be 
led astray. Our great Adversary goeth about seeking 
whom he may devour. If he could, he would be glad to 
devour us. The better Christian one is, the better the 
Adversary would like to get hold of him. 

To be a child of God does not mean that we shall be 
free from all earth-born tendencies. The Apostle points 
out that there is a continual fight of the New Creature 
against the old. (Galatians 5: 17.) The Heavenly impulses, 
tendencies and aspirations need to be fought for; 
they must be carefully and continually cultivated. Not 
only must our affections be torn from their earthly props, 
to which they naturally cling, but they must be trained 
Heavenward, and be held there by the cords of love and 
devotion to God. Do not let them gravitate again earthward. 
There are many things on this earth that are attractive, 
that are beautiful; but we need not set our hearts 
upon them. We may see them and admire them; but we 
must go right along the narrow way. Our hearts are only 
just so large; and if we fill them with flowers or pets or 
earthly ambitions or affections, how can there be room 
for the infinitely more important and beautiful things? 



FRUITS, NOT CHIPS, SHOULD FILL OUR MENTAL BASKETS 

We all remember the familiar story of the boy who 
was very fond of reading novels, and whose father wished 
to impress a valuable lesson upon his mind. One day he 
said to his son, "John, empty that basket of apples in the 
corner; then go and fill the basket with chips." The boy 
did so, and brought in the basket filled with chips. "Now," 
said the father, "put all the apples also into the basket." 
The surprised boy said, "Father, I cannot put the apples 
in while the chips are there." "No," said the father, and 
your mind is just like that basket. It can hold only so 
much; and if you fill it with chips, there will be no room 
for other and better things." 

This was a wise father; he gave his son a good suggestion. 
You and I, as New Creatures in Christ Jesus, 
should fill our minds with the glorious Heavenly things— 
the Heavenly hopes, the Heavenly ambitions, the Heavenly 
affections. All these earthly things are but as chips in 
comparison. The mind and the heart filled with chips 
cannot contain the fruits of the Spirit. If we fill our 
baskets with the Heavenly loves and joys, the spiritual 
treasures, we shall have that which is transcendently 
above any earthly love and joy. 

Beware of earthly, spurious love; for it will be a 
hindrance to the Heavenly love. The two should not be 
confused and mixed. The unselfish natural love, which 
is an element of perfect human nature, will not, if kept 
in subservience to the Heavenly, interfere with our spiritual 
interests. The one does not infract or destroy the 
other. There should be a natural love for husband, wife, 
children, parents, and the Lord would have this continue; 
but He would have it in full subjection to the Heavenly 
things. Here, also, God should be first. 

SETTING AFFECTIONS ABOVE A GRADUAL WORK 

In our text the Apostle is addressing Christians, the 
class who are day by day training their affections Heavenward. 
This matter of setting the affections on Heavenly 
things, however, is something that must be repeated, persevered 
in; for the affections are inclined to slip off. We 
have nothing but our old brains with which to do our 
thinking, and these brains have tendencies toward the 
flesh. Therefore the necessity arises for a repeated and 
continual setting of the affections on the things Above, 
until they become securely fastened there, fixed, established. 
Heaven is to be our eternal Home, not the earth, 
not the fleshly condition. All the precious promises center 
Above. Christ our beloved King is there. We are 
being prepared to enter soon into Heaven itself, the condition 
beyond the veil. The glories of the Holiest of all 
are now ours by faith; and they will soon be ours in 
reality if we hold fast and continue faithful to our covenant 
with God. 



The Lord has now through His promises given us a 
foretaste of the good things to come. We have "the earnest 
of the Spirit." It is like the paying down of a hundred 

R5907 : page 164 

dollars to secure the purchase of a house. The balance 
remains due, and the buyer does not get the property 
until this balance is paid. But the earnest money holds 
the place for him until the full payment is made. By giving 
us His Holy Spirit God binds the contract into which 
we have entered with Him. In giving us this advance 
payment the Lord says, "Now prove to Me how faithfully 
you will keep your part of the Covenant into which we 
have entered. You keep your part, and I will keep Mine." 
"Faithful is He that calleth us, who also will do it." The 
only question is whether we shall do our part faithfully; 
for God will surely do His part. 

CAREFUL PREPARATION OF THE BRIDAL GARMENTS 

When we ponder on earthly things we see that they 
are not worthy to be compared with the Heavenly things. 

R5907 : page 165 

But there is danger of spending consecrated time on 
things that are of less value even than flowers, etc. How 
much time do you think you should spend in reading the 
newspapers? How much does this enable you to set your 
affections on the things above? Each of us is responsible 
to the Lord for how he uses every moment of his time- 
God's time. We are not here condemning the reading of 
important world-news which bears upon the fulfilment 
of Scripture prophecy. It is not wrong for us to keep 
in touch with the progress of the great war, for instance, 
in so far as it is related to the incoming Kingdom. But 
we do not need to read much to find out what is necessary. 

Doubtless if Jesus were here in the flesh now. He 
would be interested in noting how the world conditions 
are fulfilling the testimony of the Scriptures. He told us 
to watch for these fulfilments and to lift up our heads 
when we saw them coming to pass. But how can we lift 
up our heads if we do not see them coming to pass? And 
how can we see them if we do not read that which will 
give us this necessary information? But we are not to 
read for entertainment, nor are we to read what is unprofitable 
to us as New Creatures. 

So then, dear brethren and sisters, we see the course 
we are to pursue. We are to be the Bride of Jehovah's 
great Son. Therefore we must be very diligent to get 
everything in readiness for the approaching marriage. 
When we consider the preparations which an earthly 
bride makes for her nuptials, we have a good illustration 
of how important it is for us to have our garments all 
prepared, our robes spotless, our embroidery-work all 



completed beforehand. You and I are privileged to have 
a most important part in the greatest, grandest wedding 
ever held. Therefore we should be ready. We who were 
by nature children of wrath even as others, are now 
privileged to be cleansed from all defilement by the precious 
blood of Christ. Daily also we are to wash with 
the water of the Word. We are to be purified from all 
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and be fitted to become 
the Bride of our Heavenly King. 

This preparation means a continuous work as long as 
we sojourn in the mortal body. God's great Program has 
been so arranged as to demonstrate who will be fit to constitute 
the Bride of His Son. This decision in our case 
will depend on our diligence in making ourselves ready. 
If we attend to this most important work properly, we 
shall have no time to fritter away. We shall have little 
time for anything else than this one thing. But the proper 
making of ourselves ready means the helping of others 
as we have opportunity, especially the brethren who are 
walking this same Heavenly way with us. We are to lay 
down our lives for the brethren. This is an important 
part of our preparation. We are to build up ourselves 
and also the brethren in the most holy faith. 

We hope, then, dear friends, that we are getting ready 
for the marriage of the Lamb, for our marriage to the 
Lamb. Something that we may do or fail to do today 
may have a bearing upon our final readiness. Our minds 
are the foundation for everything in this matter. The 
Lord knows that we have imperfect bodies. So the testing 
will not be as to whether our bodies are perfect, but 
whether our hearts are perfect. If our heart is perfect 
before God, we shall bring our words, our actions and 
our thoughts into harmony with the Law of Love to the 
extent of our ability. If we see to it that we keep our 
hearts thus loyal, we shall become more and more a copy 
of God's dear Son, our Heavenly Bridegroom; and we 
shall enter in due time with exceeding joy into our "house 
not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens." Then our 
Lord will present us before the Father— the "Bride 
adorned for her Husband"; He will present us with exceeding 
joy, BLAMELESS. 

Oh, the blessedness of this thought! Can we be 
blameless? If we reach the Kingdom, dear brethren, we 
shall indeed be blameless! Meantime, our characters are 
to be blameless here. God would never blame us for 
things we could not help, but only for the things we 
could help; and He has made an arrangement whereby 
if we have made mistakes we can go to the Fountain of 
cleansing. If we strive to do our best, and if we go 
daily, or oftener if necessary, to the Mercy Seat for 
pardon and cleansing, we shall be spotless in the Father's 
sight; and in His own due time He will give us perfect 
bodies like our Lord's. Then we shall be perfect in the 
most absolute sense. 

So long as we stay in the imperfect flesh we shall 
need the Throne of Heavenly Grace. We shall need 



mercy and assistance from the Lord every day. If we 
are faithful at heart, our mistakes will help us to be more 
watchful, more positive, than before. The Lord so arranges 
His providence as to teach us the necessary lessons. 
As we grow in the Divine likeness, we shall more 
and more come to love as God and Christ love— to love 
character, to love the principles of righteousness. We 
have never seen God or Christ with our physical eyes, 
yet we love them above all else. (1 Peter 1:8.) We 
have never seen the Apostle Paul, or the Apostle John, yet 
we love them; for we know their characters are lovable 
and worthy of admiration. We love the personality 
which shines from their writings, the beauty of their 
spirit. We love St. Paul because he counted all things 
but loss and dross that he might win Christ and be found 
in Him. We are to love whatever is good and noble and 
worthy, and in proportion as it is so. 

What do we love in each other? Is it the shape of the 
head, the symmetry of the features, the cut or style of 
the clothing? Oh, no! We love one another in proportion 
as we see the Master's likeness in each other. If 
one is much like Jesus, we love such a one all the more. 
This is the Heavenly, the spiritual love. This is the kind 
of love which we are to cultivate day by day. All other 
affections are to be entirely secondary. Let our love and 
esteem be for the things that are highly esteemed in the 
sight of God; let these be more beautiful to us than all 
else, that we may become like unto our Father in Heaven. 



R5907 : page 165 

"THE KING IN HIS BEAUTY" 

"Thine eyes shall see the King! The very same 
Whose love shone forth upon the curseful tree. 

Who bore thy guilt, who calleth thee by name; 
Thine eyes shall see! 

"Thine eyes shall see the King! The Mighty One, 
The Many-crowned, the Light -enrobed; and He 

Shall bid thee share the Kingdom He hath won; 
Thine eyes shall see! 

"And in His beauty! Stay thee, mortal song, 
The 'altogether lovely' One must be 

Unspeakable in glory— yet ere long 
Thine eyes shall see! 

"Yes! though the land be 'very far' away, 
A step, a moment, ends the toil for thee; 

Then changing grief for gladness, night for day. 
Thine eyes shall see!" 



R5907 : page 166 

THE PHILIPPIAN JAILER 
-JUNE 18.-ACTS 16:16-40.- 

AN EXPERIENCE WITH EVIL SPIRITS-SAD CONDITION OF A 
SLAVE GIRL-HER ENRAGED OWNERS REVENGE THEMSELVES ON 
ST. PAUL AND SILAS-IGNORING THE FACTS IN THE 
CASE, THEY RAISED FALSE CHARGES-THE MISSIONARIES 
BEATEN AND IMPRISONED-SINGING PRAISES TO GOD 
UNDER ADVERSE CONDITIONS-A WELL-TIMED EARTHQUAKE- 
JAILER CONVERTED-THE MAGISTRATES, AFTER LEARNING 
THE TRUTH REGARDING THE PRISONERS, MADE AMENDS. 

"Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, 

and thou slialt be saved."— Verse 31. 

WHILE the missionaries were day by day passing 
from Lydia's home to the place of worship, 
outside of the city gate, they were met 
repeatedly by a young woman known in 
Philippi as a Pythoness, or Sibyl— a fortune-teller. 
She was a slave girl possessed by an 
evil spirit— one of the fallen angels— the 
spirit working through her, divining, or giving 
intelligence of lost articles, telling fortunes, 
foretelling future events, etc. She 

was evidently well known to all the people; and the exercise 
of her profession brought large income to a joint-stock 
company that owned her— apparently a syndicate 
of influential men. 
For several days, as the missionaries went to and from 

R5908 : page 166 

the home of Lydia, attending to the Lord's work, this 

slave girl followed them, shouting, "These be the servants 

of the Most High God, which show unto us the way of 

salvation!" Of course, the girl did not know St. Paul and 

his companions; but the evil spirits did. To what extent 

they had forecast the results we may not know definitely, 

but quite possibly what occurred was what they had premeditated; 

namely, that the Apostle would cast out the 

evil spirit, and that this would bring upon the missionaries 

and their converts a violent attack from the owners of 

the girl and their friends, and all whom they could arouse 

to a frenzy of excitement, of wrath and of rioting. 

It is also possible that the evil spirit may simply have 
told the truth without considering the possibility that the 
Apostle might command it to come out of the woman— 
perhaps supposing that he would be rather pleased with a 
testimony from any quarter. But we read that St. Paul 
was grieved as day after day this testimony was given— 
not that he was grieved that a testimony was made regarding 
the Truth, but that it should come from such a 



source; for he knew that the evil spirit would have no 
respect for the Truth. Any of the fallen angels who 
would have respect for God and for the principles of 
righteousness would not seek to obsess humanity when 
they knew that such obsession would be to their injury 
and contrary to the Divine will. 

Some teachers will probably suggest that this woman 
had hysteria, or that she was somewhat demented. But 
either thought is out of accord with the facts in the case 
as Scripturally set forth, and is quite contrary to the 
words of the Apostle. St. Paul said not a word to the 
young woman, assuming that she was not accountable. 
He addressed the evil spirit as such, and in the name of 
Jesus commanded it to come out of the woman— just as 
our Lord and the Apostles under His instruction had 
frequently cast out these evil spirits.— Mark 5:1-17; 
Matthew 10:1; Luke 10:17, etc. 

THE REVENGE OF THE SYNDICATE 

Just as the owners of the swine were angry with our 
Lord because of the loss of their swine when the legions 
of demons cast out of the man had entered into the animals, 
so it was with the owners of the slave girl. We 
can imagine what consternation was aroused amongst 
them when they found not only that their source of gain 
for the future was gone, but that the large sum of money 
invested in this girl was lost; for such spirit-possessed 
slaves had a high market value. They became desperately 
angry. Nothing will so greatly move men as love or 
selfishness; and under present conditions selfishness moves 
the vast majority with intense power. The syndicate had 
no hope of getting the evil spirit back into the slave; and 
so they must have revenge upon those who had brought 
financial loss to them. 

There is much of this spirit abroad in the world today. 
As long as the Truth and the Lord's servants quietly go 
their way, the world will generally be too busy with its 
own affairs to molest them. But as soon as any perceive 
that truth and righteousness are inimical to their interests 
and prospects, their opposition becomes intense. But we 
do not consider it to be the chief business of the Lord's 
people to stir up the animosity of the world and thus to 
bring persecution upon themselves. As a rule it is best 
that we leave the world to watch its own affairs, while 
we preach the Gospel, not using it as a sledge-hammer 
to break men's hearts, but as the Message of joy, peace, 
love and blessing to those whose hearts, under Divine 
providence, have already been broken, and who have ears 
to hear the Message of the Grace of God. 

Very generally the Apostles pursued as smooth a 
course as principle would permit; and in this instance St. 
Paul very evidently acted under special guidance of the 
Lord. The Apostle's general instruction to the Church is, 
"As much as lieth in you, live peaceably with all men." 
(Romans 12:18.) The thought is. Do not go out of your 



way to stir up trouble; but if the Lord in His providence 
permits trouble to arise, be courageous and full of faith 
in Him who has permitted it, that He will overrule it 
for good and to our ultimate benefit. 

Evidently the owners of the Pythoness had influence; 
for they succeeded quickly in arousing a mob determined 
to have revenge upon St. Paul and Silas. The two missionaries 
were carried before the rulers at the market place. 
There the syndicate ignored the truth of the matter 
and raised spurious charges, claiming that the prisoners 
were teaching a religion contrary to the laws of Rome, 
and thus likely to raise sedition. This was contrary to 
the truth; for the Lord's servants went, according to law, 
outside of the city gates for their worship. 

However, under the circumstances, the false charge 
was sufficient to bring down upon the Lord's representatives 
the severest penalties which their judges could inflict. 
The magistrates, who held office especially for the 
preventing of rioting and for preserving order, were 
greatly excited and rent their garments as an indication 
of their distress and dissatisfaction that such a disturbance 
should be brought to their city. The thought was 
that the men against whom the populace would thus rise 
up must be guilty of something and thus deserving of 
punishment. They knew not that the evil spirits had to 
do with the arousing of the riot. As St. Paul elsewhere 
expressed it, "We contend not with flesh and blood 
[merely], but with wicked spirits in influential positions." 

THE MISSIONARIES IMPRISONED 

To satisfy the mob and to restore peace quickly, the 
magistrates ordered the missionaries to be beaten, presumably 
with rods, and then committed them to prison. 
Alas, what a reward for missionary effort! What a recompense 
for sacrificing their lives for the Lord and the 
Truth— that these noble men should be evil-spoken of. 
evil-thought of and evilly treated! 

Let us remember that the God who changes not is our 

R5908 : page 167 

God, and that He has supervision of the interests of the 
Church today as then. Let us remember that He requires 
of us today, as of those missionaries of old, that we be 
willing to represent Him, willing to endure hardness and 
thus to make full proof of our ministry— of our service 
for Christ and His Message. Would it require faith on 
the part of the missionaries to accept such experiences as 
providential and not to think of these as evidences of the 
Lord's disfavor or neglect? So must we learn similar 
lessons of faith in the School of Christ, and be glad to 
follow in the footsteps of Jesus and the Apostles. We 
must learn to rejoice in tribulations as in prosperity. 

The prison was constructed with outer cells, more or 
less accessible to the light and to air, and with an inner 



or central dungeon for the most vicious criminals. It was 
into this inner prison that St. Paul and Silas were thrust, 
and their feet made fast in the stocks. It was under these 
unfavorable circumstances, with their backs raw and 
bleeding from the scourging, that these faithful brethren 
were so filled with the spirit of rejoicing that they gave 
vent to their feelings in hymns of thankfulness for the 
privilege of suffering in connection with the Lord's work 
and of enduring tribulations for righteousness' sake. 

We can readily see that nothing less than a strong, 
living faith in God enabled these two missionaries to feel 
that their adversities endured for the sake of the Gospel 
meant to them the Divine approval, if rightly received. 
They realized that their trying experiences were but "light 
afflictions" which, under Divine providence, would work 
out for them a far more exceeding and eternal weight of 
glory. Only this enabled these mistreated men to triumph 
in their hour of distress and to praise God for the privilege 
of suffering as members of the Body of Christ, filling 
up a share of the sufferings of Christ in order that by 
and by they might also share His glory as members of 
His Body— members of the great antitypical Moses, the 
Mediator of the New Covenant.— Col. 1:24; Acts 3:22. 

These things were written for our instruction, that 
we, beholding the faithfulness of others, might be encouraged. 
Our covenant is the same as theirs, and theirs 
was the same as our Lord's; for the sufferings of Christ 
are one, however varied in character, and the glories to 
follow will be one, although the sharers will differ as star 
differeth from star in glory. The greater the sufferings 
endured faithfully, uncomplainingly, rejoicingly, the 
greater will be the reward in the Kingdom of our Father 
and of our Lord and Savior. 

A WELL-TIMED EARTHQUAKE 

Whilst the missionaries were singing, an earthquake 
shock was experienced which jarred the walls, loosed 
the staples of the chains wherewith they were bound, and 
released the bars whereby their prison doors were held 
in place. The jailer, finding the doors open, supposed 
that the prisoners had escaped. Knowing that he would 
be held responsible, he drew his sword and was about to 
commit suicide, when St. Paul called to him and said, 
"Do thyself no harm. We are all here." 

By this time the jailer was fully convinced that the 
missionaries committed to his care were remarkable men 
—not ordinary criminals. Possibly, indeed, he had some 
knowledge of demonism and obsession, and had heard that 
by word of mouth one of these men had spoiled a supposedly 
Divine oracle, by exercising some superior power. 
At all events he was now ready to care for these prisoners 
and to hear the Message of the Love of God. 

Presumably he first made the prison secure, the while 
thinking over these matters, and then brought the missionaries 
into his own living quarters in the prison. He 



attended to their comfort, and meantime heard from them 
something respecting their mission-respecting Jesus the 
Messiah and His death as the world's Redeemer. The 
jailer was convicted of sin. He realized in a general way 
at least that all mankind are sinners, aliens, separated 
from God by wicked works. He longed for a realization 
of forgiveness of his own sins and for a reconciliation 
with his Creator; and he perceived that these missionaries 
could help him. Hence he inquired, "What must I do 
to be saved?" What must I do to come into relationship 
with God, that I, like you, might be able to realize His 
loving care in all of my affairs; that I, like you, might be 
able to glory in tribulation and to realize that under 
Divine providence all things will work together for my 
good now and hereafter? 

The answer came promptly: "Believe on the Lord 
Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, and thy house." 
Taking this statement as a text, the missionaries explained 
to the jailer and his household some of the philosophy of 
the Divine Plan of Atonement— the death of Jesus, the 
Just for the unjust; the blessing that in due time is to 
reach Adam and his race through the resurrection processes 
and the privilege now of hearing and accepting the 
Divine call to joint-heirship with Jesus as His "members" 
in the sufferings of the present and in the glory to follow. 

THE JAILER CONVERTED 

The Truth-seed sank into good soil. Those present 
believed and gratefully accepted the privilege of discipleship 
—to suffer for Christ's sake. Forthwith they were 
baptized, thus symbolizing their death to the world, to sin 
and to self, and their desire to walk in newness of life 
as members of The Christ. How the missionaries must 
have realized that they were as providentially directed to 
the jail by the injustice of the magistrate as they had 
been previously guided to the riverside prayer meeting! 
Thus their faith was strengthened. They were willing to 
endure hardness with patience and joy for the sake of 
the great privilege of carrying the Good Tidings to others. 

According to some standards it was now high time 
for these missionaries to strike for an increase of salary 
and a parsonage, and especially to strike against any 
further persecution, and to tell the Lord that they had had 
enough along the lines of self-sacrifice. But the effect 
was just the opposite. They were the more encouraged 
to go on, to endure still further sufferings. 

As followers of Jesus, we must see to it that our experiences 
tally with those of the Master and His Apostles. 
We must neither look for any other kind of experiences 
nor be satisfied unless we find opportunities of suffering 
for the Truth's sake. We may be assured that, although 
times are somewhat changed, our Lord was quite right 
when He declared through His Apostle, "All that will live 
godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution." (2 Timothy 3: 12.) 
It may be in his own home and family or in 



the Church or from the world; for if he is faithful in 
letting his light shine he will not escape. 

If, therefore, any one of the Lord's people is escaping 
persecution, he should feel fearful of his condition and 
should make careful examination as to whether he is 
faithful to all the privileges and opportunities that he can 
find. This does not mean, however, that we should seek 
persecution in the sense of doing foolish things or of 
doing proper things in a foolish manner. But it does 
mean that we should not shrink from the responsibility 
of proper conduct because of fear of consequences. Fear 
is one of the most subtle foes of the people of God. It 
should be offset by trust, by faith in God. 

R5908 : page 168 

COMPANIONS IN SUFFERING 

The record declares that St. Paul alone rebuked the 
evil spirit. Thus he alone was responsible for the tumult 
which led to the imprisonment of himself and Silas. We 
can readily perceive how Silas might improperly have 
taken a course in opposition. He might have publicly 
reprimanded St. Paul, and at least partially have joined 
with the multitude and thus have escaped arrest, beating 
and imprisonment. We are glad that it was not so with 
Silas, that he was a worthy companion to the noble St. 
Paul. He recognized that the Lord's blessing was upon 
the Apostle, and that St. Paul was being especially used 
of the Lord, and that therefore whatever experiences 
came to them the Lord was both able and willing to overrule 
for their good. 

Thus Silas was privileged to share in the beating, in 
the songs and in the conversion of the jailer. Surely it 
brings a great blessing to have faith in the Lord, and to 
be obedient to Divine providences rather than to be too 
worldly-wise, too cautious and self-seeking. In Hebrews 10:32,33, 
the Apostle mentions some who "endured a great 
fight of afflictions," and some who were merely their companions 
in the shame without experiencing the same losses. 
He points out that God appreciates faithfulness in either 
of these respects and will duly give a reward. Let us be 
faithful to the Lord— followers of His leading and 
sharers of His blessings. 

THE PLIGHT OF THE MAGISTRATES 

The next morning the rulers, having learned something 
of the circumstances of the preceding night, ordered 
the release of the missionaries. Evidently they realized 
that they had no just cause against St. Paul and Silas. 
The beating and the imprisonment of the two were merely 
to satisfy the public clamor— just as when Pilate similarly 
commanded that our Lord be beaten, not as a satisfaction 
of justice, but to appease the anger of the multitude. 
But St. Paul had not been a lawyer for nothing. 



The night before, he had probably attempted to tell the 
rulers that he and Silas were Roman citizens and had the 
right to demand a fair trial before receiving any kind of 
punishment. But the clamor of the mob was probably so 
great that their protests were unheard. 

When the order for their release reached the prison, 
the missionaries sent word to the rulers that they were 
Roman citizens; and that Roman law had been violated 
in three particulars in their case; (1) They had been 
beaten; (2) This had been done publicly; (3) This was 
reprehensible in that they had not been legally condemned. 

ST. PAUL'S SOUNDNESS OF MIND 

These charges against the rulers might have gone hard 
against them. Hence it is not to be wondered at that 
they came to the prison, as the Apostle requested, and 
brought the missionaries forth publicly, thus giving evidence 
to the people that they conceded that an injustice 
had been done on the previous night. This would avoid 
leaving a reproach upon the faith at Philippi. The public 
could not say to the disciples, "Your teachers were tried 
and expelled from this city, and forbidden to return." 

On the other hand, notice the spirit of compromise. 
St. Paul and Silas did not insist on going forth to preach 
in public, and demand that they be given legal protection 
in the exercise of their liberties. On the contrary, they 
concluded that they had accomplished all in their power, 
and that God's providence was now directing them elsewhere. 
They acted upon the Master's counsel, "When 
they persecute you in one city, flee ye into another." 

Tims a peaceful compromise was effected, by which 
the magistrates were relieved from further difficulty and 
the missionaries were honorably led forth as men who 
had done nothing amiss, but who had concluded that in 
the interests of peace they would quit the city, although 
their rights as Roman citizens would have permitted them 
to remain. Some of the Lord's people make the mistake 
of not sufficiently insisting on their rights; and others err 
in the opposite way of insisting too much for their earthly 
rights. Here in St. Paul's case we find illustrated the 
proper course— "the spirit of a sound mind." He insisted 
upon such of his rights as were reasonable and necessary 
for the Lord's Cause; but he freely relinquished other 
rights in the interest of peace, in harmony with his covenant 
of sacrifice and with the Scriptures. 

Before separating the missionaries returned to the 
home of Lydia, where they met the brethren and comforted 
them. What they said for the comfort of the 
brethren is not difficult to imagine. They surely recounted 
the joy which they had experienced in suffering for 
Christ's sake and told how the Lord had overruled their 
trials, difficulties, sufferings and imprisonment for good, 
that thereby the jailer and his family were added to the 
number of brethren. 

Whoever has read the New Testament properly has 



surely noticed the spirit of brotherhood therein recorded 

as prevalent amongst those accepted of the Lord as members 

of the Household of Faith. And whoever intelligently 

comes into contact with those who are now rejoicing 

in the Present Truth must surely note the same spirit 

of brotherhood in a remarkable degree. 



R5908 : page 168 

FINALLY, BRETHREN, THINK! 
-JUNE 25.-QUARTERLY REVIEW- 

THE POWER OF THE MIND, THE WILL-AS A MAN THINKETH, 
SO IS HE-THE POWER OF EVIL THOUGHTS-THE POWER OF 
GOOD THOUGHTS-THINK OF PURE THINGS-NOT EARTHLY 
THINGS -OF THINGS OF GOOD REPORT-OF THINGS OF 
VALUE-OF PRAISEWORTHY THINGS-EACH RESPONSIBLE 
FOR CARE OF HIS OWN MIND. 

Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever 
things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever 
things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, 
whatsoever things are of good report: if there be 
any virtue, and if there be any praise, 
think on these things."— Philippians 4:8. 

COMPARATIVELY few, even of educated and 

scientific people, seem to appreciate the great 

power of the mind and its potent influence 

upon all the affairs of our lives. Few mothers 

realize that their very thoughts have to do 

with the molding of their unborn children 

—giving them either helpful or injurious 

dispositions. Few fathers realize this, or 

seek to cooperate with their wives in the 

bringing forth of noble children— by stirring 

up the minds of their wives during pregnancy with 

noble thoughts, elevating ambitions, high ideals, with 

things of beauty, grace, art, purity, reverence, spirituality. 

When people come to know the power of the mother's 

mind for good or for evil toward the children, it will undoubtedly 

work a radical change in many homes; for it 

is our conviction that the majority of people would rather 

do right than do wrong, and that one of their chief difficulties 

and stumbling blocks is ignorance. 

But while interested in mankind in general, we are 
never to forget that the Bible is addressed to the children 
of God, who have entered into a special covenant with 

R5908 : page 169 

Him through the Lord Jesus Christ, and who have become 
New Creatures through the begetting power of the 
Holy Spirit. The world will be taught and developed 



during the Millennium. But now, in the present life, the 
only opportunity for development is on the part of those 
who have received the begetting of the Holy Spirit, and 
whose great and only hope is a perfecting on the spirit 
plane in the Resurrection of the Just. As much, therefore, 
as we feel interested in the world, it is the Christian's 
duty to follow the example of the Lord and to be interested 
especially in his fellows, his brethren in Christ. 

THE POWER OF THOUGHT 

The Apostle's exhortation may be taken as a personal 
one by every Christian, and also as a general exhortation 
to the whole Church— that they seek to build one another 
up in the most holy faith and along the lines indicated in 
our Golden Text. 

Each individual is responsible for the care of his own 
mind. In becoming Christians we gave our wills to the 
Lord, agreeing that henceforth we would not follow the 
dictates of our wills; but that, ignoring these, we would 
follow the guidance of the Lord's will. It was on this 
condition that the Lord received us into His family; and 
any failure to follow these terms is contrary to our covenant. 
The Lord through His Word gives us the necessary 
instructions as to what His will is; and these messages, 
received into good and honest hearts, bring forth 
fruitage of obedience, and this leads on to the development 
of the fruits of the spirit. 

"As a man thinketh in his heart, so is he." Many 
Christians have learned to govern their actions, to refrain 
from carnal strife. Many have learned to control their 
tongues in a measure, remembering that the same tongue 
with which we praise God could be used in doing injury 
to fellow creatures, as the Apostle points out. (James 3:1-10.) 
But restraint of conduct and of word is difficult 
unless the mind, the will, be brought into the line with 
the will of God. Hence God shows us the reason for 
what He requires, and sets before us exceeding great and 
precious promises. These are intended to work in us— 
to work in our minds and to work out in our words and 
actions the Lord's good pleasure, the Lord's will. 

QUESTIONS FOR SELF-EXAMINATION 

The Apostle, in our Golden Text, points out the proper 
course for us to take in getting control of ourselves, our 
thoughts, our words and our conduct. Every thought 
should be challenged; for if an evil thought or a selfish 
thought or a mean thought, a depraved thought, be admitted, 
it will germinate and bring forth a great defilement, 
which will affect our words and our conduct, and 
will extend to others. We may learn to do the challenging 
readily, even along the comprehensive lines which the 
Apostle lays down in this lesson. What at first may require 
considerable time for decision will by and by be 
decided almost instantly: 



(1) Is the thought which is seeking consideration in 
our mind an honorable one? If so, it may pass in and 

be entertained. If not, it should be immediately resented 
and driven out from the mind as an evil influence. 

(2) Is the thought suggested a pure one— not sensual, 
not selfish? If so, if it pass these examinations, it 
may pass on for further consideration. If by these it 
fails to prove its purity, it should be immediately resented 
as a thought likely to do great harm— as would the entrance 
into our home of things infected with a plague. 

(3) Is the thought lovely? Does it appertain to 

things that are lovable? Does it excite lovable influences, 
or is it identified more or less with hate, resentment, anger, 

R5909 : page 169 

malice? If lovely, it may pass on. If not, it must be immediately 
expelled, not permitted to go further, to do 
harm to ourselves and to others. 

(4) Is it reputable? This cannot mean: Is the thing 
well spoken of by the world? For the Apostle himself 
and our Lord Jesus were reviled by the world, who said 

all manner of evil against them falsely. The word reputable 
here must be taken to mean that which would be 
thought well of by all reputable people, if they knew and 
understood everything connected with the thought. 

(5) Has the thought any virtue, or is it in any sense 
of the word praiseworthy? If so, it may be admitted. 
If not, it should be repelled; for even if it be blameless 
otherwise, the fact that it is not of any value is a reason 
for its rejection. We have no time and no place for 
things that are merely not bad. We desire to have in 
our hearts and our minds things that are positively good, 
helpful, beneficial in some way. Otherwise, the thought 
should be repelled as a mere cumberer of the ground of 
our hearts, of our minds, needed for profitable things. 
Much novel reading is of this character— not evil, but 
not advantageous, not upbuilding. 

Whatever we may be naturally, the people of God who 
follow the instructions of the Divine Word surely become 
noble people, helpful people, possessed of the spirit of a 
sound mind; and these things will be only a part of their 
preparation for the Kingdom and for the great work then 
to be entrusted to them as the servants of God under 
their Redeemer and Head. 



R5909: page 169 

THE SCOPE OF THE ABRAHAM IC COVENANT 

Question.— Which is the greater, the Abrahamic Covenant 
or the New Covenant? 

Answer.— The Abrahamic Covenant is an all-embracing 
arrangement. Everything that God has done and will 



yet do for our race is included in that Abrahamic Covenant. 

The Law Covenant of Israel was added to this 

Covenant "because of trangression." Although only a 

typical arrangement, nevertheless the Law Covenant developed 

a certain faithful class, to be made "princes in 

all the earth" during the Millennial Age. This Covenant 

was represented by Hagar; and her son Ishmael 

represented the nation of Israel. (Galatians 4:21-31.) 

The Christ, the New Creation class, was represented in 

Isaac, Sarah's son. Sarah, Abraham's first wife, represented 

that part of the Abrahamic Covenant which pertained 

to the Spiritual Seed, the New Creation, that which 

we sometimes speak of as the Sarah Covenant. This 

Sarah Covenant— the Grace Covenant, the Covenant of 

Sacrifice (Psalm 50:5)— brings forth the Isaac class, 

the Church, head and Body. 

Even as Isaac was not born after the flesh in the 
ordinary sense (Abraham and Sarah being too old naturally), 
but was a special creation, so with The Christ 
company, the Church. This "Isaac" class is developed 
as a distinctly new creation, formed from members of the 
fallen human race. The Divine invitation to these is to 
present their bodies living sacrifices. They sacrifice their 
human nature that they may attain with their Head, the 
antitypical "Isaac" the Divine nature— something never 
before offered. After this New Creation is completed, 
the blessing indicated in God's Promises to Abraham will 
reach all the families of the earth. It will teach them, 
first through the "Isaac" Seed, the New Creation, and 
secondly, through the Ancient Worthies developed in the 
Ages preceding this Age, under God's typical arrangements. 

All kindreds and families of the earth will be blessed 

R5909 : page 170 

by the privilege or opportunity to become children of Abraham, 
children of God, whom Abraham represented in a 
figure. "I have made thee a father of many nations 
(Genesis 17:5; Romans 4: 17), said the Lord to Abraham 
—"In becoming thy seed shall all the nations of the 
earth bless themselves." These will be blessed under the 
New covenant, an arrangement whereby the Abrahamic 
Covenant will be fulfilled as relates to Israel and to all. 

The Abrahamic Covenant, then, embraces all the other 
Covenants, those Covenants being merely different features 
of God's arrangements by which the work implied 
in the great Abrahamic Covenant or Promise is to be 
accomplished. 

As we have elsewhere previously shown, Abraham took 
another wife, after the death of Sarah— Keturah. By her 
he had many sons and daughters. Thus the New Covenant 
is typed and its grand work of bringing many to life 
—to "the liberty of the sons of God."— Romans 8: 1 9,2 1 . 



R5909: page 170 

HARVEST GATHERINGS AND SIFTINGS 

MANY are the inquiries relative to the truths presented 

in the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES and 

THE WATCH TOWER, as to whence they came 

and how they developed to their present symmetrical 

and beautiful proportions. Were they 

the results of visions? Did God in some supernatural 

way grant the solution of these hitherto 

hidden mysteries of His Plan? Is the 

author of these writings more than an ordinary 

being? Does he claim supernatural wisdom or 

power? Or how comes this revelation of 

God's Truth? 

No, dear friends; we claim nothing of superiority; nor do 
we aspire to exalt ourself in the estimation of our brethren 
of the Household of Faith, except in the sense that the Master 
urged it, saying, "Whosoever will be chief among you let 
him be your servant." (Matthew 20:27.) Our position 
amongst men of the world and of the Nominal Church, is 
certainly far from exalted; for we are everywhere spoken 
against. We are fully content, however, to wait for exaltation, 
until the Lord's due time. (1 Peter 5:6.) In the words 
of the Apostle, we therefore answer, "Why look ye upon us, 
as though by our own power we had done these things?" 
We also are a man of like passions with yourselves, of like 
infirmities and frailties, earnestly striving by overcoming many 
besetments, discouragements, etc., to press along the line toward 
the Prize of our High Calling, and claiming only, as a 
faithful student of the Word of God, to be an index finger, as 
we have previously expressed it, to help you trace for yourselves 
upon the sacred page the wonderful Plan of God— no 
less wonderful to us, we assure you, than to yourselves. 

No, the truths we present, were revealed in visions 
and dreams or by God's audible voice; nor were 
they revealed all at once, but gradually, especially since 1870, 
and particularly since 1880. This present unfolding of Truth 
is not due to human ingenuity or acuteness of perception, but 
to the simple fact that God's due time has come; and if we 
did not speak, and no other agent could be found, the very 
stones would cry out. 

We give the following history, not only because we have 
been urged to give a review of God's leadings in the path 
of light, but especially because we believe it to be needful that 
the truth be modestly told, in order that misapprehensions and 
prejudicial misstatements may be disarmed, and that our 
readers may see all along the way the Lord has helped 
and guided us. In so far as the names and views of others 
who have parted company with us may be associated with this 
history, we shall endeavor to bring forward only such points 
as are necessary to an understanding of our position and of 
the Lord's leadings. Nor can we name all the little points 
of Divine favor to which was tested, prayers were answered, 
etc., remembering that our Master and the early 



Church left no such example of boasting faith, but admonished 
otherwise, saying, "Hast thou faith, have it to thyself." 

We will not go back to tell how the light began to break 
through the clouds of prejudice and superstition which enveloped 
the world under Papacy's rule in the Dark Ages. The 
Reformation movement, or rather movements, from then until 
now, have done their share in bringing light out of darkness. 
But we will here confine ourselves to the consideration of the 
Harvest truths set forth in the publications of the THE WATCH 
TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY formerly called MILLENNIAL 
DAWN and ZION'S WATCH TOWER, now called STUDIES EST THE 
SCRIPTURES and THE WATCH TOWER. We begin the narrative 
at the year 1868, when Editor, having been a consecrated 
child of God for some years, and a member of the Congregational 
Church and of the Y.M.C.A., began to be shaken in 
faith regarding many long accepted doctrines. 

SKETCH OF DEVELOPMENT OF PRESENT TRUTH 

Brought up a Presbyterian, indoctrinated from the Catechism, 
and being naturally of an inquiring mind, I fell a ready 
prey to the logic of infidelity, as soon as I began to think 
for myself. But that which at first threatened to be the utter 
shipwreck of faith in God and the Bible, was, under God's 
providence, overruled for good, and merely wrecked my confidence 
in human creeds and systems of Bible misinterpretations. 

I was led gradually to see though each of the creeds 
contained some elements of truth, they were, on the whole, 
misleading and contradictory of God's Word. Among other 
theories, stumbled upon Adventism. Seemingly by accident, 
one evening I dropped into a dusty, dingy hall in Allegheny, 
Pa., where I had heard that religious services were held, to 
see if the handful who met there had anything more sensible 
to offer than the creeds of the great churches. There, for the 
first time, I heard something of the views of Second Adventism, 
by Jonas Wendell, long since deceased. Thus I confess 
indebtedness to Adventists as well as to other denominations. 

Though his Scripture exposition was not entirely clear, 
and though it was very far from what we now rejoice in, 
it was sufficient, under God, to reestablish my wavering faith 
in the Divine inspiration of the Bible, and to show that the 
records of the Apostles and the Prophets are indissolubly 
linked. What I heard sent me to my Bible to study with 
more zeal and care than ever before, and I shall ever thank 
the Lord for the leading; for although Adventism helped me 
to no single truth, it did help me greatly in the unlearning of 
errors, and thus prepared me for the Truth. 

FIRST FAINT GLEAM OF GOD'S PLAN 

I soon began to see that we were living somewhere near 
the close of the Gospel Age, near the time when the Lord 
declared that the wise, watching ones of His children should 
come to clear knowledge of His Plan. At this time, myself 
and a few other Truth seekers in Pittsburg and Allegheny, 
formed a class for Bible study; and the period from 



1870 to 1875 was a time of constant growth in grace, in 
knowledge and in love of God and his Word. We came to 
see something of God's love, how it had made provision for 
all mankind, how all must be awakened from the tomb in 
order that God's loving Plan might be tested to them, and 
how all who will then exercise faith in Christ's redemptive 
work and will render obedience in harmony with their knowledge 
of God's will, might then, through Christ's merit, be 
brought back into full harmony with God, and be granted 
everlasting life. This we saw to be the Restitution work 
foretold in Acts 3:21. 

But though seeing that the Church was called to jointheirship 
with the Lord in the Millennial Kingdom, we had up 
to that time failed to see clearly the great distinction between 
the rewards of the Church now on trial and the reward of the 
faithful of the world after its trial, at the close of the Millennial 
Age— that the reward of the former is to be the glory 
of the spiritual. Divine nature, while that of the latter is to 
be the glory of Restitution— restoration to the perfection of 
human nature, once enjoyed in Eden by the head of the race. 

However, we were then merely getting the outlines of 
God's Plan and unlearning many cherished errors, the time 
for the clear discernment of the minutia not having fully 
come. And here I gratefully mention assistance rendered 
by Brothers George Stetson and George Storrs, the latter the 
Editor of The bible Examiner, both now deceased. The study 
of the Word of God with these dear brethren led step by 
step into greener pastures and brighter hopes for the world, 
though it was not until 1872, when I gained a clear view of 
our Lord's work as our Ransom-price, that I found the 
foundation of all hope of Restitution to lie in the doctrine. 

Up to that time, when I read the testimony that all in 
their grave shall come forth, etc., I yet doubted the full 
provision— whether or not it would be understood to include 
idiots and infants who had died without reaching any degree 
of understanding, beings to whom the present life and its 
experiences would seem to have been of little advantage. 
But when in 1872 I came to examine the subject of Restitution 
from the standpoint of the Ransom-price given by our 
Lord Jesus for Adam and consequently for all lost in Adam, 
it settled the matter of Restitution completely, and gave me 
the fullest assurance that ALL must come forth from their 
graves and be brought to a clear knowledge of the Truth 
and to a full opportunity to gain everlasting life through Christ. 

R5909:page 171 

Thus passed the years 1868-1872. The years following, to 
1876, were years of continued growth in grace and in knowledge 
on the part of the handful of Bible students with whom 
I met in Allegheny. We progressed from our first crude and 
indefinite ideas of Restitution to clearer understanding of 
the details; but God's due time for clear light had not yet come. 

During this time, too, we came to recognize the difference 
between our lord as "the man who gave Himself," and as 
the One who would come again, a spirit being. We saw that 



spirit beings can be present and yet invisible to men, just as 

we still hold and have set forth in STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 

Vol.2, Chapter 5. And we felt greatly grieved at the error 

of Second Adventists, who were expecting Christ in the flesh 

and were teaching that the world and all in it except Second 

Aventists would be burned up in 1873 or 1874 and whose 

time settings and disappointments and crude ideas generally 

of the object and manner of our Lord's coming brought more 

or less reproach upon us and upon all who longed for and 

proclaimed His coming Kingdom. 

CHRONOLOGY SEEN TO BE VALUABLE 

These wrong views so generally held of both the object 
and manner of Christ's Second Advent, led me to write a 
pamphlet: "The Object and Manner of the Lord's return," 
of which some 50,000 copies were published. 

It was about January of 1876 that my attention was especially 
drawn to the subject of prophetic time, as it refers 
to these doctrines and hopes. It came about in this way: 
I received a paper called. The Herald of the Morning, 
sent by its Editor, Mr. N. H. Barbour. When I opened it, 
I at once identified it with Adventism from the picture on 
its cover; and I examined it with some curiosity to see what 
time the Adventists would next set for the burning of the 
world. But judge of my surprise and gratification when I 
learned from its contents that the Editor was beginning to 
get his eyes open on the subjects that for some years had so 
greatly rejoiced our hearts in our class in Allegheny— that 
the object of our Lord's Return is not to destroy, but to 
bless all the families of the earth: and that His Coming 
would be thief-like, and not in flesh, but as a spirit being, 
invisible to men; and that the gathering of His Church and 
the separation of the "wheat" from the "tares" would progress 
in the end of this Age without the world's being aware of it. 

I rejoiced to find others coming to the same advanced 
position, but was astonished to find the statement very cautiously 
set forth, that the Editor of The Herald of the Morning 
believed the prophecies to indicate that the Lord was 
already present in the world unseen and invisible that the 
Harvest work of gathering the wheat and tares was already 
due; and that this view was warranted by the time prophecies 
which but a few months before he had supposed had failed. 

Here was a new thought: Could it be that the time 
prophecies, which I had so long despised, because of their 
misuse by Adventists, were really meant to indicate when 
the Lord would be invisibly present to set up His Kingdom?— 
a thing which I clearly saw could be known in no other way. 
It seemed, to say the least, a very reasonable thing to expect 
that the Lord would inform His people on the subject, especially 
as He had promised that the faithful should not be 
left in darkness with the world, and that although "the Day 
of the Lord" would come upon others as a thief in the night 
(stealthily, unawares), nevertheless it should not be so to the 
watchers, the earnest saints.— 1 Thessalonians 5:4. 

I recalled certain arguments used by my friend Jonas 



Wendell and by other Adventists to prove that 1873 would 
witness the burning of the world, etc.— the chronology of 
the world showing that the six thousand years from Adam 
ended with the beginning of 1873— and other arguments drawn 
from the Scriptures and supposed to coincide. Could it be 
that these time arguments, which I had passed by as unworthy 
of attention, contained as important truth which the 
Adventists had misapplied? 

AN IMPORTANT DISCOVERY 

Anxious to learn from any quarter, whatever God had 
to teach, I at once wrote to Mr. Barbour, informing him of 
my harmony on other points and desiring to know particularly 
why, and upon what Scriptural evidence, he held that 
Christ's presence and the Harvest of the Gospel Age dated 
from autumn of 1874. The answer showed that my surmise 
had been correct; namely, that the time arguments, 
chronology, etc., were same as used by Second Adventists 
in 1873. It also explained that Mr. Barbour and Mr. J. H. 
Paton, of Michigan, a worker with him, had been regular 
Second Adventists up to that time; and that when the date of 
1874 had passed without the world's being burned up, and 
without their seeing Christ in the flesh, they were for a time 
dumbfounded. They had examined the time prophecies which 
had seemingly passed unfulfilled, and had been unable to find 
any flaw. Therefore they began to wonder whether the time 
was right and their expectations were wrong— whether the 
views of Restitution and blessing to the world, which others 
were teaching, might not be the things to look for. 

It seemed that not long after their 1874 disappointment, a 
reader of The Herald of the Morning, who had a copy of 
the Emphatic Diaglott, noticed something in it which he 
thought peculiar-that in Matthew 24:27,37,39, the Greek 
word parousia, which in our Common Version is rendered 
"coming," is in the Diaglott translated "presence"— evidently 
the correct translation of the Greek. This was the clue; and 
following it, they had been led through prophetic time toward 
proper views regarding the object and manner of our Lord's 
Return, and then to the examination of the time when the 
things indicated in God's Word as related to Christ's Parousia 
should take place. Thus God leads His children often from 
different starting points of Truth. But where heart is 
earnest and trustful, the results must be to draw all together. 

There were no books nor other publications setting forth 
the time prophecies as then understood. So I paid Mr. Barbour's 
expenses to come to see me at Philadelphia (where I 
had business engagements during the summer of 1876), to 
show me fully and Scripturally, if he could, that the prophecies 
indicated 1874 as the date at which the Lord's presence 
and the Harvest began. He came; and the evidence satisfied 
me. Being a person of positive convictions, and fully consecrated 
to the Lord, I at once saw that the special times in 
which we live have an important bearing upon our duty and 
work as Christ's disciples; that since we are living in the 
time of the Harvest, the Harvest work should be done; and 



that Present Truth is the sickle by which the Lord would 
have us do a reaping work everywhere among His children. 

I inquired of Mr. Barbour as to what was being done by 
him and The Herald. He replied that nothing was being done; 
that nearly all the readers of the The Herald, being disappointed 
Adventists, had lost interest and stopped their subscriptions; 
and that thus, with money exhausted. The Herald might be 
said to be practically suspended. I told him that instead of 
being discouraged and giving up the work since his newly 
found light on Restitution (for when we first met, he had 
much to learn from me on the fulness of Restitution, based 
upon the sufficiency of the Ransom given for all, as I had 
much to learn from him concerning time), he should rather 
feel that now he had some "good tidings" to preach, such as 
he never had had before; and that his zeal should be correspondingly 
increased. At the same time, the knowledge of 
the fact that we were already in the Harvest period gave 
to me an impetus to spread the Truth such as I never had 
had before. I therefore resolved upon a vigorous campaign 
for the Lord and the Truth. 

THE BEGINNING OF THE HARVEST WORK 

I determined to curtail my business cares and give my 
time as well as my means to the great Harvest work. Accordingly, 
I sent Mr. Barbour back to his home with money 
and instructions to prepare in concise book form the Good 
Tidings so far as then understood, including the time features, 
while I closed out my Philadelphia business preparatory 
to engaging in the work, traveling and preaching. 

The little book of 196 pages, thus prepared, was entitled. 
The Three Worlds, and while it was not the first book to 
teach a measure of Restitution, nor the first to treat of time 
prophecy, it was, I believe, the first to combine the idea of 
Restitution with time prophecy. From the sale of this book 
and from my purse our traveling expenses were met. After 
a time I conceived the idea of adding another Harvest laborer, 
and sent for Mr. Paton, who promptly responded and whose 
traveling expenses were met in the same way. 

By noticing how quickly people seemed to forget what 
they had heard, it became evident to us that, while the 
meetings were useful in awakening interest, a monthly journal 
was needed to hold and develop that interest. It therefore 
seemed to be the Lord's will that one of us should 
settle somewhere and begin again the regular issuing of The 
Herald of the Morning. I suggested that Mr. Barbour do 
this, as he had experience as a type-setter, and could therefore 
do it more economically; while Mr. Paton and I would 
continue to travel and contribute to its columns as we should 
find opportunity. To the objection that type was now 
sold, and that the new subscriptions that would come in would 
not for a long time make the journal self-sustaining, I replied 
that I would furnish the money for purchasing type, 
etc., and leave a few hundred dollars in bank subject to Mr. 
Barbour's check, and that he should manage this as economically 
as possible, while Mr. Paton and I would continue 



to travel. This seemed to be the Lord's will in the 
matter, was done. 
It was after this, while a tour of the New England 

R5909 : page 172 

states that I met Mr. A. P. Adams, than a young Methodist 

minister, who became deeply interested and accepted the 

Message heartily during the week that I preached to his congregation. 

Subsequently I introduced him to little gatherings 

of interested ones in neighboring towns, and assisted 

otherwise, as I could, rejoicing in another who, with study, 

would soon be a colaborer in the Harvest field. About this 

time, too, I was much encouraged by the accession of Mr. 

A. D. Jones, then a clerk in my employ in Pittsburgh— a 

young man of activity and promise, who soon developed into 

an active and appreciated colaborer in the Harvest work, and 

is remembered by some of our older readers. Mr. Jones ran 

well for a time; but ambition or something else eventually 

worked utter shipwreck of his faith, and left us a painful 

illustration of the wisdom of the Apostle's words: "My 

brethren be not many of you teachers, knowing that we shall 

have a severer judgment. "—James 3:1, Diaglott. 

SIFTING AS WHEAT 

"Satan hath desired to have you, that he might sift you as 
wheat."— Luke 22:31. 

Until then all had run smoothly onward. We had been 
greatly blessed with the Truth, but not especially tested in 
our love and fidelity to it. But with the summer of 1878, the 
parallel in time to our Lord's crucifixion and His utterance 
of the above quoted words, the sifting began which has 
continued ever since, and which must, sooner or later, test 
every one who receives the light of Present Truth. 

"Think it not strange concerning the fiery trials which 
shall try you, as though some strange thing happened to you"; 
for "the fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is"— 
whether he has built his faith flimsily of wood, hay and 
stubble, instead of with the valuable stones of God's revealed 
Truth' or whether he has built it upon the shifting 
sands of human theories (Evolution, etc.) or has built it 
upon the solid rock, the Ransom, the only sure foundation, 
which God has provided. They who would build upon that Rock 
shall be saved personally, even though they may have built 
up an illogical faith, which the "fire" and shaking of this 
Day of trial shall overthrow and utterly consume. But they 
who have built upon any other foundation, whether they 
have used good or bad materials, are sure of complete wreck. 
-Luke 6:47-49; 1 Corinthians 3:1 1-15. 

The object of this trial and sifting evidently is to select 
all whose heart desires are unselfish, who are fully and unreservedly 
consecrated to the Lord; who are so desirous of 
having the Lord's will done, and whose confidence in His 
wisdom. His way and His Word is so great, that they refuse 
to be led away from the Lord's Word, either by the sophistries 



of others or by plans and ideas of their own. These 
in this sifting time will be strengthened and will increase 
their joy in the Lord and their knowledge of His plans, even 
while their faith is being tested by the falling into error of 
thousands on every hand.— Psalm 91:7. 

The sifting began: It was regarding St. Paul's statement 
(1 Corinthians 15:51,52), "We shall not all sleep, but 
we shall all be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an 
eye," etc. We still held the idea which Adventists, and indeed 
all Christians, hold, that at some time the living saints 
would be suddenly and miraculously caught away bodily. 
thenceforth to be with the Lord. And now our acquaintance 
with time prophecy led us to expect this translation 
of the saints at the point of time in this Age parallel to 
the Lord's resurrection; for many of the parallelisms between 
the Jewish and Christian dispensations were already seen by 
us, and formed one of the features of the little book above 
referred to— The Three Worlds. 

We did not see then as we do now (see STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES, Vol. III., Chapter 7), that April, 1878, marked the 
time for the beginning of the establishment of the Kingdom 
of God, by the glorification of all who were already asleep 
in Christ; and that the "change" which St. Paul mentions in 
1 Corinthians 15:51 is to occur in the moment of dying 
to all the class described, from that date onward through the 
Harvest period, until all the living members ("the feet") of 
the body of Christ shall have been changed to glorious spirit 
beings. But when, at that date, nothing occurred which we 
could see, a reexamination of the matter showed me that our 
mistake lay in expecting to see all the living saints changed 
at once, and without dying— an erroneous view shared in by 
the whole Nominal Church, one which we had not yet recognized 
as an error and discarded. 

Our present clear view was the result of the examination 
thus started. I soon saw that in the Apostle's words, "We 
shall not all sleep," the word sleep was not synonymous with 
die, though generally so understood; that, on the contrary, 
the expression "sleep" here used represents unconsciousness; 
and that the Apostle wished us to understand that from a 
certain time in the Lord's presence. His saints, though they 
would all die like men (Psalm 82:6,7), would not remain 
for any time unconscious, but in the moment of dying would 
be "changed," and would receive the spirit body promised. 
Throughout this Gospel Age, dying has been followed by 
unconsciousness, "sleep" This continued true of all true 
saints who fell "asleep in Jesus," up to the time when He 
took the office of King (Revelation 11:17), which we have 
shown was in the spring of 1878. See STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES, Vol. II., pp. 212-219. 

Not only did the king at that date awaken in His likeness 
all the members of his body, the Church, who slept, but for 
the same reason (the time for establishing the Kingdom having 
come) it is no longer necessary that the "feet" or last 
remaining members go into "sleep," or unconsciousness. On 
the contrary, each now, as he finishes his course, faithful 
unto death, will at once receive the Crown of Life, and being 



changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, cannot be 

said to sleep, or be unconscious at all. Here— 1878— Revelation 14:13 

became applicable: "Blessed are the dead who die 

in the Lord from henceforth." 

So this reexamination showed further light upon the 
pathway and became a good cause for encouragement, as 
evidencing the Lord's continued leading. 

DENYING THE RANSOM 

But while thus helped to clearer views and brighter 
hopes, and while I diligently endeavored to help others, the 
spring of 1878 proved far from a blessing to Mr. Barbour 
and to many under his influence. Rejecting the plain, simple 
solution presented above, Mr. Barbour seemed to feel that 
he must of necessity get up something new to divert attention 
from the failure of the living saints to be caught away. 
But alas, how dangerous it is for any man to feel too much 
responsibility and to attempt to force new light! To our 
painful surprise, Mr. Barbour soon after wrote an article 
for The Herald denying the doctrine of the Atonement- 
denying that the death of Christ was the Ransom-price for 
Adam and his race, saying that our Lord's death could no 
more avail for the payment of the penalty of Man's sins than 
would the sticking of a pin through the body of a fly and 
causing it suffering and death be considered by an earthly 
parent as a just settlement for misdemeanor in his child. I 
was astonished; for I supposed that Mr. Barbour had a clear 
understanding of the work of Christ as our Sin- Offering, 
our willing Redeemer, who gladly cooperating in the Divine 
Plan, gave Himself as the Ransom, or corresponding price, 
to meet the penalty upon Adam, that Adam and all his posterity 
might in due time go free from sin and death. 

A totally different thing indeed was the willing, intelligent, 
loving offering of our Redeemer, according to the Plan devised 
and revealed by Infinite Wisdom, from the miserable 
caricature of the Ransom offered in Mr. Barbour's illustration. 
Either I had given Mr. Barbour credit for clearer views 
than he ever had, or else he was deliberately taking off and 
casting away the Wedding Garment of Christ's righteousness. 
The latter was the only conclusion left; for he afterwards 
stated that he had previously recognized Christ's death as 
man's Ransom. 

Immediately I wrote an article for The Herald in contradiction 
of the error, showing the necessity that "One die for 
all," "the Just for the unjust"; that Christ had fulfilled all 
this as had been written; and consequently God could be 
just and forgive and release the sinner from the very penalty 
which He had justly imposed. (Romans 3:26.) I also wrote 
to Mr. Paton, calling his attention to the fundamental character 
of the doctrines assailed, and pointing out the time 
and circumstances all corresponded with the parable of the 
one who took off the wedding garment when just about to 
partake of the wedding feast.— Matthew 22:1 1-14. 

Mr. Paton replied that he had not seen the matter in so 
strong a light before; for Mr. Barbour had a strong, dogmatic 



way of putting things which had for the time over-balanced 
him. I urged that, seeing now the importance of 
the doctrine, he also wrote and article for The Herald, which 
in no uncertain tone would give his witness also for the 
precious blood of Christ. This he did. These articles appeared 
in The Herald from July to December, 1878. 

"THE WATCH TOWER" BEGUN 

It now became clear to me that the Lord would no longer 
have me assist financially, or be in any way identical with, 
anything which cast an influence in opposition to the fundamental 
principle of our holy religion. Therefore, after a 
most careful though unavailing effort to reclaim the erring. 
I withdrew entirely from The Herald of the Morning, and 
from further fellowship with Mr. Barbour. But a mere withdrawal 
I felt was not sufficient to show my continued loyalty 
to our Lord and Redeemer whose cause had thus been violently 

R5909 : page 173 

assailed by one in a position to lead the sheep stray— 
and in that position, too, very largely by my individual assistance 
and encouragement, when 1 believed him to be, in all 
sincerity, true to the Lord. I therefore understood it to be 
the Lord's will that I should start another journal, in which 
the standard of the Cross should be lifted high, the doctrine 
of the Ransom defended and the Good Tidings of great joy 
proclaimed as extensively as possible. 

Acting upon this leading of the Lord, I gave up traveling, 
and in July, 1879, the first number of THE WATCH TOWER 
AND HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE made its appearance. 
From the first, it has been a special advocate of the Ransom; 
and, by the grace of God, we hope it will be so to the end. 

For a time we had a most painful experience. The readers 
of THE WATCH TOWER and of The Herald were the same; 
and from the time the former started, and the supply of funds 
from this quarter for The Herald ceased, Mr. Barbour not 
only drew from the bank the money deposited by me and 
treated all he had in his possession as his own, but poured 
upon the Editor of THE WATCH TOWER the vilest of personal 
abuse, in order to prevent THE WATCH TOWER and the doctrine 
of the Ransom from having due influence upon the 
readers. This, of course, caused a division, as such things 
always do. The personal abuse, being regarded by some as 
true, had its intended effect of biasing the judgments of many 
on the subject of the Ransom; and many turned from us. 

OTHERS REPUDIATE THE RANSOM 

But the Lord continued His favor, which we esteem more 
valuable than the favor of the whole world. It was this 
time that Mr. Adams espoused the views of Mr. Barbour, and 
likewise forsook the doctrine of the Ransom. And true to 
our interpretation of the parable of the Wedding Garment, 
as given at the time, Mr. Barbour and Mr. Adams, having 



cast off the Wedding Garment of Christ's Righteousness, went 
out of the light into the darkness of the world on the subjects 
once so clearly seen; namely, the time and manner of 
the Lord's presence; from that time, onward, they expected 
Christ, Spring or Fall, down to the Spring of 1892, which 
was their latest disappointment, so far as we heard.* 



*Mr. Barbour died some years after this article first appeared 
in print. 



During this ordeal, or we might truly call it, battle for 
the cause of Christ, we had the earnest cooperation of Mr. 
Pat on, who, up to the Summer of 1881, was an appreciated 
colaborer and defender of the doctrine of coming blessings 
through Christ, based upon the Ransom for all given at Calvary. 
The book, the Three Worlds, having been for some 
time out of print, it seemed as if either another edition or a 
new book covering the same features should be gotten out. 

Mr. Paton agreed to get it ready for the press; and Mr. 
Jones offered to pay all the expenses incident to its printing 
and binding and to give Mr. Paton as many copies of the 
book as he could sell, as remuneration for his time spent 
in preparing the matter, provided I would agree to advertise 
it liberally and gratuitously in THE WATCH TOWER. (For this 
reason, Mr. Jones' address was, probably, the only one mentioned 
in our advertisement of it.) He well knew that there 
would be a demand for it if I should recommend it, and that 
his outlay would be sure to return with profit (for those 
books did not sell at such very low prices as we charge for 
the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES). I not only agreed to this, 
but contributed to Mr. Paton's personal expenses in connection 
with the publishing, and as well paid part of the printer's 
bill, at his solicitation. 

STILL FURTHER SIFTINGS 

In the end, I alone was at any financial loss in connection 
with the book. Day Dawn, the writer and the publisher both 
being gainers financially, while I did all the introducing by 
repeated advertisements. We need to give these particulars 
because of certain misrepresentations and one-sided and partial 
statements of acts which were afterward published and 
circulated in tract form by Mr. Paton, who also became later 
an advocate of the "other Gospel," of which the Cross of 
Christ is not the center, and which denies that He "bought us 
with His own precious blood." (Galatians 1:6-9.) Mr. Paton 
afterward published another book, which though called by 
the same name as the one I introduced, was on another and 
false foundation, which I could not and did not recommend, 
but which I esteemed misleading sophistry, tending to undermine 
the whole structure of the Christian system, yet retaining 
a sufficiency of the truths which we once held in common to 
make it palatable and dangerous to all not rooted and 
grounded upon the Ransom Rock. 

The false foundation which this later Day Dawn presented 
is the old heathen doctrine of Evolution, renamed, which not 



only denies the fall of man, but, as a consequence, all necessity 

of a redeemer. It claimed on the contrary, that not by 

Redemption and Restitution to a lost estate, but by progressive 

evolution, or development, man has risen and is still to 

rise from the lower condition in which he was created until, 

by his own good works, he ultimately reaches the Divine nature. 

Mr. Paton claimed that our blessed Lord Himself was 

a degraded and imperfect man, whose work on earth was to 

crucify a carnal nature (which it was claimed He possessed), 

and to thus show all men how to crucify their carnal or sinful 

propensities. 

And here we remark that the darkness and degradation 
which came upon the whole world in its fallen, cast-off condition, 
and which was only intensified by Papacy's priestcraft 
during the Dark Ages, when contrasted with the light of intelligence 
which God is now letting in upon the world, have 
gradually led men to esteem present intelligence as merely a 
part of the process of evolution. This view, as we have shown 
in STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. I., p. 162, though quite 
incorrect, is nevertheless the occasion of the great predicted 
falling away from the faith in the Bible during this Harvest 
period. (Psalm 91:7.) And few Christian people seem to be 
well enough grounded in the Truth to be able to withstand 
this trial of this "evil day," in which many will fall, while 
only the few will stand. 

The little history of the way Mr. Paton came to turn from 
us and from the Ransom to oppose that which he once clearly 
saw and advocated, is important; for it became the occasion 
of another sifting, or testing, of THE WATCH TOWER readers 
(by that time a much larger number), because Mr. Paton had 
been a respected brother and coworker with us, and because 
as a traveling representative of the THE WATCH TOWER and its 
doctrines (his expenses being met in part by WATCH TOWER 
subscriptions and renewals, as well as by money from myself), 
he was personally known to a larger number of our 
readers than was the Editor. It came about thus: 

In the year 1881, Mr. Barbour, still publishing The Herald, 
and still endeavoring to overthrow the doctrine of the Ransom, 
finding that on a preaching tour I had used a diagram 
of the Tabernacle to illustrate how Christ's sacrifice was 
typified in the sacrifices of typical Israel, wrote an article 
on the Atonement, in which he undertook to show that the 
sacrifices of the Day of Atonement typified almost anything 
else than what they do typify. I could readily see through 
the fallacy of his presentation, which made the bullock and 
the goat typify one thing in one verse and another thing in 
each other verse in which either was mentioned. But I well 
knew that people in general are not close reasoners, and that 
with the cares of life upon them, they are too apt to accept 
a seeming interpretation, without a critical examination of 
the words of the Scriptures and their context. 

After I had thought the matter all over, I reexamined the 
chapter. (Leviticus 16.) But while seeing the inconsistency 
of Mr. Barbour's interpretation, I could only confess that I 
did not understand it and could not give a connected interpretation 
which would fit all the details so plainly stated. 



and all of which must have a particular meaning. What 

could I do? those reading both The Herald and THE WATCH 

TOWER would probably be misled if not helped out of the 

difficulty; and to merely say the The Herald's interpretation 

was inconsistent with itself, and therefore a misinterpretation, 

would be misunderstood. Many would surely think that 

I opposed that view from a spirit of rivalry; for there are 

always people with whom everything resolves itself into personality, 

rivalry and party spirit, and such cannot understand 

others who take a higher and nobler view, and who think 

always and only of the Truth, regardless of persons. 

"TABERNACLE SHADOWS OF BETTER SACRIFICES" 

I went to the Lord with this, as with every trial; I told 
Him just how it seemed to me, how anxious I felt for the 
dear sheep, who having their appetites sharpened by the 
Truth were by their very hunger exposed to Satan's deceptions. 
I told him that I realized that He was the Shepherd 
and not I, but I knew also that he would be pleased 
with my interest in the sheep and my desire to be His servant 
and to declare the Truth, the Way and the Life to them; 
that I felt deeply impressed that if the time had come for 
the permission of a false view to deceive the unworthy, it 
must also be His due time to have the truth on the same 
subject made clear, that the worthy ones might be able to 
stand, and not fall from the Truth. 

Believing that the due time had come for the correct understanding 
of the meaning of the Jewish sacrifices which all 
Christians see were typical of "better sacrifices," and trusting 
that the Lord would grant the insight as soon as I got 
into the attitude of mind best fitted to receive the light, I 
prayed with confidence that if the Lord's due time had come, 
and if he were willing to use me as His instrument to declare 

R5909 : page 174 

the massage to His dear family, I might be able to rid my 
heart and mind of any prejudice that might stand in the way, 
and be led of His Spirit into the proper understanding. 

Believing that the prayer would be answered affirmatively, 
I went into my next morning prepared to study and 
write. The forenoon I spent in scrutinizing the text and every 
other Scripture likely to shed light upon it, especially the 
Epistle to the Hebrews, and in looking to the Lord for wisdom 
and guidance. But no solution of the difficult passage 
came. The afternoon and evening were similarly spent, and 
all of the next day. Everything else was neglected, and I 
wondered why the Lord kept me so long. But on the third 
day, near noon, the whole matter came to me as clear as the 
noonday sun— so clear and convincing and harmonious with 
the whole tenor of the Scriptures, that I could not question 
its correctness; and no one has ever yet been able to overthrow 
it. (The matter has been published in several editions 
in pamphlet form, under the title, TABERNACLE SHADOWS OF 
THE BETTER SACRIFICES, and can be had by addressing 



THE WATCH TOWER Office at Brooklyn.) 

Then I knew why the Lord had led me to the solution so 
slowly and cautiously. I needed a special preparation of 
heart for the full appreciation of all it contained; and I was 
all the more assured that it was not of my own wisdom; for 
if of my own, why would it not have come at once? I found 
that the understanding of that subject was bound to have a 
wide influence upon all our hopes and views of all truths— 
not that it overturned old truths or contradicted them, but 
that, on the contrary, it set them all in order and harmony, 
and straightened out little knots and twists. 

For instance, the doctrine of justification by Faith had 
always been more of less confused in my mind— as it has 
been in every mind— with the doctrine of sanctification, which 
calls for self-sacrifice and works. This was all made clear 
and plain at once; for the types show that we all, as sinners, 
needed first of all Christ's Ransom-sacrifice that we must 
appropriate its merit to ourselves by faith; that thus we are 
justified (reckoned free from sin), when we by faith accept 
of Christ's sacrifice on our behalf and consecrate ourselves 
to God. The type shows, too, that it is only after being thus 
cleansed in God's sight (by our acceptance of Christ's finished 
work as our Ransom-sacrifice, and the imputation of Christ's 
merit to us) that God is willing to accept our offering and receive 
us as joint-sacrificers with Christ: and that, if faithful 
to the end, following in His footsteps, we shall be granted 
the favor of joint-heirship in the kingdom. 

STILL FURTHER LIGHT ON THE SCRIPTURES 

Here I first saw that the great privilege of becoming joint-heirs 
with Christ and partakers with Him of the Divine nature 
is confined exclusively to those who would share with 
Him in His sacrifice and service of the Truth. And here, too, 
I saw for the first time that the Lord was the first of these 
sacrifices— the Sin- offering; consequently, that none of God's 
servants, the Prophets and faithful ones who lived and died 
before Christ, were priests after His order or sharers in the 
sacrifice with Him, even though some of them were stoned, 
others sawn asunder, and others slain with the sword, for the 
cause of God; that though they would get a good and great 
reward, they would belong to a separate class and order from 
those called to sacrifice and joint-heirship with Christ in the 
kingdom, at and since Pentecost. 

Here, too, I first saw that the Acceptable Day of the Lord 
signifies this Gospel Age, the time during which God will accept 
the sacrifice of any who come to Him through Christ, 
the great Sin-Offering; that when this Acceptable Day ends, 
the reward of joint-heirship and the Divine nature ends; and 
that when this great Day of Sacrifice, the Gospel Age (the 
real Day of Atonement, has closed, when all the members of 
the body of Christ shall have participated with Him in the 
sacrifice of their rights as justified men, and shall be glorified, 
then the blessings shall begin to come to the world— the Millennial 
blessings purchased for them by their Redeemer, according 
to the grace of God. 



This first brought me to a clear recognition of the distinction 
of natures— of what constitutes human nature, what 
constitutes angelic nature and what constitutes Divine nature, 
as shown in STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. Vol. I., Chapter X. 
And whereas I had used the word RESTITUTION in a general 
way to mean some sort of a blessed change, now under the 
clear light. I began to see that the great work of Restitution 
could mean only what the word implies— a restoration of that 
which was lost (Matthew 18:1 1), a restoration to the original 
condition from which man once fell. 

Then I saw that God's Plan when carried out, would not 
bring all of His creatures to the level of the Divine nature, 
but that He purposed to have an order of beings called 
angels, who though perfect, would always be of a different 
order, or nature, from the Divine nature; and that He likewise 
purposed to have a race of beings of the human nature 
of whom Adam was a sample, or pattern of whose future 
earthly home— Paradise— Eden was a sample, or pattern. I 
also saw that God purposed that Christ and His joint-sacrificers 
and joint-heirs to be God's instruments for blessing 
the fallen race and restoring them to the perfection enjoyed by 
Adam in Eden, a condition which God said was "very good." 
and in which man was an image of his Creator. 

When all these things unexpectedly shone out so brightly 
and clearly, I did not wonder that the Lord gave me several 
days waiting and preparation for the blessing; and to Him 
I rendered praise and thanks. All my faintness of heart and 
all fear of the bad effect of the wrong view fled before this 
evidence of the Lord's leading in the pathway that "shines 
more and more unto the perfect Day." I saw at once that 
these new developments would probably prove a stumbling-block 
to some, as well as a great blessing to others who were 
ready for them. Instead, therefore, of publishing it in the next 
WATCH TOWER, I determined to first present the matter privately 
to the more prominent brethren; remembering the 
Apostle Paul's course in a similar matter.— Galatians 2: 1,2. 

OTHERS WITHDRAW FROM US 

Accordingly, I sent the invitation and the money necessary 
for the traveling expenses to four of the more prominent 
brethren, requesting a conference. Mr. Paton, from Michigan, 
was one of the four, and the only one who rejected the 
first rays of light. Nor could he find any fault with the 
exegesis, though urged, as all were, to state anything which 
might seem inconsistent, or to quote any passage of Scripture 
thought to be in conflict. There were none; and every question 
only demonstrated the strength of the position. I therefore 
urged that what was beyond the criticism of those most 
familiar with the Plan of God must be the Truth and ought 
to be confessed and taught, especially when it arranged and 
ordered all the other features of the Truth so beautifully. 

I pointed out, too, how necessary it was to a logical holding 
of the Ransom to see just what this showed; namely, the 
distinctions of natures— that our Lord left a higher nature 
and took a lower nature, when He was made flesh, and that 



the object in that change of nature was that He might, as a 
man a perfect man, give Himself a Ransom for the first perfect 
man, Adam, and thus redeem Adam and all lost in him. 
I also showed how, as a reward for this great work. He was 
given the Divine nature in His resurrection— a nature still 
higher than the one He had left when He became a man. 

But either Mr. Paton's mental vision or his heart was 
weak; for he never took the step; and before long, he, too. 
forsook the doctrine of the Ransom. Yet he still used the 
word Ransom, while denying the idea conveyed by the word; 
nor could he give the word any other definition or otherwise 
dispute the correctness of the meaning which we attach to it 
—which may be found in any English dictionary and is true 
to the significance of the Greek word which it translates. 

Notwithstanding our best endeavors to save him, he drifted 
farther and farther away. I was obliged to refuse his articles 
for THE WATCH TOWER for the same reason that obliged me 
to refuse to spend the Lord's money entrusted to me to assist 
Mr. Barbour to spread the same pernicious theory. 

It was about this time that Mr. Jones informed me that 
the copies of the book. Day Dawn, which I had purchased 
last were all that were left; and announcing it so that no 
more orders for it might come to the TOWER Office, I took 
occasion to promise MILLENNIAL DAWN, which should present 
the Plan of the Ages in the clearer, more orderly manner 
made possible by the new light shed upon every feature of 
it by the lessons from the Tabernacle. 

About this time Mr. Paton concluded that he would publish 
another book under the name Day Dawn, revised to harmonize 
with his new views, which ignored the Ransom, 
ignored justification, and the need of either, and taught that 
all men will be everlastingly saved— not in any sense as the 
result of a sacrifice by Christ, but as the result of each one's 
crucifying sin in himself— the law under which the poor 
Jews tried to commend themselves to God, but which justified 
none. Many and severe were the calumnies heaped upon me 
because I exposed this change, told that the original Day Dawn 
was out of print, and that the new book was on a different 
foundation from that which I had recommended. 

FOOD FOR THINKING CHRISTIANS 

During this time I was busied with an immense work, 
known to some of you— the issue and circulation of over 
1,400,000 copies of two pamphlets: one entitled. FOOD FOR 
THINKING CHRISTIANS, and other, TABERNACLE TEACHINGS. 
The united matter of these two pamphlets was about the size 

R5909 : page 175 

of that of SCRIPTURES STUDIES, Vol I. Besides this, I was 
flooded with thousands of joyous and joy-giving letters, from 
those who had received and were reading the pamphlets thus 
distributed, and were asking questions and more reading 
matter. To add to our pressure, financial complications came; 
and thus for four years I was hindered from fulfilling my 



promise of MILLENNIAL DAWN, now called STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES. Nor is our promise of the complete set fulfilled 
even yet. Six volumes are out, but the Seventh Volume is 
not yet issued. During these years, however, we were 
struggling through an immense amount of labor (all cheerfully 
undergone for the sake of our Lord and His saints); 
and each year we hoped afresh to be able to gather the hours 
necessary to complete the first volume of MILLENNIAL DAWN. 
And the same great Adversary of the Truth later hindered 
other volumes of the series. 

Some who have The Three Worlds or the old edition of 
Day dawn would perhaps like to know my present opinion 
of them— whether I still think them profitable books to loan 
to truth-seekers. To this I reply. Certainly not; for the very 
immature views of God's Truth therein presented fall far 
short of what we now see to be God's wonderful Plan. 
Things which are now clear as noonday were then cloudy 
and mixed. The distinction between the perfect human 
nature, to which the obedient of the world will be restored 
during the Millennium, and the Divine nature, to which the 
Little Flock, the sacrificing Elect of the Gospel Age are soon 
to be exalted, were then unnoticed. All now so clear was 
then blurred, mixed and indistinct. Neither had we then 
seen the steps or planes, shown upon the Chart of the Ages 
in STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. I., which have assisted 
so many to distinguish justification and sanctification 
and to determine their present relationship to God. 

And the time reckonings which those books presented. 
lacking point and leaving the reader in doubt as to 
what the author is attempting to prove to them, tend only 
to confuse the mind and to give the impression that time 
prophecies are merely clues and serve no definite purpose or 
object. Hence, I answer most decidedly, I would not recommend 
or use either of those books to day. Once I was much 
less careful about what I circulated or commended, but I am 
learning every day to be more and more careful as to what 
sort of food I put before any of the Lord's hungry sheep. 
The lord has taught me that it is a responsible matter to be 
a teacher, even to the extent of circulating a book or paper. 
Even the book. Food for Thinking Christians (now out of 
print), published and circulated during the year 1881. 1 no 
longer commend, because it is less systematic and therefore 
less clear than later publications. 

STILL ANOTHER SIFTING 

Another chapter in our experience needs to be told, as it 
marks another shaking and sifting. Mr. A. D. Jones proposed 
to start another paper on the same lines as THE WATCH 
TOWER, to republish some of the simpler features of God's 
Plan and to be a sort of missionary and primary teacher. 
Knowing him to be clear on the subject of the Ransom, I 
bade him Godspeed and introduced a sample copy of his 
paper, Zion's Day Star (now for many years discontinued), 
to our nearly ten thousand readers, only, as it soon proved, 
to stumble some of them into rank infidelity, and others into 



the rejection on the Ransom. For though The Day Star 
steered a straight course for a few months, and maintained 
the same position as THE WATCH TOWER with reference to 
the Ransom, and for the same reason refused the no-ransom 
articles sent in for its columns by Mr. Paton, yet within one 
year it had gone boldly into infidelity, and totally repudiated 
all the rest of the Bible as well as those portions which teach 
the fall of Adam and the Ransom therefrom in Christ. 

All this meant another strain, another sifting, another 
cutting loose of friends, who erroneously supposed that our 
criticisms of the false doctrines were prompted by a spirit 
of rivalry, and who did not so soon see whither his teachings 
were drifting, nor how the importance of holding fast 
the first principles of the doctrines of Christ— how Christ 
died for our sins, and rose for our justification. 

These shaking and sifting processes continued to progress, 
and are not yet over; for all must be thoroughly tried and 
tested. It is not a question of who may fall, but of "who 
shall be able to stand?" as the Apostle puts it. And we have 
need again to remember the Apostolic admonition, "Let him 
who thinketh he standeth [who feels very confident, as did 
St. Peter when he said, 'Lord, though all deny Thee, yet 
will not I'] take heed lest he fall." 

THE TEST ON ALL CHRISTIANS 

This doctrine, of another way of salvation (and salvation 
for all, too) than the Cross of Christ, is not only the 
error which since 1874 has been sifting all who came into the 
light of present Truth, but it is the trial that has come upon 
the whole of Christendom to try them. (Revelation 3: 1 0.) 
It has spread among all classes of Christian people, especially 
among ministers of all sects. The number who believe that 
Christ's death provides the Ransom-price for Adamic sin is 
daily getting smaller; indeed there has been an actual stampede 
from the doctrine of man's fall in Adam and his ransom 
from that fall by "the Man Christ Jesus." (1 Timothy 2:5,6.) 
As the Psalmist prophetically pictured it, a thousand shall 
fall to one that shall stand.— Psalm 91:7. 

The time has come for each one to declare himself 
boldly. Whosoever is not for the Cross and the ransom there 
effected, is against it! He that gathereth not, scattereth 
abroad! Whoever is silent on this subject, when it is being 
assailed by foes on every hand, whether it be the silence of 
fear or of shame or of indifference, is not worthy of the 
Truth, and will surely be one to stumble quickly. Whoever 
from any cause sits idly by while the banner of the Cross is 
being assailed, is not a soldier of the Cross worthy of the 
name, and will not be reckoned among the overcomers who 
shall inherit all things. And God is permitting these very 
siftings, in order to sift out all who are not overcomers and 
to test and manifest the Little Flock, who like Gideon's band 
will, though few in number, share the victory and honors of 
their Captain in glory. 

Are you prepared for the issue, dear brethren and sisters? 
The armor of Truth has ben given you some time past; 



have you put it on? Have you made it your shield and 
buckler, your defence, against all the wily arts of the Evil One? 

Do not be deceived by the agents whom the Adversary 
often uses. In this matter he will be as cunning as in his 
presentation of the misrepresentations of Truth. 

Aptly indeed did the Prophet liken this infectious poison 
to a pestilence. (Psalm 91:6.) A pestilence spread because 
people are in a physical condition which renders them susceptible 
to disease. Physicians say that those whose systems 
are in good, healthy order are in little danger of any disease. 
In like manner a spiritual pestilence will flourish, not only 
because all will be exposed to it who have not a clear intellectual 
appreciation of the doctrines of Christ, but from 
another cause also. Out of the heart are the issues of life; 
therefore the most needful of all things to be in right condition 
is the heart. How is your heart? Is it proud boastful, 
independent, self-concious, self-willed? If so, take care; 
you will be very liable to this epidemic, no matter how far 
from it you may seem to be. 

"A heart resigned, submissive, meek, 

My great Redeemer's Throne, 
Where only Christ is heard to speak. 

Where Jesus reigns alone." 

With such a heart you are safe. In meekness and lowliness, 
you will never think of redeeming yourself from the 
condemnation that you inherited through Adam, by sacrificing 
present sinful desires, but you will flee to the Cross, where 
God himself opened the Fountain for sin and uncleanness, 
present as well as past. 

DOTH THIS OFFEND YOU? 

We presume that this article will offend some, though it is 
not designed to offend any. It is written for the defense 
of the meek against the sophistries of error. "Who shall 
ascend into the Hill of the Lord [into the Kingdom offered], 
or who shall stand in His Holy Place? He that hath clean 
hands and a pure heart [who is diligently fashioning his 
life after the principles of holiness], who hath not lifted up 
his soul unto vanity [who cultivates no earthly ambition or 
pride, but patiently waits for the glory to follow the course 
of present self-sacrifice], nor sworn deceitfully [ignoring or 
despising Hi s Covenant with GodJ. He shall receive the blessing 
of the Lord [the Kingdom glory and joint-heirship with 
Christ], and righteousness [perfection, full deliverance from 
present infirmities, etc.] from the God of his salvation." 
(Psalm 24:3-5.) "Seek righteousness, seek meekness; it may 
be ye shall be hid in the Day of the Lord's anger [this evil day 
—this day of snares, pitfalls, flying arrows and destructive 
pestilences]." (Zephaniah 2:3.) "Watch and pray, that ye 
enter not into temptation"— that "your minds be not corrupted 
from the simplicity that is in Christ." Let all the 
meek fully awake to the trial of the hour. And while many 
are putting stumbling-blocks in the way of the "feet" of the 



Body of Christ, let each soldier of the Cross be vigilant, not 
only to stand, but to assist others to stand bearing up the 
"feef'-Psalm 91:1 1,12. 



page 176 

International Bible Students Association Classes 
STUDIES AND LECTURES BY MEMBERS OF THE PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 177 

VOL. XXXVII. JUNE 15 No. 12 
A.D. 1916-A.M. 6044 



CONTENTS 

How the Great Apostasy Will Be Overruled 179 

Sin's Rapid Development to the Flood 179 

Satan's Evil Work Continued . . 179 

Gradual Rise of the Papacy . . 181 

Work of Reformation-"A Little Help" 18 1 
"They Go From Strength to Strength" . 182 

Daily Self-Examination Necessary . 183 

Blessed Results of Spirit's Infilling 183 
St. Paul at Thessalonica and Berea. . 184 

"Turning the World Upside Down" . 185 
The Thessalonian Christians ... 186 

"Them That Sleep In Jesus". . . 187 

"In Jesus" vs. "In Christ". . . 188 
Our Lord's Inspiring Promise ... 189 
Summer Conventions of Bible Students . 189 
Interesting Letters 190 

Consider One Another in Love . . 190 

Re Love the Sum of AH Graces . . 191 

Letters From French Brethren . . 191 

page 178 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 



SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



THE ANGELOPHONE 

Many of our readers got phonographs from us in connection 
with the "Eureka Drama" and the "Family Outfits." We 
have had considerable difficulty for the past eight months in 
filling orders. The demand for phonographs has been so 
great of late that all the manufacturers are behind with their 
orders. They give their special attention to the finer and costlier 
instruments. The cheaper ones for which there is the 
larger demand, are nearly always "out of stock." 

In the Lord's providence we have made arrangements for 
obtaining a phonograph of up-to-date model, which we are 
enabled to supply to our readers at what are known as jobbers' 
prices— less than the wholesale prices. The retail prices 
are $25.00, $50.00, and $100.00. The wholesale prices are just 
one-half of the retail prices. The jobbers' prices at which we 
are permitted to supply WATCH TOWER readers are still less— 
namely, one-third the retail price— $8.33, $16.67, and $33.33. 

The "A" Angelophone, which would cost our readers but 
$8.33, is of very neat design and of good, full size, quite 
artistic looking. The spring is strong enough to run the 
record without rewinding. 

The "B" Angelophone is still larger, more handsomely 
covered, and has a double-spring motor with worm-gear. 

The "C" Angelophone is still more handsome in appearance, 
with a cabinet case and lid, double-spring motors, worm 
gear, etc. All are rosewood-stained and varnished. All are 
supplied with excellent tone-arms and sound-boxes— and the 
latter is so arranged as to play any kind of record— Columbia, 
Victor, Pathe, Edison, etc. 

The name Angelophone signifies "The Angel Voice." 
Very appropriately, the manufacturers are preparing a large 
selection of religious music. This, however, is not yet on sale. 
We will announce it later. 

Any of our readers desiring to purchase at above prices 
may address their orders: 

THE ANGELICO, c/o I.B.S.A., 122 Columbia Heights, 
Brooklyn, N.Y. 



SCRIPTURE STUDIES AND SCENARIOS-VARIOUS 

For the information of our readers we give below a list of 
the languages into which the various volumes of STUDIES IN 
THE SCRIPTURES have been translated. Most of these can be 
supplied from the head office at Brooklyn. 

Volume I. In English, German, Swedish, Dano-Norwegian, 
Italian, French, Greek, Hungarian, Spanish, Polish, 
Hollandish, Finnish, Arabic, Slovak, Rumanian, Armenian, 
Lettish, Chinese, Japanese and Korean. We have also the 
English Braille, American Braille and New York Point. 

Volume II. In English, German, Swedish, Finnish and 
Dano-Norwegian. 

Volume III. In English, German, Swedish, Finnish and 
Dano-Norwegian. 

Volume IV. In English, German, Swedish, Finnish and 
Dano-Norwegian. 

Volume V. In English, German, Swedish, Finnish and 
Dano-Norwegian. 

Volume VI. English, German, Swedish, Finnish, Greek, 

The PHOTO-DRAMA SCENARIO is supplied in Spanish, Italian, 
Greek, Polish, Armenian, German, Finnish, Swedish and English, 
in one or more styles of binding. See WATCH TOWER, 
October 1, 1915, for prices and styles of binding. 



I.B.S.A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
MONTH OF JULY 
QUESTIONS FROM 
MANUAL ON SERIES THIRD 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
STUDY VI.-"THE WORK OF THE HARVEST" 

Week of July 2... Q. 57 to 63 Week of July 16...Q. 71 to77 
Week of July 9...Q. 64 to 70 Week of July 23. ..Q. 78 to 84 
Week of July 30..Q. 85 to 92 

Question Manual on Vol. III., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
5c each; or 50c per dozen, postpaid. 



R5909: page 179 

HOW THE GREAT APOSTASY WILL BE OVERRULED 

"They received not the love of the Truth, that they might be 
saved. And for this cause God sendeth them a working of 
error, that they should believe a lie; that they all 
might be judged who believed not the Truth, 
but had pleasure in unrighteousness." 
—2 Thessalonians 2:10-12 Rev. Ver. 



THE Bible Helps of our day are so numerous 

and accessible, and the words in the original 

Scriptures translated Hell, so clearly shown 

in these Helps, that there is no reason why 

an honest student of the Word of God may 

not see clearly what the Bible teaches on 

this subject. We are not to lay upon our 

God the responsibility for the erroneous 

thought on the subject of future punishment; 

for He is not the Author of sin or darkness 

or error in any form. All His work is perfect; He is 

"righteous altogether," His name is LOVE. Such being 

the case He would never create any being to torture it 

forever. Nor does the responsibility for doctrinal error 

rest entirely upon humanity, who have no doubt been more 

ignorant than wilful in respect to this error of doctrine, 

though there seems to have been a measure of wilfulness 

on the part of mankind. 

The Apostle Paul, in the first chapter of Romans, declares 
that when men knew God, they worshiped Him not 
as God, and did not wish to retain the knowledge of Him 
in their minds, but willingly departed from Him. (Romans 1:18-28.) 
This same Apostle elsewhere assures us 
that "the god of this world," "the prince of this world," 
Satan, who fell from his holy estate and became the Adversary 
of God through unholy ambition, has blinded the 
minds of mankind. (2 Corinthians 4:4; John 12:31; 14:30.) 
He is the great Deceiver, of whom the Lord said, 
"He was a murderer from the beginning [of man's creation] 
and abode not in the Truth, because there is no 
truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his 
own; for he is a liar and the father of it."— John 8:44. 

Again the Master declared in Revelation, when telling 
us about the consummation of the Gospel Age and the inauguration 
of the Age to follow, that at that time Satan 
should be bound for a thousand years, that he should deceive 
the nations no more until the thousand years were 
finished— thus intimating that prior to that time the people 
of the world had been deceived by him right along. 
Satan started his lies very early. His first great lie was 
told to our Mother Eve, away back in Eden. (Genesis 3:4,5; 
2 Corinthians 1 1:3.) The lie that he told to 
Mother Eve he has ever since very assiduously propagated; 
namely, "Ye shall not surely die"— God has deceived 
you; nobody dies; what is called death is only the 
dropping off of the mortal body as of a worn-out dress; 
merely the passing into another form of life— a more desirable 
change. But the Bible has all the while been assuring 
us that death is a reality, that death means death. 

SIN'S RAPID DEVELOPMENT UP TO THE FLOOD 

There is an irreconcilable conflict between the words 
of Satan and the declaration of God. But God has permitted 
man to a large extent to go his own way, just as 



St. Paul intimates in Romans, already cited. Mankind 

did not desire to retain God in their knowledge, so for a 

time He has permitted them to work all manner of uncleanness. 

(Romans 1:28-32.) But while He has allowed 

the world liberty in regard to their own wills, nevertheless 

He has not abandoned them. From the beginning 

God has purposed that in due time, after mankind have 

learned the needed lesson, they shall be delivered from 

sin and death— "whosoever will." For the time being 

R5910:page 179 

He has permitted them to take their choice as to whether 
they would give heed to the voice of conscience still to 
some extent remaining in man, whether they would listen 
to His word of instruction, so far as they were able to 
know it, or whether they preferred the words of Satan and 
the promptings of evil. The great majority have followed 
Satan, the opponent of God. 

The Adversary has propagated his falsehoods and deceptions 
in order to oppose God and righteousness. He 
succeeded so well from the start that in 1656 years from 
the creation of our first parents in Eden, many of the 
holy angels had fallen and had joined him in the debauchery 
of mankind. (Genesis 6:1-5.) Eventually the 
world became so full of corruption that God destroyed all 
of humanity from the face of the earth, including the 
unlawful progeny of the fallen angels, and began anew the 
propagation of the human race from Noah and his family, 
who had remained untainted— "perfect in his generation." 
—Genesis 6:1-22. 

SATAN'S EVIL WORK CONTINUED 

But soon Satan again got in his evil work, so that in 
Abraham's day, only a few centuries later, the whole 
world was again corrupted by idolatry and sin. Evil 
spirits— the fallen angels— denied by the Lord after the 
Deluge the power of materialization in human bodies, continued 
their deceptions by using human beings as mediums 
of communication with men, either by developing in them 
powers of clairvoyance, clairaudience, guiding their hands 
to write, etc., or by taking actual possession of their bodies 
and using these as if their own. All t Hi s has been done 
by Satan and the other fallen spirits over whom he made 
himself prince (Ephesians 2:2; 6:1 2), in order to prove to 

R5910:page 180 

mankind that God had deceived them and falsified in His 
pronouncement of a sentence of death upon the father of 
the human race, to effect as well all his offspring. They 
wished to make men believe that people who had gone 
into death were not dead— that they had not ceased to be 
—but were more alive than before. 
This gigantic falsehood has greatly hindered mankind 



from seeing the Truth and the real facts of the case. God 
has all along been Master of the situation to the fullest 
extent, but has been permitting Satan and His legions to 
thus exercise power over the rebellious race that He may 
ultimately teach a lesson to both men and angels. 

Four hundred and twenty-seven years after the great 
Deluge, God called Abraham, and after testing his loyalty 
and obedience, made a covenant with him, as a reward 
for faithfulness, to the effect that in his Seed all the 
families of the earth should ultimately be blessed. In due 
time, the descendants of Jacob, Abraham's grandson, were 
chosen to be the special people of God, under the terms 
of the Law Covenant. These people were used to picture 
forth in types God's great Plan for the salvation of all 
mankind. They were to be a separate people from the 
other nations of the earth. 

Although God established a special Covenant with the 
nation of Israel, and they promised full obedience to 
His Law, yet they became, like the nations about them, 
idolatrous, and sought after wizards, witches, and necromancers, 
mediums of the fallen spirits. This became so 
pronounced that God commanded that any amongst them 
who became such a medium should be put to death. They 
had agreed to be the people of God, and He had warned 
them to be on guard against these evil spirits. 

In the days of our Lord, these fallen spirits had intruded 
to such an extent in Israel that many of His 
miracles were for the healing and deliverance of those 
afflicted of the Devil, possessed by one or more of these 
wicked demons, and thus rendered insane. Israel had 
become to a considerable extent affected by the false doctrines 
of paganism, this being especially true of certain 
parties among the ruling class. The Sadducees were infidels, 
materialists, denying totally the resurrection of the 
dead and believing in neither angels nor spirits. The 
mental afflictions and confusion of mind amongst the 
people seemed more widespread even than were bodily 
diseases. In the time of our Lord, Grecian philosophy 
had attained great prominence, notably the doctrine of 
the immortality of the soul. Thus was Satan's great lie, 
"Thou shalt not surely die," prospered. Like all Gentile 
nations, Greece had many gods, divinities; and thus were 
the Greeks worshipers of devils, fallen angels.— Deuteronomy 32: 16, 17; 
Psalm 106:34-38; I Cor. 10:19,20. 

JEWISH NATION UNWORTHY, CALL GOES TO GENTILES 

Because of the world-wide prominence of the Greek 
language, Greek philosophy, "science falsely so-called" 
(1 Timothy 6:20), had become entrenched in the minds of 
thinking people generally. This was true to quite a degree 
even in Palestine. Only to Israel had God sent His 
Law and given His prophecies. To them He had said, "You 
only have I known [recognized] of all the families of the 
earth." (Amos 3:2.) When Jesus came. He said. If you 
had received the witness of John, you would have been 



ready to be My disciples. Many of the Jews had merely 
a form of godliness. They thought God would save them 
by the Law whether or no. But Jesus told them that 
they should not boast that they had Abraham for their 
Father, for God was able even of the stones about them 
to raise up children to Abraham. He assured them that 
God would find a worthy Seed of Abraham. 

The work of Jesus during His ministry was the starting 
of this new Seed. Jesus Himself was the Head of this 
Seed. The special work of the entire Gospel Age has 
been the calling and preparing of this Spiritual Seed of 
Abraham. The promise was first to the Jews, but since 
they did not prove worthy as a nation, God, after taking 
out the faithful "remnant" from that people, turned to the 
Gentiles, to take out from them a sufficient number to 
complete the foreordained 144,000 to comprise this Seed, 
the Church of Christ, the members of His Body. After 
the accomplishment of this work, Christ, who would then 
be present in the world the second time, would again visit 
the natural seed of Abraham, for their enlightenment and 
blessing. But this blessing would come to them through 
the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, the faithful Seed. 

Our Lord, in the parable of the Wheat and Tares, 
shows that of those who would constitute, nominally, the 
Spiritual Seed, there would likewise be but a faithful 
"remnant" who would prove worthy to be exalted to reign 
with Christ; and that the remainder, like the majority of 
the natural seed, would lose this great favor. The words 
of the Apostle Paul have proven true, that "all that will 
live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution." 

SATAN SOWED TARES IN THE WHEAT-FIELD 

In this parable Jesus showed how after the Apostles 
had fallen asleep the great Adversary, Satan, would come 
and sow "tare" seed in God's wheat-field, the Church. 
This tare seed would spring up and bring forth "tares," 
imitation "wheat," who would associate with the true 
Church and count themselves as of the Elect. They would 
consider themselves as real "wheat," In the parable, the 
servants are shown as coming to the Master and asking 
Him whether they should root up the tares from among 
the wheat. But the Master replied that they should not 
then do this, lest, in pulling up the tares, they might also 
root up the wheat. He bade them let both grow together 
until the time of "Harvest," when He would again be 
present and would say to the reapers, "Gather ye together 
first the tares, and bind them into bundles to burn them; 
but gather the wheat into My barn." The field was really 
a wheat-field always; the tares had no right there. 

This indicated a separating work to come in the end 
of the Gospel Age, in the time called by our Lord the 
"Harvest." The "field" in the parable, as Jesus said, represented 
the world, the masses of mankind. This evil 
seed which Satan sowed in the wheat -field was largely 
the Greek philosophies. Prior to this time, when the persecutions 



of Nero and, later, Diocletian, Roman emperors, 

came upon the growing Church, there was a faithful company 

of disciples, which had held firmly to the Truth and 

were loyal to Christ; and they endured much hardness, 

many of them even unto death by violence. 

But later came prosperity and freedom from persecution, 
and this proved the downfall of many. The Church 
attracted the attention of the Greek philosophers. They 
said, "You Christians teach much that is good. Your 
teacher Jesus was a great man, a great philosopher. But 
we also have great philosophers and teachers. We would 
like to come in with you, but in order to do that we must 
all be broad-minded; none of us must be narrow. We 
must each be able to see the great truths of the others. 
Socrates and Plato and others of our great teachers taught 
the doctrine of a future life long before Jesus was born." 

So the Christians thought it would be fine if all the 
Gentiles could be united in religion. Thus the majority 
gradually worked in with the Greek philosophers and fraternized 
with them. Numbers of the adherents of paganism 
made a profession of Christianity, being reinforced. 

R5910:page 181 

later by many others from the more northern tribes of 
Europe, these all joining some of their heathen philosophies 
and theories with Christianity. 

GRADUAL RISE OF THE PAPACY 

Thus it came about that the poisonous draught was 
mixed which was poured into the "golden cup" of Truth, 
and held out to the world by the apostate "Woman," the 
professed Church of God. And she "made all nations 
drunk with the wine of her fornication." (Jeremiah 51:6-13; 
Revelation 17:1-5,15.) As error spread and 
the spirit of ambition gradually superseded the spirit of 
humility and loyalty to God, bringing the desire to avoid 
suffering and to be esteemed of men. the Church, as conditions 

R5911 :page 181 

favored her advancement, organized herself as 
the Papal hierarchy. The Bishop of Rome was declared 
Pope, and claimed to represent our Lord Jesus to the 
Church and to the world. The Pope sat upon a throne 
of glory and became an autocrat in power; commanding 
kings, and ruling as both a spiritual and a temporal 
prince. The pagan doctrine of the immortality of the soul, 
combined with the idea, also imbibed from paganism, of the 
torture of the wicked after death, was made the basis of 
the doctrine of the eternal torture of heretics and of the 
Purgatorial sufferings after death of practically all Catholics 
to fit them for Heaven. 

These ideas and theories were presented by Dante in 
his great epic poem. The Divine Comedy. According to 



his presentation, it was written over the gates of the Inferno 
that all who entered abandoned hope. This place 
was for those who were to suffer eternal torment. This 
included all heretics; for no good Catholic entered that 
abode. Then there was another place— Purgatory— where 
different punishments were administered for various sins, 
the process of purgation to vary in time according to the 
degree of the sin and the masses said for them by their 
friends on earth and the money paid for their deliverance. 
Thus the work went on, and the "tares" in the Church 
were multiplied. People were threatened with eternal torment 
if they did not go to church, and support the hierarchy; 
and their infants who died were denied salvation. 

It was the claim of the Papacy that the thousand years 
of Christ's Reign, the Millennium, promised in Scripture 
to follow Christ's Second Advent, began in the year 800 
A.D., under Pope Leo III., who claimed to be the representative 
of Christ, His Vicegerent, to begin Christ's 
Reign in His stead. In that year the "Papal states" were 
ceded to the Church by Emperor Charlemagne. Their 
"Millennium" ended, it was claimed, in the year 1799, when 
Napoleon confiscated the territories granted to the Church 
and took the Pope, Pius VI., a captive to France, where 
he died. The succeeding freedom from Papal persecution, 
and the widespread circulation of the Bible in the languages 
of the people, was declared by the Papal leaders 
to be the "little season" foretold in Revelation to follow 
the thousand-year Reign of Christ on earth; and they are 
hoping that soon they will regain their former power and 
prestige and once more reign supreme, and that their 
rule will be permanent. 

This Papal Millennium is known in history as the 
"Dark Ages." During that time many were the erroneous 
doctrines and practises brought in and forced upon the 
peoples of Europe by the Papacy. Their theory was 
that they must conquer the world. They endeavored to 
do this by force, which led to great persecutions, notable 
among them being the Inquisition. During those dark 
centuries millions were tortured, exiled, and murdered in 
multitudinous ways, for refusing to bow to the mandates 
of the apostate Church, under the leadership of Popes, 
Bishops and priests. Agents and spies were employed to 
apprehend and bring to punishment any who were found 
to express sentiments contrary to the Papal hierarchy, or 
who failed to bow in abject submission to their authority. 

Thus were the nations of Europe paganized and 
steeped in error and superstition and in reverence for 
men who falsely claimed to be the special and authorized 
representatives of God on earth. Yea, these pseudo-apostles 
of God, as declared in the prophecy of Daniel (7:25), 
thought to "change times and laws." They presumed 
to have authority to alter the laws of God when 
it seemed advisable to them to do so. They thought to 
change the time for the Reign of Christ, as we have shown. 
They also set up the abomination of the Mass, which was 
the taking away of "the continual [once for all] Sacrifice" 



of Christ, claiming that in the Mass Christ is offered 

again and again, in a bloodless manner. Thus they set 

at naught the Scriptural teaching that the one offering of 

Jesus on Calvary was all-sufficient for the cancellation of 

sin. See STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. II., Chapter 9. 

We do not charge that these religious leaders of the 
Dark Ages were all doing these things knowingly. We 
believe that many of them were themselves deluded by 
the Adversary into thinking that they were doing the 
Lord's will. These errors were gradually fastened upon 
the Church. The leaders became to a large degree confused. 
God alone can judge of the culpability of each one. 
By degrees this paganized Christianity, more cruel and relentless 
in its propagation and enforcement than even 
Paganism itself, was adopted by the European nations, 
and they became what was, and still is, known as "Christendom"- 
Christ's Kingdom. The glorious Scriptural 

doctrine of the resurrection also fell largely into the background; 
for what use had an immortal soul which could 
not die, for a resurrection from the dead? Plato's doctrine 
of the immortality of man was much more agreeable 
to the flesh than was the true idea of death. It was 
not pleasant to think of death as the enemy of man, as the 
curse which God had pronounced because of Adam's sin. 

WORK OF REFORMATION-"A LITTLE HELP" 

The work of reform, which in spite of violent opposition 
gradually developed, in the sixteenth century, into 
what was known as the Great Reformation, brought some 
measure of relief to the persecuted, hunted, crushed saints 
of God— His true Church. Even through the darkest 
years of the Dark Ages there were a few saintly ones 
who never bowed their knees to Baal. These sealed with 
their blood their declaration of faith in the vital doctrines 
of the Scriptures. However, in due time, their teachings 
gained sufficient headway to bring about the Reformation, 
by which the saints "were holpen with a little help." 
But their leaders were in time overcome with "flatteries," 
and also succumbed in a considerable degree to the desire 
to gain power and influence among the nations. See 
SCRIPTURE STUDIES, Vol. III., pp. 34-39 and pp. 108-1 13. 

AN IMPORTANT QUESTION AND ITS ANSWER 

Why has God permitted these appalling conditions, is 
it asked by some? Why did He allow His wheat-field to 
become so overrun with tares? Our Lord knew that these 
conditions would later develop, as is shown in this parable 
of the Wheat and Tares. It was God's purpose to permit 
this experience as a great lesson to the Church, to angels, 
and eventually to the whole world. These errors were to 
be permitted to be introduced, to grow and bring forth 
their bitter fruitage, and thus to manifest the terrible 
effects of error, unholy ambition and sin. It had the effect, 
too, of developing and separating in spirit the true saints 



of God from the great mass of tares. Both were to grow 

R5911 :page 182 

together in the Babylonian System, however, until the 
Harvest time. Then would come the entire separation 
of the two classes. 

Now we are in this separating time. Now we whose 
eyes of understanding have been opened can see that these 
errors and evil practices are not of God, are not taught 
in His Word. Now we see that, as our Master forewarned, 
"The Kingdom of Heaven suffereth violence, and 
the violent take it by force." But the great majority of 
professed Christians are still largely blinded by the smoke 
of the Dark Ages which for so long has filled their eyes. 
Violence to the persons of the saints of God is not often 
indulged in today, because of present laws and public sentiment, 
though with some this persecuting spirit still exists 
as formerly, if only they could gain the power. But the 
same unscriptural doctrines are still preached, modified to 
some extent to suit the refined ideas of our day. The Bible 
doctrine of the resurrection of the dead is relegated to 
the scrap-heap. 

Ministers of today, though they sometimes read passages 
of Scripture bearing upon the resurrection, straightway 
give them an interpretation utterly at variance with 
the Scriptural presentation. Some still preach that there 
is to be a final resurrection of the body, to be joined to its 
spirit— a doctrine nowhere taught in the Bible, and the 
veriest nonsense in view of their own theory of the immortality 
of the soul, which they say is translated at 
death to its eternal abode. The Bible teaches that the 
dead are dead, and that there is to be a resurrection of 
the soul, the being, the Ego. Our Redeemer died to buy 
back the human race who died in Adam; and He was 
raised from the dead on the third day by the Father. If 
the body is "shuffled off" at death, that the spirit may be 
free from its encumbrance, why would the spirit come to 
need it again sometime in the distant future? And what 
an eternal degradation this would be for a spirit which 
had been freed from its former animal body for years 
or for centuries! 

The church systems of today are thoroughly permeated 
with all manner of pagan doctrines— Greek philosophies. 
Pantheism, Buddhism, Rationalism, Spiritism, etc. The 
doctrines of the immortality of the soul, a trinity of Gods 
in one, torment after death, re-incarnation of the soul 
after death, communion of the living with the dead— all 
these have been borrowed from paganism and are purely 
heathenish. Truly the nominal systems of today have 
become Babylon, confusion! And now in the Harvest 
time of the Age, God is calling His people out of them, 
and the work is nearly completed. He has spewed these 
nominal systems out of His mouth.— Revelation 3:14-20; 
17:1-5; 18:1-24; 19:1-8. 

At one time we wondered why it was God's will to 



permit this condition of things. But in the light now 

shining we believe we can clearly see the reason. We 

believe that God saw what we are now coming to see; 

namely, that who had never known of the nature 

and results of sin. who had never known the baneful 

effects of these monstrous doctrines, could never have appreciated 

the Truth as can those who have been influenced 

and bound by them. 

What wonderful relief came to our minds and hearts 
when we emerged from this gross darkness out into the 
glorious light of God's Truth as it is in Jesus! What a 
marvelous impression it made upon us! We fancy that 

R5912:page 182 

mankind, when awakened from the sleep of death, will 
be on the lookout, as they awake, for the conditions which 
they had been taught would be theirs beyond this life. 
Many will look around in terror to see the fiery flames 
and tortures, and will shout, "Where is the Devil?" Then 
when the love of God in His wonderful provision for 
mankind shall be shown to them, when they are told that 
they are now under the righteous Reign of Messiah, which 
designs only good for all men, when they come to realize 
God's matchless goodness, what a revelation of joy it will 
be to the poor, benighted, sin-cursed world! 

Surely all who are sincere of heart, all desirous of 
doing right, when the conditions are made favorable for 
so doing will appreciate, as they never could have done 
otherwise, the glorious character of our great Creator! 
So we can see that God has had a purpose in permitting 
for six thousand years the evil conditions which have prevailed— 
a purpose for the Church and for the world and 
for all His created intelligences, even those yet to be 
created. We hope and believe that when God makes the 
matter fully plain all will see that His ways are just and 
righteous altogether. We are waiting for Him fully to 
demonstrate His character in due time; and this time, we 
believe, is now very near at hand. 



R5912:page 182 

"THEY GO FROM STRENGTH TO STRENGTH" 

"Be ye filled with the Spirit."— Ephesians 5:18. 

LET us consider together briefly these words 

of the Apostle Paul, addressed to the 

Church of Christ, the saints. They do not 

apply to those who are merely empty professors, 

having a form of godliness only, but 

to those who have fully accepted the terms 

of God's Call, who have made the full consecration 

which alone brings us into the 



position of sons of God. These are the only 
ones who have the Spirit of God. These 
only are begotten from Above. But St. Paul would have 
us remember that it is not sufficient that we receive the 
begetting of the Holy Spirit, which comes to us at the 
very entrance of the narrow way. We should see that 
the Holy Spirit of God abounds in us more and more as 
we go on in our Heavenward course. The little spark of 
the new mind should grow stronger and brighter day by day. 

If this development does not take place, if we merely 
stand still, we shall soon begin to lose ground; but if we 
progress, the natural man will gradually perish and the 
new man will thrive. Christian development should be 
steady and continuous. We are to be more and more 
filled with the Spirit. Sometimes the Lord's children say, 
"I do desire to be filled with the Lord's Spirit, but it seems 
as if my capacity is so small. I wish to have His Spirit 
in large measure, but I am unable to be what I long to be. 
I am not satisfied with my attainments." But if we are 
striving earnestly and prayerfully to become like Christ, 
let us not be discouraged. Let us remember that if we 
keep filled to our present capacity, this very infilling will 
enlarge our capacity. Then our earthen vessel will hold 
more of the Holy Spirit. This, in turn, still further enlarges 
our capacity; and so the expanding and filling 
goes on. Thus it is possible for us to be filled continually. 

If it were an impossibility for us to be filled with the 
Spirit of God, the inspired Apostle would not have so 
instructed us. To the truly consecrated child of God 
this is possible, and not only possible, but obligatory. But 
as there are ebbs and flows in the ocean tides, so with 
our sense of the Lord's presence with us and His smile 
upon us. We may not always realize His presence to a 
large degree, but the Lord's saints must learn to walk by 
faith, to trust Him and His abiding love and presence with 
us even though physical ill health or untoward outward 

R5912:page 183 

circumstances or conditions may at times cause a mental 
depression. We are to rejoice in the Lord even though 
there may be for a time more or less heaviness of spirit. 

DAILY SELF-EXAMINATION NECESSARY 

In speaking of the glorious salvation of the Church 
the Apostle Peter says, "Wherein ye greatly rejoice, 
though now for a season, if need be, ye are in heaviness 
through manifold temptations [trials], that the trial of 
your faith, being much more precious than of gold that 
perisheth, might be found unto praise and honor and glory 
at the appearing of Jesus Christ, whom having not seen ye 
love; in whom, though now ye see Him not, yet believing, 
ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory." (1 Peter 1:6-8.) 
And we can thus rejoice even in the midst 
of severe trials that cause pain and tears. There may 



be times when it will seem as though we are more filled 
with the Spirit than at other times. But if we are striving 
earnestly to daily walk with God, this will not really 
be the case. It may be only a difference of surface feelings. 
The true child of the Lord should steadily progress. 

The spirit, or disposition, of the world will seek to 
invade the dominion of the New Creature. But the New 
Creature must be on the alert to see that his mind and 
body are freed from everything that would not be in 
fullest harmony with God's Holy Spirit. Each one should 
seek to judge himself in this respect. We may not judge 
one another, but we should judge ourselves. We are to 
see to it that the Spirit of the Lord is manifest in our 
words, our thoughts and our conduct. We should be 
able to do this more and more successfully, more and 
more continually, as we go on in the good way and grow 
in grace and knowledge. This we shall do if we are 
watching, praying, striving, day by day. 

The Spirit of the Lord dwelling in us in fulness, as it 
should be, will cause our entire being to be so absorbed 
by the principles of righteousness laid down in the Lord's 
Word, to be so in love with the Heavenly things, Heavenly 
hopes. Heavenly prospects, that everything else will 
be of no value to us. And this will be more and more 
our blessed experience if we continue faithfully in the 
narrow way, if we "follow on to know the Lord." 

But if, on the contrary, we find ourselves making 
provision for the flesh, making worldly plans; if we find 
ourselves inclined to lay up treasures on earth instead 
of in Heaven, we should take alarm, and should ask ourselves 
whether we are deficient, whether we are neglecting 
the means of grace— prayer alone with God, study 
of His Word, meditation upon the glorious things to 
which we have been called, watching ourselves as to our 
growth in the fruits of the Spirit. If we find that we 
are considerably controlled by the spirit of contention, 
we should ask ourselves, "Are we seeking to deal justly 
and equitably with others— to give them their rights and 
not to intrude upon them? Are we cultivating the love 
which is forbearing, forgiving and kind?"— 2 Timothy 2:24; 
Ephesians 4:31,32. 

If we find after close introspection that we are in full 
sympathy with the spirit of love, and can see that we are 
gradually developing this crowning fruit of the Spirit, 
let us rejoice; for we should greatly deplore the matter 
if it were otherwise. If we find that we are controlled 
by this spirit of love, we may know that we are filled 
with the Spirit. This spirit of love will enlarge our 
hearts and minds, making us broader and nobler day by day. 

But we need to continually watch and pray; for there 
is constant danger otherwise that we may be tripped up 
or stumbled either by our own faults or those of others. 
We are never safe from being side-tracked unless we go 
often to the Throne of Grace; we cannot be filled unless 
we keep very close to the great Fountain from which 
our infilling comes. We must daily carry our earthen 



pitcher to this Heavenly Fountain to be replenished; for 
we are leaky vessels. We are not to feel discouraged if 
we do not find in ourselves the rapid growth that we desire 
to see. Strong, sturdy trees that can withstand the 
fiercest storms are not developed in a day. Their growth 
is a slow, steady process. We should show our loyalty 
to the Lord by renewed effort every time we fail. He 
is looking at us not to see if we are perfect in 
the flesh— for He knows that we are not and can never 
be— but to see whether or not we have the spirit of 
earnestness and loyalty which daily and hourly seeks to 
keep the body under and to cheerfully take up the cross. 

BLESSED RESULTS OF SPIRIT'S INFILLING 

The Christian is not to be like the worldling who 
seeks to drown his troubles and afflictions in drink or in 
pleasures, dissipations and frivolous diversions; but in 
every trouble he is to fly to the only true Source of solace 
and comfort and strength. This will drive away all 
anxiety and give him rest and peace even in the midst 
of trouble. Like the fabled halcyon, which built its nest 
and brought forth its birdlings in the midst of the sea, 
the true child of God can be at rest even amidst the billows 
and storms of life, and can prosper as a New Creature 
and accomplish all the good pleasure of God's will. 

This unwavering trust in the Lord, this abiding rest 
of the soul, this zeal in God's service, is a matter of growth. 
"They go from strength to strength," the Psalmist declares 
of the inhabitants of Zion. "First the blade, then 
the ear, after that the full corn in the ear," said our Lord 
of this class. (Psalm 84:7; Mark 4:28.) Notwithstanding 
the difficulties of life, these can continue to make 
melody in their hearts unto the Lord. They rejoice no 

R5913:page 183 

matter what may be the outward earthly conditions. They 
can smile even through their tears, knowing that, according 
to His promise, all things are working together for 
their good. To attain this development is to be filled 
with the Spirit; and each consecrated disciple of Christ 
should reach this plane. 

Some Christian writer has well said: "Wherever there 
has been a faithful following of the Lord in a consecrated 
heart, several things have, sooner or later, inevitably followed. 
Meekness and quietness of spirit become in time 
the characteristics of the daily life. A submissive acceptance 
of the will of God, as it comes in the hourly 
events of each day, is manifested; pliability in the hands 
of God to do or to suffer all the good pleasure of His 
will; sweetness under provocation; calmness in the midst 
of turmoil and bustle; a yielding to the wishes of others 
[where there is no conflicting principle involved], and 
an insensibility to slights and affronts; absence of worry 
or anxiety; deliverance from care and fear— all these. 



and many other similar graces, are invariably found to 
be the natural outward development of that inward life 
which is 'hid with Christ in God.'" 



"Jesus, my Lord, Thou art my life. 
My rest in labor, strength in strife; 
Thy love begets my love of Thee; 
Thy fulness that which filleth me. 

"Mine effort vain, my weakness learned, 
Weary, from self to Christ 1 turned. 
Content to let His fulness be 
An unbought fulness unto me." 



R5913:page 184 

ST. PAUL AT THESSALONICA AND BEREA 
-JULY 2.-ACTS 17:1-15.- 

METHOD OF INDOCTRINATION IN THE EARLY CHURCH- 
IMPORTANCE OF UNPREJUDICED STUDY OF THE BIBLE-THE RANSOM 
THE PIVOTAL POINT OF THE GOSPEL-THE FEW 
BELIEVED-THE MAJORITY EMBITTERED-THE MISSIONARIES 
CHARGED WITH TREASON-SLANDER EVER THE WEAPON 
OF ENVY AND PRIDE-GOD'S SERVANTS PERSECUTED EVER. 

"Him did God exalt with His right hand 
to be a Prince and a Savior."— Acts 5:31. 

LEAVING Philippi, St. Paul, Silas and Timothy 

went about one hundred miles to the southwest 

and stopped ;it the city of Thessalonica, 

the largest commercial city of Macedonia— 

a city now known as Salonica. En route 

they passed two cities, where apparently 

they found no opening for their Message, no 

hearts prepared. Philippi was one of the 

few cities where the Gospel made any headway 

before the city had first come under 

the influence of Judaism to some extent. Evidently the 

scattering of the Jews throughout this region had more or 

less acquainted their neighbors with the true God, the 

observation of His Laws and respect for His revelations 

and for the promised Messiah. 

At Thessalonica the missionaries found a Jewish 
synagogue; and in harmony with their usual custom they 
attended worship there. For three Sabbath days they 
reasoned with the congregation from the Scriptures. The 
word rendered reasoned in Verse 2 implies a dialogue 
or discussion. St. Paul discussed the Bible with the Jews. 
The propriety of his course is evident. The Jews were 
familiar with the Messianic prophecies; and although 



making their home amongst the Gentiles, nevertheless, as 
the Apostle declares, they were continually hoping for the 
fulfilment of the grand promises made to Abraham, confirmed 
to Isaac and to Jacob— the Oath-bound Covenant. 
-Acts 26:7; Hebrews 6:13-19. 

This form of preaching the Gospel has fallen considerably 
into disuse amongst Christians. It is an excellent 
one. We have endeavored to revive it amongst the 
friends of Present Truth everywhere by especially commending 
to them the Berean Bible Studies and such discussions 
of the Word of God with the aid of helps. The 
effect is excellent. In this way many obtain clearer conceptions 
of the Truth than they would get from any 
ordinary discourse. While we commend any kind of 
Bible study, we especially commend this form which the 
Lord has blessed above all others for the enlightenment 
of His people in this end of the Gospel Age. This method 
is for the advantage of the entire class; for an able 
leader is not so indispensable as with other methods. 
One danger with able leaders is that sometimes their 
ability goes in a wrong direction and misleads the too 
confiding ones under their care. 

For this kind of Bible study both a textbook and a 
question book are used. The textbooks are the STUDIES 
IN THE SCRIPTURES. In these volumes the teachings of 
the Bible have been brought into an assimilable form. 
Each subject is treated systematically, with references 
to various parts of the Bible in which these subjects are 
stated. It does not surprise us, therefore, that those of 
God's people who have learned the value of this method 
of Bible study and who follow it have a clearer understanding 
of the Word than have others. 

THE ESSENCE OF ST. PAUL'S TEACHING 

After telling us that the Apostle reasoned with the 
Jews concerning the Gospel Message, our Study explains 
something of his method; namely, he opened the Scriptures 
to them, pointing out what they had not previously 
noted respecting Messiah— the fact that it was necessary 
for Christ to suffer death and to rise from the dead before 
He could be the King promised. The Jews knew 
of the Scriptures which referred to Messiah's sufferings. 
But these they ignored, and grasped only those which referred 
to His Millennial Reign of glory, honor and power. 

What they needed was just what the Lord sent them 
in the Apostle— some one to explain the Scriptures, to 
answer their questions and to help them to find the answers 
to their own questions in the Scriptures. St. Paul 
showed them the connecting links between the two lines 
of prophecies pertaining to Messiah. He pointed out the 
fact that through the power of sin inbred, ingrained, 
death reigned over the human race, and that none could 
be released from this condition without a Redeemer. 
Messiah would indeed reign over His Kingdom, the 
world; but previously a redemption must take place, a 



lifting of the curse of death. Then he produced the facts 
of Jesus' death, "the Just for the unjust," and showed 
that our Lord's resurrection was exactly what had been 
declared by the Prophets, and was necessary for Him to 
carry out in due time the foretold blessing of Israel under 
their New Covenant and the blessing of the world through 
Israel.-Genesis 2:17; 3:19; 12:3;Ezekiel 18:4,20; 
Jeremiah 31:31-34. 

Then the Apostle showed that first, however, an elect 
class must be gathered, to be associated with Messiah in 
His Kingdom; and that these must demonstrate 
their worthiness by laying down their lives in consecration 
in His service. The sum of the Apostle's argument 
was, "This Jesus whom I preach unto you is Messiah." 

ITS EFFECT UPON THE HEARERS 

Some of the Jews believed the Message and took sides 
with St. Paul and Silas; but evidently they were only 
a minority. With them were some devout Greeks and 
also a number of prominent women. The division time 
had come. The wheat amongst the Jews in Thessalonica 
must be separated from the chaff class, as elsewhere. 
(Matthew 3: 1 1,12.) They were being gathered into the 
Gospel garner, into the Spirit Dispensation. They were 
being transferred from Moses to Christ, from Natural 
Israel to the new Spiritual Israel, called to be a Royal 
Priesthood, a peculiar people, for a Divine purpose. 

Only a minority of the Jews could receive this Message. 
The remainder were embittered. Therefore they 
became jealous of the success achieved by these strangers, 
who had been in the city but a few weeks, but who nevertheless 
had already made considerable impression upon 
Gentiles, whom they had been unable to influence and 
to convert to Judaism. 

Having no truthful argument, no logic wherewith they 
could overcome the arguments of the missionaries, the 
unbelieving Jews resorted to Satan's usual tactics of misrepresentation, 
slander, thus arousing prejudice, hatred, 
malice, etc. They even incited an uproar in the city— a 
mob, which made an assault upon the house of Jason, 
with whom the missionaries were lodging. Not finding 
the missionaries, the mob, under leadership, took Jason and 
other believers before the magistrate, saying, "These that 
have turned the world upside down have come here also." 
Jason has received them, and is thus a participant in their 
wrong-doing. They are traitors to this government and 
the Emperor; they teach that there is another king— Jesus. 

This was almost the exact charge brought against our 
Redeemer when He was brought to Pilate's judgment 
bar. And there is a measure of truth in it; for the 

R5913:page 185 

Caesars claimed not only to be civil rulers of the world, 
but also to be the Pontifex Maximus, or chief religious 



ruler. While the Kingdom which Jesus and the Apostles 
preached is a Heavenly one, a spiritual one, nevertheless 
the Message includes the thought that in due time this 
Heavenly rule, or authority, would be extended to the 
affairs of earth, and Messiah's Kingdom would be worldwide— 
"under the whole heaven."— Daniel 7:27. 

We can readily see that such a proclamation might be 
construed as treasonable from the world's standpoint. 
But surely the Jews had no excuse for using their influence 
along these lines; for they well knew that all the 
hopes and promises in which their nation rejoiced led 
up to just such a Kingdom hope. Nevertheless, their 
pride and hatred blinded them to the injustice of their 
course when they incited the heathen multitude. It should 
not surprise us at all if in the near future false Christians 
—Christians not in the proper attitude of heart to receive 
the Message of Present Truth— should similarly charge 
us with treason because we preach "the Kingdom of God's 
dear Son," about to be established in power and great 
glory, in the midst of a period of social distress and 
anarchy. Nor will it surprise us if these false Christians 
should be the very ones to incite the multitudes and the 
rulers against us. 

"TURNING THE WORLD UPSIDE DOWN" 

The Jews realized that there was a conflict on between 
Judaism and Christianity; and that wherever the two 
came into contact there could be naught else than a clash, 
and one or the other be turned upside down. Similarly, 
some of those who are at present blinded to Present Truth 
rail at us in almost the same language. And the truthfulness 
of the assertions cannot be controverted. The 
Gospel of Christ created differences in the Jewish system 
then, as the Gospel Truth is doing now in Christendom. 
This is what our Lord Jesus foretold when He said, 
"Think not that I have come to send peace upon the earth. 
I have come to send a sword. . . . And a man's foes 
shall be they of his own household."— Matthew 10:34-36. 

Our own experiences, like those of the Apostles, corroborate 
the truth of our Lord's statement. An irrepressible 
conflict is on. However, had the Jews but properly 
understood the matter, they need not have given themselves 
such concern. They might have known that comparatively 
few would accept the Message of the Gospel; and that 
the few going out from them would scarcely be missed. 

And so it is today. Our dear friends in the various 
denominations are fearful lest Present Truth capture 
their people by the wholesale. But they are mistaken. 
It will take only the Elect, and leave the remainder. The 
wheat are comparatively few in proportion to the tares; 
and only the wheat is being gathered. The tares must 
be left in the bundles— in sectarian bodies. They must 
not in any manner get in amongst the wheat ready for 
the garner. The separation of the wheat from the tares 
should not, and could not, take place in the past, but 



must and will take place now, in the Harvest of this Age. 

Apparently this attack upon Jason and others was not 
permitted of the Lord until the work of propagation had 
been well accomplished, and until those who had an ear 
to hear had a good opportunity to hear the Message. The 
rulers of Thessalonica put Jason and the other believers 
under bonds, to guarantee against a certain forfeit of 
money or of property that these Christian missionaries 
should raise no further disturbance. As a result, St. 
Paul and Silas realized that their work at Thessalonica 
was at an end; and, that they might not jeopardize the 
interests of the Cause and of their friends by further 
public utterances, St. Paul agreed that they should leave 
the city quietly, secretly. 

"THE MORE NOBLE BEREANS" 

The next stopping place was Berea; and there, as 
usual, the missionaries went first to the synagogue. They 
were agreeably surprised to find the Jews at that place 
very honest-hearted. We read, "These were more noble 
than those in Thessalonica, in that they received the Word 
with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures 
daily, whether these things were so." The Greek word 
used here for "noble" seems to imply persons of noble 
birth, a higher and nobler class than those of the more 
commercial city. Nobility of character is favorable, 
wherever found and from whatever causes; and true nobility 
implies reasonableness, as distinguished from prejudice. 

The Bereans were reasonable. Professing to believe 
all that was written in the Law and the Prophets, professing 
to be looking for the Messiah, they welcomed the 
servants of God who sought to draw their attention particularly 
to the "things written aforetime." With all 
readiness of mind they began to examine the Scriptures, 
not merely on the Sabbath, but daily, to see how well the 
Apostle's arguments were supported by the testimony of 
the Law and the Prophets. As we should expect, many 
of so noble a class accepted the Good Tidings. Indeed, 
the wonder is that any person of noble and reasoning 
mind, once becoming acquainted with the glorious Message 
of God's love and mercy through Christ— His Plan 
for selecting the Church now and of blessing all the 
families of the earth through that Church by and by- 
could disbelieve it or could attribute such a Gospel to any 
human source. Surely its internal evidences are convincing 
that it is not of man nor by man, but of the Lord! 

We read that many of the noble Bereans believed— 
Jews and Greeks, men and women. Here is a suggestion 
to us all. We should have a judgment and conviction 
respecting the Divine Word; but it should not be so unreasonable 
a one as to hinder us from receiving further 
knowledge from the same source. We are to "try the 
spirits," the teachings, the doctrines. This does not signify, 
however, that we are to be "blown about by every 
wind of doctrine." We should know in whom we have 



believed; and having been once convinced, we should not 
be easily turned aside from a properly grounded faith. 
If we are satisfied that we have been building upon 
the Rock Foundation furnished us in the Divine Revelation, 
we should expect that any further light coming to us 
would not be contradictory to what we have found to be 
Scriptural and harmonious with the Divine character. 
On the contrary, we should expect that all further light 
from the Divine Word would be consistent with the 
foundations of our faith. Anything that would set aside 
or make valueless the first principles of the doctrines of 
Christ should be promptly rejected. 

PERSECUTED IN EVERY CITY 

If the missionaries of the Cross of Christ were vigilant 
and earnest, so were the servants of error. The Jews 
of Thessalonica learned that the missionaries were at 
Berea, and forthwith began to foment strife and to raise 
a disturbance amongst the people. The missionaries concluded 
that this was a sign that they should move forward. 

Let us be on the alert to watch for the leadings of the 
Lord's providence; and while not fleeing persecution in 
the ordinary sense, let us be ready to move when persecution 
seems inevitable and when apparently it might be 
considered as an indication from the Lord that He had 
service for us in some other field of labor. Thus persecuted, 
St. Paul went to Athens; and later Silas and Timothy 
followed him thither. 



R5913:page 186 

THE THESSALONIAN CHRISTIANS 
-JULY 9.-1 THESSALONIANS I; 4:13-18.- 

ST. PAUL'S LETTER TO THE YOUNG CHURCH AT THESSALONICA- 
THE POWER OF THE GOSPEL AMONGST THEM-THEIR REJOICING 
IN TRIBULATION-THEIR ACTIVITIES IN SPREADING 
THE TRUTH-THEIR HOPE, CENTERED IN THE SECOND 
COMING OF CHRIST-A HIGHLY FIGURATIVE DESCRIPTION 
OF OUR LORD'S SECOND PRESENCE AND THE RESURRECTION 
OF THE CHURCH-"THE DEAD IN CHRIST" VS. "THOSE 
THAT SLEEP IN JESUS." 

"If we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even 
so them also that are fallen asleep in Jesus will 
God bring with Him."— Chapter 4: 14. 

WHILE our Study today deals chiefly with the 
Second Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
the Epistle of which it forms a part gives a 
description of the class that will rejoice in 
His Second Coming and with good reason. 
In this Epistle St. Paul points out some of 



the characteristics of those to whom he says, 

"Ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that that 

Day should overtake you as a thief. Ye are 

all children of the light, the children of the 

Day." (Chapter 5:4,5.) Of these characteristics the 

essential one is "the love of God," "The love of Christ," 

extending to all who are of the Household of Faith, and 

manifesting itself in a spirit of sympathy toward the entire 

"groaning creation." 

Although the Church at Thessalonica was composed 
of those who in respect to length of Christian experience 
were but "babes in Christ." nevertheless it is very evident 
that the persecution which had come upon them had caused 
them to grow very rapidly. It was about a year since 
they had received the Gospel; and yet the Apostle witnesses 
to their rapid development, as evidenced by their 
love for one another— not only for the little company at 
Thessalonica, but to all of the Household of Faith 
throughout Macedonia. The Apostle declares that this 
love of the brethren was a manifestation of the fact that 
they had been "taught of God." 

One of the first effects of a knowledge of the grace of 
God in Christ and of a full consecration to the Lord is 
this love for all fellow-servants— "the brethren." Would 
that the fervency and the zeal of first love, both toward 
the Lord and toward the entire Household of Faith, might 
not only continue, but increase with all! But, alas! many 
who start warmly and earnestly grow lukewarm— become 
captious, cynical, hypercritical, high-minded and self-assertive- 
and lose much of the simplicity, zeal and humility 
of their first faith and their first love. 

This is the first attack of the great Adversary to re -ensnare, 
through the weaknesses of the flesh, those who 
have escaped his chains of darkness and have come to see 
some of the glory of God shining through Christ. If they 
do not resist these attacks, the effect is sure to be not 
only lukewarmness toward the Lord, His Cause and the 
members of His Body, but eventually the cultivation of 
the fruits of darkness— envy, malice, hatred, strife— instead 
of the fruits of the Spirit of Christ— meekness, 
gentleness, patience, brotherly-kindness, love. Hence the 
Apostle urges the Church, "We beseech you, brethren, 
that ye increase more and more"— in love and service one 
for the other; for this increase implies a growth in all 
the graces of the Holy Spirit. 

CHRISTIAN DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 

The religion of Christ is designed to blend with all the 
proper duties, perplexities, trials and pleasures of the 
home and the family. Thus the majority of the people 
of God can best let shine the light which they have received 
from the Lord. Each should "study to be quiet"— 
to have a quiet ambition, not a restless bustling for notoriety 
and for great exploits, but a quiet, earnest perseverance 
in well-doing, a condition in which the fruits 



and graces of the Holy Spirit will best thrive. 

True, the light received will make a great change in 
many of the affairs of the home. It sets before us new 
ideals, to be esteemed and copied. It introduces us to a 
new relationship, a new kindred— the family of God. 
Thus it brings us some new responsibilities and privileges; 
and if we are filled with the spirit of the Truth, with love 
toward God and all who have any of His likeness, it will 
make us very zealous in the dispensing of the grace of 
God, which has brought such blessing to our own hearts. 

This does not signify that it is the Lord's will that all 
who receive the Truth should go forth as public teachers, 
abandoning home, trade, occupation, duties, responsibilities, 
etc. The Lord's call will never conflict with proper 
duties and responsibilities previously upon us. The man 
who has a family to provide for should not even think 
of leaving such obligations, nor consider himself called 
to public preaching, if it would imply the neglect of duties 
and obligations already resting upon him. Such persons 
should quietly and thankfully do all in the Divine service 
that a proper regard for those dependent upon them 
would permit. 

On the other hand, those who are free to give time 
and energy to the Lord's service, and who have talents 
of any kind, should, when they receive the Truth, humbly 
present their all to the Lord and then seek to use their 
every opportunity in His service as He shall open the 
way. Thereafter such consecrated ones should be very 
careful that they do not so encumber themselves as to 
hinder their usefulness in such service. 

RESPONSIBILITIES TOWARD THOSE WITHOUT 

Not only have we duties and a ministry toward every 
member of the Body of Christ, but we have certain responsibilities 
toward those who are in darkness, out of 
Christ. The Christian is to be a burning and shining light 
toward the world. The world sees not from the inside, 
as does the Household of Faith. Hence there is great 
necessity that the Christian should so live before the world 
as to be a "living epistle, known and read of all men," 
honoring to the Lord and to His Word. 

The Christian life should be seen by the world, not 
merely as just and honest, but also as noble and honorable. 
There are honest people who are mean. There are truthful 
people who tell the truth in a combative and repellant 
manner. Bui in the true Christian, love should produce 
so generous a sentiment that it would ennoble every virtue. 
To this end, also, the Christian should strive "to have need 
of nothing"— so far as possible, not to be dependent upon 
charity, but rather, as the Apostle elsewhere states it, to 
"labor, working with his own hands the thing which is 
good, that he may have to give to him that needeth." 
(Ephesians 4:28.) The Lord's instruction to fleshly Israel 
that they should lend, but should not borrow, may well be 
applied in principle by Spiritual Israel. This principle 



applies to buying on credit, a practise which should be 
avoided by the Lord's people; and as a rule this principle 
would be found advantageous to mankind in general. 

"ENSAMPLES TO ALL THAT BELIEVE" 

Under St. Paul's instruction, supplemented by Timothy's, 
the young Thessalonian Church had in a very short 
time attained considerable knowledge of the Divine Plan- 
much more, apparently, than is enjoyed by a majority of 
Christian congregations today. For instance, they knew 
what many today are ignorant of— that the Christian's 

R5913:page 187 

hope centers in the Second Coming of our Lord Jesus 
Christ and the gathering of the Church to Him. They 
also knew that their friends who had died were "asleep"; 
and their hope was that all the sleeping dead would be 
awakened from the death sleep by the Lord at His Second 
Coming. Realizing that all hopes of eternal life depended 
upon the Second Coming of our Lord as the great Life-giver, 
there was no danger that the early Church should 
ever lose sight of this inspiring hope set before us. 

For several centuries past this fact that the dead sleep, 
and cannot be awakened until the Second Advent of our 
Lord, has been lost sight of; and as a result all faith in 
the Lord's Second Coming has generally languished. It 
has come to be believed generally by Christian people that 
the dead do not "sleep," but are more awake than they 
were when alive— that in the moment of dissolution the 
dead go to Heaven or to Hell, and that these conditions 
are permanent, unalterable. With such unscriptural 
thoughts before their minds, who can wonder that to the 
majority of professed Christians the Second Coming of 
the Lord is an event without special interest? Hence it 
is regarded lightly by some; and by many it is wholly disbelieved 
and declared to be a useless, uninteresting and 
pernicious teaching. 

However, "the brethren," who have been instructed 
in the Word of the Lord, and who do not follow "cunningly 
devised fables" originated by the Arch Deceiver, 
find that the Scriptures as a whole, from Genesis to Revelation, 
are illuminated with the grand hope of the coming 
of Messiah in glory and power, to establish His Kingdom 
of Righteousness in the earth, to awaken and uplift 
those who have fallen under the hand of Death— to give 
beauty for ashes, and the oil of joy for the spirit of 
heaviness— to as many as will accept His blessing, under 
the terms of the New Covenant.— Jeremiah 31:31-34; 
Hebrews 8:8-13; Isaiah 61:1-3. 

"THEM THAT SLEEP IN JESUS" 

As originally pronounced in Eden, the penalty against 
the race of Adam was not a sleep of death for a few 



days, years or centuries. On the contrary, it was absolute 
extinction— destruction. (Genesis 2:17; 3:19.) But God had 
purposed a redemption from the curse of death; and for 
this purpose Christ Jesus came into the world and died, "the 
Just for the unjust," that He might bring mankind back 
to God— back to Divine favor, where the gift of God- 
eternal life— will be a possibility for the willing and 
obedient. Ever since the Ransom-price was laid down at 
Calvary, and its acceptance manifested at Pentecost, it has 
been proper to regard the whole world as being no longer 
dead— wholly cut off from life— but as merely sleeping- 
awaiting the return of the Redeemer as the Awakener, the 
Vivifier, the Live-giver.— Romans 6:23; John 5:25,28,29; 
1 Corinthians 15:12-23. 

In this sense of the word, all mankind may be said to 
"sleep in Jesus," the Redeemer; for by His death our 
Lord Jesus secured for all of Adam's posterity another 
trial for life— instead of the one lost by Father Adam 
through disobedience. Our Lord Himself declared that 
as a consequence of His being lifted up as the great Sin-Offering 
upon the cross. He will yet draw all men unto 
Himself. (John 12:32,33; 3:14-16.) Thus He showed 
us that the world is not to be considered as dead— extinct 
—but as merely "asleep," waiting for the drawing time 
foreordained of the Father, and provided for by the "Ransom 
for all." (1 Timothy 2:5,6.) This drawing, like 
that exerted for the selection of the Church, will be 
through a knowledge of the Truth, and signifies that ultimately 
all mankind will be made aware of God's gracious 
provision, under which they may, if they will when 
brought to a knowledge of the Truth, obtain life everlasting. 

Since the majority of the race of mankind went into 
death before the Ransom-price was provided, this implies 
an awakening from death in order that they may be drawn 
or come to a knowledge of the Truth. In harmony with 
this thought are the words of our Lord to the effect that 
the hour is coming when all that are in the graves shall 
hear His voice and come forth; and that then those who 
hear— obey— shall live— everlastingly. 

A future life for all has been provided by our Lord, 
who "gave His life a Ransom for all"; and the fact that 
their death sentence has been provided for makes it 
proper to speak of them as "asleep in Jesus," instead of 
as being dead in Adam. The fact that many of them did 
not know of their redemption would work no greater 
hindrance than would the fact that many of the same ones 
had no knowledge in particular of the original sentence 
through Adam. They came under the Adamic sentence 
without choice or knowledge, and later came under the 
benefits of the redemption similarly without choice or 
knowledge.— Romans 5:18. 

"THE DEAD IN CHRIST" 

In the use of the phrase, "them also which sleep in 
Jesus," the Apostle cannot refer merely to the saints; for 



the Gospel had been preached at Thessalonica for only 
about one year, and during that year not very many of 
the saints could have died. Furthermore, when we remember 
that the saints are generally not related according 
to the flesh we can readily see that in appealing to their 
hopes in order that they might not sorrow as did others, 
the Apostle must have meant not only hopes for the saints, 
but also hopes for all of their friends who had died. If 
their hopes had been merely for the saints, and if they 
had believed that all others were hopelessly and everlastingly 
lost, it would have been in vain for the Apostle to 
appeal to them to sorrow not as others who have no such 
hope; for such bad hopes respecting the great majority of 
their dying and dead friends and relatives would have 
been a cause for greater sorrow than they or any other 
heathens could have had when they had no knowledge 
and no definite hopes. 

This fact is set forth by the Apostle in Chapter 4: 14. 
There he points out that the Christian's faith is built 
upon the fact that Christ Jesus died, and that He rose 
again. Our Lord died for the sins of the Church, "and 
not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole world." 
(1 John 2:2.) His resurrection is an evidence that His 
sacrifice was acceptable not only on behalf of His Church, 
but also on behalf of all for whom He died; and therefore 
it becomes a guarantee, or pledge, that in His own due 
time God will establish Christ and His Church as the 
Kingdom of God, and that this Kingdom when established 
shall bless all the families of the earth with the knowledge 
of the Truth. 

Believing this, we are bound to believe also that all 
mankind redeemed by the precious blood of Christ, shall, 
according to His promise, yet come forth from the sleep 
of death to hear His Word as the great Law-giver of the 
New Covenant, and to have, if they will by obedience to 
it, the gift of God— eternal life— through Jesus Christ 
our Lord. As God accepted the sacrifice of Christ and 
raised Him from the dead, "even so them also which 
sleep in Jesus will God bring [from the sleep of death] 
with Him"— through His instrumentality. 

But let us not confound this thought that the future 
of the whole world has been changed from "death" to 

R5913:page 188 

"sleep" by the Ransom-price, which Jesus gave for all, 

with the very different expression, "the dead in Christ," 

which is applicable to no other than the elect Church. 

The name Jesus, which signifies Savior, has special application 

to the Ransom and Restitution features of our 

Lord's work. But the name Christ is the title to His kingly 

office. The call to "be baptized into Jesus Christ," thus 

to become "members of the Body of Christ"— the Anointed 

—is an offer which is restricted to the "called and chosen 

and faithful" Church of this Gospel Age. But the redemptive 

benefits covered by the name Jesus are "for all," 



"for every man," for "whosoever will" accept those mercies 
on the New Covenant conditions. 

"IN JESUS" VS. "IN CHRIST" 

So then, in the language of the Apostle, we exhort 
Christians in respect to all their dead— in Christ and 
out of Christ, New Creatures and old creatures, those 
enlightened and blessed by the marvelous light of the Gospel, 
and those who have died while blinded by "the god 
of this world"— that they sorrow not as others who have no 
hope. We believe that Jesus died for all; that He has 
risen from the dead; that on this account all the dead are 
to be considered as sleeping, waiting for His return and 
the exaltation of His elect Church also in glory; and that 
then all whom God counts as asleep in Him, or on account 
of Him, or through Him and His work, shall also be 
brought from the dead. 

Few Christians have noticed the frequency with which 
the Scriptures use this word "sleep" in reference to the 
state of the dead. Notice that in Chapter 4:13-15 the 
word is used three times in three successive verses. Notice 
also the following instances: John 1 1:1 1,12; Acts 7:60; 
13:36; 2 Peter 3:4; 1 Corinthians 15:6,18,20,51; 
Matthew 9:24; 13:25; Mark 5:39; Luke 8:52; 1 Thessalonians 5:10; 
Matthew 27:52; 1 Corinthians 11:30. 

In these instances, all from the New Testament, the 
word sleep is used instead of the word death, and used in 
full view of the Ransom by which all shall be redeemed. 
What was the custom in Old Testament times? Looking 
back, we find that Daniel (12:1-3) prophetically speaks 
of those "who sleep in the dust of the earth," and describes 
the sleepers as being of two classes— some who will awake 
to everlasting life, and some who will awake to shame 
and everlasting contempt— the latter class representing 
those who will be tried during the Millennium. Similarly, 
of both kings and prophets— one after another— it is declared 
that "he slept with his fathers." 

The basis for this expression and of the faith in a future 
life which it implies is set forth by our Lord, saying, 
"That the dead are [to be] raised, even Moses showed at 
the Bush." (Luke 20:37.) "Have ye not read in the 
Book of Moses how in the Bush God spake unto him, saying, 
I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and 
the God of Jacob." (Mark 12:26.) "He is not a God 
of the dead [the extinct, for whom no future is designed], 
but [He is the God] of the living, because all live unto 
Him." (Luke 20:38.) It was as a result of Moses' experience 
that the Jews thereafter spoke of their dead as 
"asleep" and "waiting for the morning," when they would 
be "awakened." 

But be it noticed, God's reason for speaking of humanity 
as yet having a hope of life beyond the grave rests 
not upon any change of the sentence from death— extinction— 
to a profound "sleep" for a period, but upon His 
predetermined Plan to provide a Savior who would redeem. 



purchase back, for Adam and all his race "that 

which was lost"— the privilege of life everlasting in harmony 

with God.-Luke 19:10; John 10:10. 

SPECIAL MESSAGE TO THE CHURCH 

Having spoken of the general hopes of the entire 
"groaning creation," all of which center in the Second 
Coming of our Lord, the Apostle delivers, not an opinion 
or a guess, but a special message to the effect that the 
sleeping saints will suffer no loss by reason of having 
fallen asleep, but that on the contrary they will be granted 
a priority over the living saints in that they will be 
"changed," "glorified," to see the Lord, to be like Him 
and to share His glory, before those of the same class 
who are alive at the time of the Second Advent. Elsewhere 
we have given at considerable length our reasons 
for believing that the shout, the voice and the trumpet 
here mentioned by the Apostle are symbols, as in other 
parts of the Scriptures; for instance, in the Revelation. 
See STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. 2, 143-150. 

Apparently the Church at Thessalonica had been 
studying the subject of our Lord's Second Coming, and 
were fearful lest some of their number might "fall asleep" 
before that event, and were doubtful as to how much of 
the blessing might thus be lost by these, as well as solicitous 
for their friends. Hence the Apostle says, "Comfort 
one another with these words." 

The word translated "coming" in Verse 15 is parousia. 
This Greek word does not really have the significance of 
our English word "coming," but signifies presence— after 
arrival— giving the thought that our Lord will be present 
before "the dead in Christ" are "raised," although this 
will be prior to the "change" of the living. This Scripture, 
as well as many others, indicates distinctly that the 
Lord's presence will not be manifest, visible, to the world 
during this time. As our Lord said before He went away, 
"Yet a little while, and the world seeth Me no more." 
(John 14:19.) This thought is emphasized by St. Paul's 
subsequent remarks respecting the Day of the Lord and 
the fact that the world would not know of it, but only 
the "brethren," those not "in darkness."— 1 Thess. 5:1-5. 

It speaks well for the rapid growth in knowledge on 
the part of the Church at Thessalonica that the Apostle 
could thus write to them. How definitely he separates the 
Church, the Body of Christ, from the world! How particularly 
he shows that the one class will be in total ignorance 
of this subject, while the other class will have 
knowledge of our Lord's return! Knowledge of the Second 
Presence of our Lord is a feature of the Day of the 
Lord— the Day of His Presence— "the Harvest," or end 
of this Age, during which the great Chief Reaper will not 
only gather the sleeping saints first, but proceed also to 
seal and to gather all the living members of the Elect 
class, who shall be counted worthy to escape the great 
afflictions which are about to come upon the world, in the 



culmination of the great Time of Trouble, which will dissolve 

present institutions and make ready for the establishment 

of the Heavenly Kingdom, under the rulership 

of Christ Jesus and His "little flock" of joint-heirs— the 

Seed of Abraham, who are to bless all the families of 

the earth, living and dead. 



"Painful and dark the pathway seems 

To distant earthly eyes; 
They only see the hedging thorns 

On either side that rise; 

"They cannot know how soft between 
The flowers of love are strewn. 

The sunny ways, the pastures green. 
Where Jesus leads His own." 



R5913:page 189 

OUR LORD JESUS' INSPIRING PROMISE 

"Be thou faithful unto death, and I will 
give thee a Crown of Life."— Rev. 2: 10. 

THESE are the words of our glorified Lord, 

given through St. John the Revelator on 

the Island of Patmos. This thrilling exhortation 

is given to the Church, to those who 

have entered into a special contract, a special 

covenant with the Lord. The invitation 

of the present time, to suffer with 

Jesus that we may reign with Him, implies 

the attainment of membership in His Body. 

His members are His disciples; they have 

been invited to walk in His steps. 

R5914:page 189 

It is required of these that they continue to hold fast 
the faith that first led them to make a consecration. 
They are to continue in this attitude through evil report 
and through good report, to follow their Leader "whithersoever 
He goeth." They must not faint before they reach 
the end of the journey. The world, the flesh and the 
Adversary will try to dissuade them and turn them back- 
try to cause them to think that the invitation they 
have received is an intangible, impossible thing. 

A faithful servant is one who demonstrates himself 
worthy of his master's confidence, one who can always 
be relied upon. Daily we are proving our loyalty or our 
disloyalty. "The Lord your God doth prove you." He 
proves us to see if we are worthy— to see whether we 



love Him best or love self best, to see if our confidence in 
Him is such that we will lay aside everything else to 
win this great Prize which He has offered, to see whether 
we are following a mere temporary impulse, whether we 
are trying to grasp this beautiful thing, this Crown of 
Life, without appreciation of its cost. 

In one of His parables, our Lord represents some who, 
when the sun of persecution arises, are not sufficiently 
loyal to the principles of righteousness to stand. They 
become offended. They wither away. So this word 
faithful seems particularly to signify loyalty, including 
also the thought of being full of faith. God's children 
are to be full of faith, and those in whom God can have 
faith— those proving worthy of His entire confidence. 

Our Lord will say to such as are wholly faithful to 
the end of the race, "Well done, good and faithful servant; 
thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will 
make thee ruler over many things; enter thou into the 
joy of thy Lord!" These shall have "a Crown of Life." 
Their loyalty must be proved even unto death. This does 
not mean merely that they shall die as a consequence of 
their consecration to the Lord; for there will be two 
classes of those who thus die— the Little Flock will die 
sacrificially, and the Great Company will die through 
"the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved 
in the Day of the Lord Jesus." 

"Unto death," therefore, would in this text mean a 
faithfulness which would persist until the sacrifice is 
finished in death, a faithfulness ready to encounter death 
at any moment, which would lead to the performance of 
the Covenant of Sacrifice even unto its consummation. 

THE FADELESS CROWN OF LIFE 

The thought in respect to the receiving of the Crown 
is that it confers great honor. In the Olympian games 
of olden time a crown was given which was usually of 
laurel leaves; and great victors on battle-fields received 
crowns of laurel— the laurel being an evergreen shrub 
or tree, symbolizing that which endures. The Apostle 
used this illustration as picturing the high honor to be 
bestowed upon the faithful Church. There is a great 
Prize to be given. There is an election going on. It is 
for each individual to make his calling and election sure.— 
2Peter 1:10,11. 

Each one who is victorious will receive a Crown of 
Life. It will not be a crown that will soon fade, or one 
that will last only a certain number of years, but a crown 
of everlasting life. And not only so, but the Lord shows 
us that this crown of everlasting life will be a crown of 
superior life— life on the very highest plane. Those who 
attain Restitution during the Millennial Age will have 
everlasting life on the human plane. The angels will 
have everlasting life on the spirit plane. But this Crown 
of Life given to the "more than conquerors" will be the 
very highest form of spirit life— immortality— far above 



all other planes of life, as the special reward for being 
victors in this race. "Let us so run that we may obtain. 
The goal is near! 

"Run on, my soul, undaunted. 

Where duty shines before. 
Though deserts blaze around thee 

And Jordans surge and roar; 
The land on this side Jordan 

Is not thy birthright blest; 
Speed on, and find thy Canaan 

And enter into rest." 



page 189 

SUMMER CONVENTIONS OF BIBLE STUDENTS 

WE HAVE mapped out a very elaborate Convention 
arrangement for this Summer. The custom 
of taking a few days' vacation every Summer 
is becoming a general one. Bible Students 
especially enjoy their vacations when these can 
be spent in Christian fellowship and in building 
one another up in the Most Holy Faith and in 
the fruits and graces of the Holy Spirit. The 
method once employed of having one or two 
Conventions in the Summer has been found 
unsatisfactory for two reasons: 

(1) This involves too large an expenditure 

of time and money when long distances must be traveled. 

(2) When a Convention is too large the fellowship is not 
so good— the opportunities for getting acquainted, etc., are 
poorer proportionately. 

We believe that we have made good selections of Convention 
points in the territory where Bible Students are most 
numerous. We are announcing the dates in good time, so 
that vacations may be arranged accordingly. In every case 
arrangements will be made for lodgings at fifty cents per 
night upward and for restaurant service, where each can provide 
according to his appetite, purse and judgment. Address 
the Secretary of every Convention you wish to attend, mentioning 
the number of your party, males and females. If 
colored, the fact should be mentioned. 

In the past we have had difficulty from the fact that when 
an assignment was made no money consideration was passed; 
therefore neither the householder nor the visitor considered 
the matter thoroughly binding. As a result, sometimes the 
householder rented the room to others, and sometimes the 
visitor went elsewhere, neglecting the assignment. We hope 
to remedy the matter this year by requiring the deposit of 
one dollar in the case of each assignment. The dollar will be 
paid to the householder on the visitor's account, and the receipt 
will show this. We trust thus to avoid difficulty experienced 
in the past and to add to the comfort of all. Our 



representatives will visit and inspect the rooms assigned and 
judge of their cleanliness and suitability, and, to the best of 
their ability, serve the interests of the visiting Brethren and 
Sisters. We urge that, when sending in the one dollar for 
each person, you state your preferences as respects accommodation- 
remembering, of course, that a fifty-cent lodging will 
not be in any respects as fine as a five-dollar one. Our Convention 
List is, we believe, about complete, as follows: 

ST. LOUIS CONVENTION-JUNE 22-25 

St. Louis will be central as a Convention point to a large 
number of Bible Students. The Brethren there have arranged 
for Princess Theater, which is accredited with being a very 
cool place. In it all the Convention Meetings will be held— 
the evenings being devoted to the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION. 
Brother Russell is expected to be present at the conclusion of 

page 190 

the Convention. His topic will be, "The World on Fire," at 
the Odeon Theater, Sunday, June 25, 8 p.m. 

The following Pilgrim Brethren are scheduled to be in 
attendance: R.H. Hirsh, George Draper, R.L. Robie, R.O. 
Hadley, W.M. Batterson, A.J. Eshleman, Menta Sturgeon, 
Chairman. Address J.H. HOEVELER, 6126 Waterman Ave., 
St. Louis, Mo., for information and assignment of lodgings. 

SIOUX CITY CONVENTION-JULY 6-9 

A splendid invitation has come to Bible Students to meet 
at Sioux City, Iowa. We are sure of a cordial welcome by 
the Bible Students and citizens and officials there. A splendid 
Auditorium has been placed at our disposal. We have every 
reason to expect a glorious season of spiritual fellowship, as 
well as physical comfort. The following Pilgrim Brethren 
are scheduled to be in attendance: I.F. Hoskins, W.F. 
Hudgings, J.P. MacPherson, T.P. Yates, L.F. Zink, B.M. 
Rice, A.P. Walker, A.I. Ritchie, Chairman. Address A.J. 
Strite, 1422 W. 5th St., for accommodations. 

NEWPORT CONVENTION-JULY 9-16 

The Authorities of this old and dignified Watering Place 
of Rhode Island have placed at the disposal of our Association 
excellent Auditorium facilities, including arrangements 
for the showing of the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION every 
night. As Newport is central for a large population, we believe 
that the attendance will be excellent. The following 
Pilgrim Brethren are scheduled as speakers: R.H. Barber, 
P.S.L. Johnson, A.H. MacMillan, E.F. Crist, R.G. Jolly, 
F.C. Detwiler, C.J. Woodworth, H.C. Rockwell, Edward 
Hazlett, R.J. Martin and W.E. Van Amburgh, Chairman. 
Address Anna R. Calvert, Newport, R.I., for accommodations. 

NORFOLK CONVENTION-JULY 22-30 



Although Norfolk, Va., is a Southern City, it is fanned 
by Ocean breezes. We are sure that it is quite a suitable 
place for our Convention. Virginia Beach is near Norfolk 
for those who desire a little further outing than the Convention 
will give. Old Point Comfort also is near. The following 
Pilgrim Brethren are scheduled to be in attendance: J.D. 
Wright, Alexander Graham, W.J. Thorn, F.W. Plaenker, 
F.H. Mendel, J. A. Meggison, A.E. Burgess and J.A. 
Baeuerlein, Chairman. Address P.L. Derring, 216 12th St., 
for accommodations. 

NIAGARA FALLS CONVENTION-AUG. 19-22 

A Convention at Niagara Falls will be very convenient for 
the Canada Brethren, as well as for some in New York, Pennsylvania 
and Ohio. A very interesting Convention is predicted. 
The following Pilgrim Brethren are scheduled to 
speak: W.M. Wisdom, J.F. Emerson, P.E. Thomson, T.R. 
Hilbish, J.F. Stephenson, Chairman. Address A. Fossberry, 
727 Pine Ave., for accommodations. 

NASHVILLE CONVENTION-AUG. 24-27 

Bible Students have been very cordially invited by city 
and State officials to hold a Convention at Nashville, Tenn. 
It will, we believe, be a central point for quite a goodly number. 
At least a thousand may be expected. Address M.E. 
Confehr, 2124 Achlen Ave., for accommodations. 

LONG BEACH CONVENTION-SEPT. 2-10 

Long Beach, Cal., is suburban to Los Angeles. We are 
sure that it is a delightful place for a Convention, and that 
every effort will be made for the comfort of all Bible Students 
in attendance. Arrangements will be in the hands of the Los 
Angeles Class. Address F.P. Sherman, 206 Hamlet St. 

SEATTLE CONVENTION-SEPT. 14-17 

Seattle, Wash., is beautiful for situation and convenient to 
a large population. Many of our Canadian friends will doubtless 
come from Vancouver, Victoria, etc. Other delegates will 
come from Spokane, Tacoma, Portland, etc. We are trusting 
for a happy time in the sunshine of our Lord's favor. Address 
F.A. Acheson, 1009 8th Ave., for accommodations. 

MILWAUKEE CONVENTION-SEPT. 16-24 

Milwaukee, Wis., claims to have some special advantages 
as a Convention City and will be central to a considerable 
number of friends in the Truth. It is accessible both by rail 
and by Lake steamer from Chicago and from other Lake 
Michigan points. During the eight days it is expected that the 
PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION will make two full showings in 
the evenings. The eight days will give splendid opportunity 



for commingling and spiritual fellowship amongst the friends. 
The Municipal Auditorium has been put at the disposal of the 
Convention for the entire time. We believe that a large number 
will be in attendance. Address A.L. Smith, 1 166 Eighth 
St., Milwaukee, for accommodations. 

Brother Russell is expected to give public addresses as 
well as Convention addresses at each of these Conventions. 
The dates for his public meetings are noted. 

At each Convention there will be provision for the symbolizing 
of consecration by water baptism— robes, etc. 



R5914: page 190 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
CONSIDER ONE ANOTHER IN LOVE 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Quite a number of the classes consider it wise to provide 
a supper at the home where the afternoon and evening meetings 
are held on the occasion of a Pilgrim visit. They are 
frequently unwilling to have this a light luncheon, but rather 
an elaborate meal. Various Sisters proffer their assistance to 
the one at whose home the meeting is held, but they fail to 
realize that even with their help she has many times as much 
to do as they have in getting house and dishes ready beforehand, 
and in cleaning things up later. 

If the large majority of such meetings are held in a certain 
home because of its large rooms, etc., it means an oft-recurring 
burden to that Sister, and especially so if she is 
not physically strong. 

This week I have been in two different towns where 
almost identical conditions exist along this very line. One of 
these sisters, a noble, self-sacrificing character, told me that 
she was so nearly in a state of collapse after the strain of 
such an occasion that it had become a severe trial to hear 
another Pilgrim was coming. But she is afraid to tell the 
class lest they misunderstand and think her selfish. 

She was under such a physical and nervous strain as to 
get practically no good from the Pilgrim's visit and possibly 
while he was talking she would have to spend part of the 
lime in (lie kitchen. 

I find that sometimes the older and more practical sisters 
see the unwisdom of this, but the younger ones who have 
less home cares, and better health, will insist on a more elaborate 
program, though in the end the major portion of the 
work does not fall on them. Often it seems prompted by a 
pride that wants to surpass the hospitality of another class. 

However, there are some sisters who have the matter 
of a luncheon down to the point of ideality, and if the friends 
knew that such methods gave us the greatest satisfaction they 
might adopt the same. Let me tell the method of a certain 
class where almost all week-day meetings are held at one 
home on the occasion of a Pilgrim visit since it is the only 



house large enough. 

Probably 25 or 30 will sometimes stay over from one 
meeting to the next. They do not go to the table, but are 
asked to take seats around the room, leaving the middle of 
the room open for passage. Then there is passed to each 
one a picnic plate on which are two sandwiches (probably 
one is meat and one cheese), a pickle, a piece of cake and a 
banana (or some other fruit). Then tea or coffee or water 
is passed to each. On each plate is also a paper napkin. 

There is no dish-washing, except of cups and saucers and 

R5915:page 190 

spoons. Even tin cups will simplify this. When all are 
served, everybody is free to enjoy the discussion of Scripture 
questions, etc. As each one is through he puts his cup on 
a convenient table, from which sisters finally remove them in 
a few moments. 

In this way the friends have clearer minds for the evening 
discourse and are in a better state to take in the more spiritual 
food. If any feel a cooked supper is necessary they can go 
to a nearby restaurant. 

At the class I have in mind the Sister usually speaks to 
the Pilgrim brother earlier in the day somewhat like this: 
"Now, Brother, we know you must have little luncheons so 
often that something more substantial may be needed, so if 
you tell us what you want, we will see you have it." However, 
it suits me far better than a heavy supper, while there 
are other places where a memory of the elaborate variety of 
heavy food I am supposed and urged to eat, puts a little 
measure of fear into me when it is apparent I must endure 
it over again. If I had partaken of one-tenth of all the cake 
and rich things offered me during the last fifteen years, I 
would have finished my pilgrimage long ago. 

These sisters at the place mentioned estimate the number 
to be provided for, and then divide it up amongst themselves. 
One brings 12 or 15 sandwiches, another the same, another a 

R5915:page 191 

dozen bananas, etc., and thus the expense as well as the labor 
entailed is made very light. 

Many of the sisters making extensive preparations for 
entertaining have the best of motives; they thus desire to 
show their appreciation of the presence of the friends, the 
Lord's children; but there is a lack of wisdom in it. 

Another thing: When a home meeting is held the friends 
as they arrive are shown to a room where they can leave 
their coats. If they get there early enough this is all right, 
but it sometimes happens that even those coming in late are 
thus treated. Escorting them to where the wraps can be left, 
not only keeps the hostess out of meetings, but also preserves 
confusion among those near the stairway or hall; at least it 
distracts the attention of some. How much better if all such 
moved promptly to the nearest vacant chair, keeping their 
coats with them as they would in a more public place! 



I also desire to mention the fact that the classes are not 
so particular to supply free literature to visiting strangers as 
they once were. I have been to public services, even, when 
not a single tract was on hand. It made me think of "Billy" 
Sunday's comments on "the deacon who didn't deak." That 
surely is one of the things to which the deacons of the 
various classes should see. 

It isn't my intention to complain of the classes, for they 
are really in a glorious state, but there are some places where 
the foregoing suggestions might make them still more of a 
blessing to one another. With warmest Christian love. 

Yours in the bonds of the Kingdom, B.H. BARTON 



RE LOVE THE SUM OF ALL GRACES 

MY DEAR PASTOR AND BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

Have thought many times of writing you since that most 
helpful article on Love appeared in THE WATCH TOWER, and 
especially since you suggested that we write you stating the 
progress and growth we have made in the development of 
this all-important fruit of the Spirit. And now as my cup 
of joy and blessing is simply overflowing in gratitude to our 
dear Heavenly Father, and to you. His faithful servant, for 
your loving ministry, I write you of my experiences. 

Desiring more and more to become Christlike, I had been 
striving to develop more love. It became the burden of my 
prayer. Then in the providences of God the article on Love 
appeared in THE TOWER. It was just what I needed!— and 
how it helped me! By God's grace I have noted growth in 
love as I daily seek to walk in the Master's steps. It has 
helped me to be more kind, more patient, more sympathetic, 
and to daily examine myself by this standard. Truly, the 
articles in THE WATCH TOWER become more and more to me 
"meat in due season," and I rejoice to see how wonderfully 
the Lord is providing all things needful for them who love 
Him supremely. (Philippians 4: 19.) The Lord is indeed 
blessing us during this period of waiting, that the Bride may 
make herself ready. 

Would like to relate to you several experiences in the 
Volunteer work, which were a source of joy and help to 
me, and we believe of interest to you. The other day, in 
serving a nearby town with tracts, we learned in conversation 
with a merchant's son how much he and his father enjoyed 
the tracts. He said, "Father has been treasurer and a 
member of council of the Lutheran Church for many years, 
and they have recently reelected him, but he will not serve 
any more; he is thoroughly disgusted with it all, because 
there are so many hypocrites in the Church. We don't want 
anything to do with it." A lady, hearing the conversation, 
said, "I haven't been in Church for two years." We sought, 
by the Lord's help, to lend a helping hand. They received 
the literature with gladness and would surely read it. 

The next day, going to another town, we met a gentleman 
on the train (a tract serving as an introduction), and he 



spoke freely concerning conditions in his (another Lutheran) 
Church. He told me, "You would be surprised to know 
how many read these tracts. Why some of our members 
(mentioning names of business men) won't come to Church 
any more. When approached about it they say, 'What is 
the use, I get Pastor Russell's sermons at my house every Sunday 
morning, and there I get just what I want, and I would 
not get that if I went to Church.'" 

No doubt the Truth is reaching more people than we 
might realize. (Ecclesiastes 1 1:6.) However this may be, 
these experiences awakened in me a deeper concern and 
appreciation as to our privileges and opportunities, and a 
greater diligence in the service of our Lord and Master. 

Again asking you to pardon me for the length of this 
letter, and thanking you for your loving service, which is 
proving invaluable to me, and praying that our loving 
Heavenly Father continue to bless and to keep you strong 
in the Lord and faithful unto death, I remain 

Lovingly your brother in Christ, HIRAM P. KLEINHANS. 



LETTERS FROM FRENCH BRETHREN 

In accordance with the invitation of dear Brother Russell 
in his wonderful and comforting article on "Divine Love," 
published in the last July French TOWER, I am intending to 
write to him. 

May the God of all grace and peace be with each of you 
in your activity for the Lord's cause, till by and by above 
we shall sing an everlasting alleluia to the honor and glory 
of our great Creator! 

ELIE JERVILLE, Corporal at Bailleul.— Northern France. 



I have received the PHOTO-DRAMA booklet, and wish I 
could eat it and know it by heart. Forward to my new 
address THE TOWER (French), the BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLY 
and Brother Russell's sermon. I am not very old, enjoying 
spiritual life only during the past five months. I never would 
have believed that such love could be found among God's 
children. I have known the Bible for ten years, and that it 
was God's Word, yet I was without knowledge, since darkness 
surrounded me. Is it possible that I could ascribe to 
the loving God the cruelty to torture everlastingly His creatures? 
Oh, how much I now bless the Father for having 
made known to me His love! 

Believe me your devoted brother, ALFRED BLAS. 

Wounded soldier in the hospital at Meung, France (newly 
interested). 



This second message to you is to show my love and to 
tell of the change in my character since receiving THE 



WATCH TOWER (French). You have addressed to us an invitation 
which has greatly helped me, and since that time I 
pray every morning and evening, and run to the Throne of 
Grace to confess my failures and my progress. Dear brother, 
I can tell you I have received great blessings, and I ask your 
prayers to the end that perfect love— not the love of the 
world, but that for life eternal— may abide in me. 
Your sister in Christ's love, L.R. 



I thank the Lord with all my heart for granting me to 
know your excellent books and also the dear WATCH TOWER 
(French), which I value as a pearl. The Lord in His mercy 
has sent us His messengers with the torch of the true Gospel. 
Therefore, as Paul said to Timothy, "Keep that which 
is committed to thy trust, avoiding profane and vain babblings, 
and oppositions of science falsely so called." Forgive my intrusion, 
but I wished to tell you how much your labor and 
devotion are precious to my soul. M.R.— Switzerland. 



It is ever with keen pleasure and deep gratitude to our 
God that I receive THE WATCH TOWER (French), that messenger 
of good news which is as refreshing water. (Prov. 25:25.) 
THE TOWER truly sums up our experiences, joys and 
hopes. As our face sees itself in a mirror, likewise the printed 
lines of THE TOWER reflect the truths we perceive in the Holy 
Word. Therefore, I more and more thank the Lord that I 
am among those having reached the 1335 days. I rejoice 
while listening attentively to the teaching of the faithful and 
wise servant.— Rev. 1:3. 

The Lord bless you and keep you in His love through 
Jesus Christ! 

Yours devotedly in Him, F. JUPIN. 

Non-commissioned officer. Northern France. 



I hasten to give you my most sincere thanks for so graciously 
sending your journal, THE WATCH TOWER (French), 
to my son, Oscar, who is a war prisoner in Germany. I take 

R5916 : page 191 

the liberty, sir, to present you my warmest felicitations for 

the work you have undertaken, which consists in giving to our 

associates spiritual meat in harmony with their faith and belief. 

I would gladly reimburse the expenses you have made 

for these services rendered to my son, who is very well pleased 

with THE WATCH TOWER and MILLENNIAL DAWN. Our correspondence 

with Switzerland not being allowed, I send this 

to my aforesaid son in Germany, who will transmit it to you. 

Please believe, sir, in my deep gratitude and accept my 
Christian greetings. JOSEPH SERVAIS. 



President of the Temperance Society— Belgium. 



page 192 

International Bible Students Association Classes 
STUDIES AND LECTURES BY MEMBERS OF THE PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 193 

VOL. XXXVII. JULY 1 No. 13 
A. D. 1916-A.M. 6044 



CONTENTS 

Signs of the Presence of the King 195 

"Saved as Through Fire" 195 

Invulnerability of the Truth 196 

Seeking Membership in God's Kingdom 197 

True and False Ideas of the Kingdom 197 

St. Paul at Athens 198 

Some Mocked at the Resurrection 200 

Good, Better, Best in Bible Study 200 

St. Paul at Corinth 201 

Eighteen Months of Teaching 202 

Glorying in the Cross of Christ 203 

Significance of the Cross 203 

Earthly vs. Heavenly Wisdom 203 

Lesson of the Blighted Fig Tree 204 

The Fig Tree a Symbol 205 

Love in the Classes 205 

Pastoral Advice 205 

A Fourteen-Year-Old Martyr 206 

"Let Him Buy a Sword" 206 

Interesting Letters 207 

page 194 

GENERAL CONVENTIONS 

ST. LOUIS, MO.-June 22-25. For assignments address J. 

H. Hoeveler, 6126 Waterman Ave. Friends coming 

from the South to this convention should inquire of 

Ticket Agent for Excursion Rates. 
SIOUX CITY, IA.-July 6-9. For assignments address A. 

J. Strite, 1422 W. 5th St. 
NEWPORT, R.I.-July 9-16. For assignments address Mrs. 

Anna R. Calvert, 12 Everett St. 
PORTLAND, ME.-July 21-23. For assignments address A. 

F. Buxton, 55 Chestnut St. 
NORFOLK, VA.-July 22-30. For assignments address P. 

L. Derring, 216 12th St. 
NIAGARA FALLS, N.Y. -Aug. 19-22. For assignments 

address A. Fossbraey, 727 Pine Ave. 
NASHVILLE, TENN.-Aug. 24-27. For assignments address 

Milton E. Confehr, 1516 McGavock St. 
LOS ANGELES, CAL.-Sept. 2-10. The Long Beach Convention 

has been transferred to Los Angeles. For assignments 

address F.P. Sherman, 808 S. Figueroa St. 
SEATTLE, WASH.-Sept. 14-17. For assignments address 

H.G. Babcock, 2410 First Ave., W. 
MILWAUKEE, WIS.-Sept. 16-24. For assignments address 



C. Hilton Ellison, 2704 Wells St. 



PHOTO-DRAMA SCENARIO 

De Luxe Edition, gilt 85c; Cloth edition, 35c; Paper 
edition, 15c— includes postage. 
Colporteur rates, 50% off collect, or charge postage or 

express. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR AUGUST 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
August follow: (1) 27; (2) 333; (3) 152; (4) 313; (5) 1; (6) 
46; (7) 58; (8) 119; (9) 60; (10) 130; (11) 324; (12) 277; (13) 
114; (14) 117; (15) 226; (16) 91; (17) 105; (18) 194; (19) 23; 
(20) 7; (21) 154; (22) 66; (23) 325; (24) 78; (25) 296; (26) 
19; (27) 57; (28) 165; (29) Vow; (30) 107; (31) 113. 



STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE 
KEYS." PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION. 

SERIES I., "The Plan of the Ages," gives an outline of the Divine 
Plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
384 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. 
(3s. l-l/2d.) 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's Second Coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter on the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Battle of Armageddon," shows that the dissolution of 
the present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas 
offered are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these 
events the fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great 
prophecy of Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 688 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., "The Atonement Between God and Man." treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of Divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 



prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 640 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week 
(Genesis 1 and 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 750 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, gilt edges, the set (6 vols.) $3.00, 
(12s. 6d.), plus postage, 60c. (2s. 6d.) 

Also published in foreign languages as follows: German and Swedish, 
six vols.; Dano-Norwegian, five vols.; Greek, four vols.; Finnish, three 
vols.; French, two vols.; Hollandish, Spanish, Italian, Hungarian, 
Polish, Arabic, Roumanian, Chinese, Japanese, one vol. each; bound in 
cloth, uniform with English edition, prices the same. 

For the Blind in American Braille, English Braille and New York Point. 



R5916 : page 195 

SIGNS OF THE PRESENCE OF THE KING 

"But who may abide the Day of His Coming? And who shall 
stand when He appeareth? for He is like a refiner's fire and 
like fuller's soap."— Malachi 3:2. 

THE words of the Prophet given in our text 
refer to the close of the present Gospel Age. 
It is the same Day prophesied by the Apostle 
Paul when he declared, "The fire of that 
Day shall try every man's work of what sort 
it is." (1 Corinthians 3: 13.) It is the Day 
of which the Apostle Peter wrote so graphically 
when he said that in that great Day of 
the Lord the heavens should be on fire and 
the elements should melt with fervent heat, 
and that the earth and all the works therein should be 
burned up. (2 Peter 3:10.) It is the Day of which the 
Prophet Zephaniah spoke when he said that in the great 
Day of the Lord all the earth should be devoured with the 
fire of God's jealousy. (Zephaniah 3:8.) Isaiah, Jeremiah, 
and many of the faithful Prophets of God prophesied 
of this Day. The Prophet Daniel was instructed by 
the angel of the Lord that in that Day there should be a 
"Time of Trouble such as never was since there was a 
nation." (Daniel 12:1.) Our Lord Jesus Himself verified 
this prophecy, and added that never afterwards should 
there be such a time.— Matthew 24:21,22. 

The Scriptures call this Day "the Day of the Lord," 
"the Day of Jehovah," "the Day of God," "the Day 
of Christ," "the Day of Vengeance," "that great and notable 
Day," etc. It is the Day in which the Old Order is 
to perish and the glorious New Order is to be ushered in. 
In foretelling this Day, both the Prophets and the Apostles 



speak of the class which will stand in this Day when all 
others shall fall. St. Paul says that everything which can 
be shaken down will be; and that only the Kingdom which 
will then be set up, and which cannot be shaken, will 
remain. (Hebrews 12:25-29.) The present order of society— 
the nominal church systems, financial institutions, 
political institutions— all— will go down. 

During the Gospel Age many who have not been Christians 
have associated themselves with the Church. The 
civilized world of today call themselves "Christians," in 
contradistinction to the nations which they call "heathen." 
though from the Scriptural standpoint they are all heathen 
—Gentiles. Among all these various nations we find many 
religions, whose devotees claim that they have consecrated 
themselves to God. But the touch-stone by which these 
claims may be tested is the Word of God. See Galatians 1 :6-9. 
To the true Church of Christ alone will God give 
the Messianic Kingdom. Some who really have Christ 
and His work of sacrifice as their foundation will be saved, 
but at the expense of all their works, their character-structure, 
which the "fire" of this Day will consume. The 
tare class in the nominal churches will be bundled and 
"burned," not as individuals, but as professed Christians; 
that is to say, their professions will be seen to be without 
foundation. They will come to see how grossly in error 
they were— how far removed from the Truth. 

"SAVED AS THROUGH FIRE" 

The ones who are upon the Rock Christ Jesus, the only 
true Foundation, are those who have accepted Jesus as 
their Ransom-sacrifice, and have consecrated themselves 
wholly to God through Him. All these, "have been called 
in one hope of their calling." (Ephesians 4:4.) Many 
of these will fail to make their calling and election sure 
and will suffer great loss. They did not build properly 
upon this Foundation, Christ, a structure of gold, silver 
and precious stones of Truth and of whole-hearted loyalty 
to the Lord. They will suffer the loss of the Kingdom, 
and through much tribulation will take a lower place, 
before the Throne— not rulers, but honorable servants of 
the ruling class. All who have been begotten of the Holy 
Spirit must, as we have shown elsewhere, either be born 
upon the spirit plane or lose life altogether. Those who 
prove wholly faithful will be born Divine beings. Those 
not wholly faithful, and who miss the great "prize," 
though not denying the Lord that bought them, will be 
born spirit beings of a lower order. 

The tribulations which characterize the end of this 
Age will thoroughly awaken these careless ones. Certain 
special tribulations, we understand, have come to those 
who were of this class all through the Age. But apparently 
a larger number of these are living now, at the close 
of the Age; and these must go through "the great tribulation," 
and must wash their soiled robes and make them 
white in the blood of the Lamb. (Revelation 7:9-17.) 



They will have a blessed portion after their purification, 
but far less glorious than that to which they were called. 
The Apostle Paul in his writings lays special emphasis 
upon the fundamental importance of correct doctrinal 
teaching. It made no difference whether Paul or Apollos 
or even an angel from Heaven taught anything, it must be 
in harmony with the foundation doctrines which had been 
given them by the Lord. (Galatians 1:6-12.) He assured 
the Church that what he had taught them was from God; 
and that even if an angel should bring them another Gospel, 
it would be a proof that such angel had deflected from 
loyalty to the Lord. That Jesus Christ died to secure the 
Redemption-price for Adam and his race is the foundation 
doctrine of the Church, which was received from 

R5916 : page 196 

Jesus Himself and from His faithful mouthpieces and 

which was shown in the Divinely given types of the Law. 

Whoever taught this fundamental truth faithfully was a 

real help to the people of God. Yet even such a teacher 

might help them to build, even on this proper foundation, 

a faith and character structure which would not stand the 

tests of the great Day of the Lord; for the fire of that 

Day would surely prove the nature of this structure. Consequently, 

both teacher and pupil would suffer loss and 

be saved only "as through fire." 

INVULNERABILITY OF THE TRUTH 

This prophecy of our text is still in process of fulfilment. 
The "refiner's fire" is even now doing its work, and 
thousands and tens of thousands are falling all about us. 
The Prophet's query is very pertinent at this time. We 
see that the false teachings which have come down during 
these many centuries since the Apostles fell asleep have 
made humanity incapable of reasoning correctly on religious 
subjects. In the past we have had our own experiences 
along this line. Whenever anything religious 
was mentioned we seemed to lose our common sense. Now 
we have lost our fear of the dread penalty of using our 
reason. We have come back to the teachings of Jesus 
and the Apostles, and we find them grand and beautiful. 

Those who have been teaching errors will soon be 
ashamed (Isaiah 66:5), while the fire of this Day will only 
manifest the Truth to all. No power, no tongue, no pen, 
can successfully contradict the Truth, the great Divine 
Plan of the Ages. It is strong before its enemies and before 
all who make assaults upon it, and ere long the folly 
of its foes shall be made known to the whole world. 
"There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth." 

SIGNIFICANCE OF THE PRESENCE OF THE KING 

The coming of the King to possess His Kingdom will 
mean a personal as well as a national and a church examination. 



judgment and treatment. It will mean, when the 
Kingdom is fully inaugurated, the suppression of vice in 
a manner and to a degree never attempted by any earthly 
reformer. There will be no license to do evil in any form. 
The only liberty granted will be liberty to do right. It is 
no wonder that so few experience joy at the proclamation 
of the return of earth's rightful King to reign. To many 
it will mean the loss of their present advantages over their 
fellowmen. To many it will mean the prohibition and cutting 
off of sins now indulged in and enjoyed. 

Nevertheless, both the King and the Kingdom are not 
only coming, but are here; and the present troubles and 
shakings in church and state, and the general awakening of 
the people are the results of influences emanating from 
that King and Kingdom. Though men know it not, it is 
the smiting of the Kingdom of God that is even now preparing 
for the wreck of all the kingdoms of the earth, 
that the way may be opened for the establishment of 
righteousness in the world, that men's hearts may be 
humbled and prepared for the righteous Government 
which is to take control of earth. Worldly men cannot 

R5917:page 196 

realize this; for this Kingdom cometh not with outward 
observation— with outward show and display. Therefore 
they cannot say, "Lo, here," or "Lo, there." 

In spite of the awful war now raging, growing fiercer 
and more deadly every day, these continue to hope for 
peace, trying to convince themselves and others that the 
trouble must soon be brought to an end, and that matters 
will then go on as formerly. They blind themselves to 
the true conditions and refuse to believe that God has determined 
to permit this trouble to spread and involve the 
entire world and to bring about the utter overthrow of the 
Present Order of things. Selfishness, pride and love of 
money have closed their eyes. We give here an extract 
from a poem written some years ago by a Christian minister, 
which forcefully describes present conditions and 
the judgment of God which is now to be visited upon the 
world for their lasting good: 

"Woe to the Age when gold is god, and law a solemn jest. 

That helps the boldly vile to crush the noblest and the best! 
When Mammon o'er cheap millions flings his gilded harness 

strong, 
And drives them tame beneath his lash down broad highways 

of wrong; 
While Truth's shrill clarion down the sky peals faintly o'er 

the rout. 
And dust and fumes of earth and sin shut Heaven's blest 

sunlight out! 
Then look for lightning!— God's red bolts must cleave the 

stifling gloom. 
In righteous wrath to purge the world in Sodom's fearful 

doom!" 



But we are thankful that while the judgments of a 
righteous God against sin must come at this time, yet the 
ultimate results will be glorious, when the world will come 
forth chastened, subdued, purified by the awful baptism 
of fire and blood; when they shall come to see that sin, 
selfishness and corruption have wrought their legitimate 
outcome. Then mankind will be ready to cry to the Lord 
and to long for His deliverance, and He will be entreated 
of them and will lift them up and bless them. 

But the coming of the King means much trouble and 
the general overturning of the kingdoms of this world 
which, while professing to be kingdoms of God, are really 
under the control of the "prince of this world," Satan, 
"the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now 
worketh in the children of disobedience." (John 14:30; 16:1 1; 
Ephesians 2:2.) It means the shaking of society 
in a manner and to an extent never before known, and so 
thoroughly that another shaking will never be necessary. 
(Hebrews 12:26,27.) It means the breaking in pieces of 
the empires and governments of the world as a potter's 
vessel. It means the passing away of the present ecclesiastical 
"heavens," and the fall of many of its bright "stars." 
At present the sunlight of the true Gospel, and the moonlight 
of the Law with its types and shadows, are obscured 
by the thick clouds of worldly wisdom. "The sun shall be 
turned into darkness, the moon into blood."— Joel 2:30,31. 

While many would rejoice to see society relieved of 
many of its selfish, life -sapping ulcers, they seem to realize 
that so just and impartial a Judge as the Lord Himself 
might cut off certain long-cherished sins to which they 
desire to cling; they fear to have their personal selfishness 
touched. And their fears are well-founded. He will bring 
to light all the hidden things of darkness, and correct and 
suppress private as well as public sin and selfishness. He 
will expose depths of corruption never before realized. 
He will make "Justice the line and righteousness the 
plummet; and the hail shall sweep away the refuge of 
lies, and the waters shall overflow the hiding place." (R.V.) 
He will "bring down them that dwell on High, the 
lofty city [Babylon] He layeth low, . . . even to the 
dust." He will bring down them who have "made lies 
their refuge."-Isaiah 28:15,17,18; 26:5,6. 

LIFT UP TRUTH'S GLORIOUS BANNER! 

It is written that the Day of the Lord would come as 
a thief and a snare upon the whole world, and that only 
God's fully consecrated Church would be in the light and 
not be taken unawares. Many of the consecrated have 
been deceived by looking for the Heavenly King to come 
again in the flesh. They forgot that the only reason for 
His coming in the flesh at His First Advent was "for 

R5917:page 197 



the suffering of death" as man's corresponding-price; and 
that now He is highly exalted, a glorious spirit Being. 
"He was put to death in flesh, but made alive in spirit." 
(1 Peter 3:18.) They forgot that the Apostle Paul also 
said, "Though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet 
henceforth know we Him [so] no more." (2 Corinthians 5:16.) 
The true children of God are coming more and 
more to see how the Master comes at His Second Advent, 
and are not expecting to see Him in the flesh and with 
their natural eyes. 

We who know that the King of Glory and His blessed 
Kingdom are the only remedy for the wrongs and woes of 
man should be pointing the groaning creation to this 
Kingdom, rather than to the poultices of their own contriving 
which can do no real good. Tell them the meaning 
of present world-wide conditions, and how, beyond the 
troubles now overspreading the world, will come the glorious 
Times of Restitution foretold by all the holy Prophets 
since the world began. Tell them that the death of Jesus 
was the Redemption-price for the entire race of Adam, 
and that His return is for the purpose not only of delivering 
His Church, but to bind Satan and set free all His 
captives, including all who are in the graves, giving all 
who will an opportunity to come into the liberty of sons 
of God, under the terms of the New Covenant, soon to 
be established. 



R5917:page 197 

SEEKING MEMBERSHIP IN GOD'S KINGDOM 

"Seek ye first the Kingdom of God 
and His righteousness."— Matthew 6:33. 

AT THE beginning of our Lord's earthly ministry 
the Jewish nation were invited to become 
the Kingdom of God. The offer of 
God's chief blessing was "to the Jew first." 
For many centuries they had been God's 
special people. They had been called to be 
unto God "a kingdom of priests and an holy 
nation"— a peculiar treasure unto God, composed 
of a priestly class and a chosen, holy 
people. (Exodus 19:5,6.) We do not understand 
that all Israel from the time of the giving of the 
Law could have been of the Heavenly Kingdom, however 
faithful they might have been. None could be of this 
Kingdom class before Jesus came to earth; for He was 
the Forerunner of this class. The offer was made to the 
Jews of His day. But those of the nation who lived previously, 
and who had been faithful to God, true to their 
Covenant, shall be greatly blessed of the Lord on the 
human plane. They shall be used to bless all nations under 
Spiritual Israel— the Kingdom of God now being set up. 



God's special favor to the people of natural Israel in 
choosing them above any other nation was especially because 
they were the seed of His faithful friend, Abraham. 
God had promised Abraham that because of his faith and 
obedience his seed should be blessed. It was not because 
they were of themselves holier or better than other peoples. 
(See Exodus 32:9-13; Deuteronomy 9:4-8.) But 
for their fathers' sakes God chose them to be His people. 

At our Lord's First Advent the time had come for the 
offer of membership in the Kingdom, for the testing of the 
whole nation of Israel, to prove whether they were ready 
for this choice blessing. Jesus was the One to offer this 
Kingdom; for He had consecrated Himself a Sacrifice for 
sin, which would constitute a basis for the establishment 
of the Kingdom on earth. 

TRUE AND FALSE IDEAS OF THE KINGDOM 

The Sermon on the Mount, from which our text is 
taken, points out the earnestness and singleness of heart 
necessary in those who would become members of the 
Kingdom class. The Master intimates that not all of this 
favored nation who heard His Message would be ready 
to accept it. Many were absorbed in the things of this 
life— in what they would eat, what they would drink, what 
they would wear. But in order to be ready to receive the 
proffered blessing, in order to be acceptable to God, they 
must make the Kingdom their first interest. "Seek ye 
first the Kingdom of God and His righteousness," enjoined 
the Savior, not the earthly things. If the Kingdom was 
made first, all their earthly needs would be supplied; "All 
these things shall be added unto you," was His promise. 

Not many of the Jews were ready for so drastic a 
Teacher. They had their own plans— business plans, political 
plans, social functions. Hence this invitation of Jesus 
to leave all to obtain a Kingdom of which they knew nothing 
and which seemed so intangible did not find a very 
ready response. The twelve Apostles were among the first 
to accept His offer. At the time of Jesus' death, something 
over five hundred had joined themselves to Him as 
His disciples. Of these we are told that one hundred and 
twenty were gathered in the upper room on the day of 
Pentecost, where they received the begetting of the Holy 
Spirit. After Pentecost some thousands of Jews came to 

R5918:page 197 

the point of decision to make the Kingdom of God their 
first business. These, however, were but a small minority 
of the nation of Israel. 

Throughout this Gospel Age there have been a 
few who have heard the Call and accepted the conditions, 
who have determined to make the Kingdom of God the first 
consideration of their lives. Satan has tried to make many 
of these think that papacy is that Kingdom, or that Great 
Britain or Russia or some one of the other kingdoms of 



earth is that Kingdom. To others he brought a misinterpretation 

of the words of the Apostle, "The Kingdom of 

God is righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit," 

and endeavored to make them think that all there was of 

the Kingdom of God was merely righteousness and holiness 

of life, living a godly life through the power of the 

Lord's Spirit. How far all this is from the teaching of the 

Scriptures regarding the Kingdom can be readily seen by 

a study of the subject of the Kingdom of God as presented 

by the Holy Prophets, the Apostles and our Lord Jesus 

Himself. Truly we have a wily Adversary! 

HOW CHRISTIANS MAY KEEP GOD'S LAW 

By these false ideas the true thought of the Kingdom 
was obscured— the thought that God was selecting the 
members of the Kingdom class, the thought that we not 
only make a full consecration of our little all to the Lord 
according to His terms, but that we should continually put 
this vow of consecration into practice, counting all other 
things as loss and dross that we might win a membership 
in this glorious company of which Jesus is the Head. 
This obscuration of mind still continues with the majority 
of those who have professed the name of Christ; but the 
full complement of Body members of Christ is being secured, 
despite Satan's vigorous efforts to prevent it. Now 
the number is almost full; indeed the few now coming in, 
we believe, are merely taking the places vacated by some 
who by unfaithfulness have lost the crown laid up for 
them; for we understand that the full number had accepted 
the offer and been begotten of the Spirit when the general 
Call ceased, in the fall of 1881. See STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
Vol. III., Chap. 6-"The Work of the Harvest." 

In seeking the Kingdom of God we as Gentiles are to 
realize that the Lord has not changed from His original 

R5918:page 198 

position held when He made the proposition to Israel that 
in order to obtain everlasting life they must keep the Law. 
There is no other way. God will not exalt to Kingdom 
honors any who are violators of His Law. The question 
then comes in. How can we keep the Law? If the Jews 
could not keep it in all those sixteen hundred years, how 
could we keep it? And does not the Lord say through the 
Apostle that by the deeds of the Law shall no flesh be justified 
in His sight? To understand this is to understand 
some of the deep things of God; namely, that "God is in 
Christ reconciling the world [those from the world who 
now accept the Gospel Call] unto Himself, not imputing 
their trespasses unto them."— 2 Corinthians 5:19. 

"YOUR BODIES MEMBERS OF CHRIST" 

Christ kept the Law and satisfied Divine Justice for 
all who become His during the Gospel Age; and His 



merit is imputed to those who keep the Law in their 
heart and are hindered from keeping it absolutely by the 
weaknesses of their fallen flesh which they are unable to 
control. And so St. Paul says that the righteousness of 
the Law is fulfilled in us who walk not after the flesh, 
but after the Spirit. First of all, through the imputation 
of His merit to their mortal bodies, their flesh, our Redeemer 
covers their natural imperfections. Second, because 
that body so devoted, so justified, is sacrificed. He 
reckons them dead as human beings. They are then begotten 
to a new, a spirit nature. Thenceforth their mortal 
body is counted as the body of the New Creature, no 
longer as a human body; for this was sacrificed. Actually, 
however, it is quickened to be the servant of the New 
Creature. Being still actually human, it must be given a 
robe of righteousness to wear until the end of the present 
life. This is furnished by our Savior. 

The Apostle Paul, in speaking of our human bodies 
from the standpoint of our new relationship in Christ 
Jesus, says, "Know ye not that your bodies are members 
of Christ?" (1 Corinthians 6: 15.) God no longer counts 
our fleshly body as the body of a human being. It is a 
member of Christ, the property of the spiritual New Creature. 
This New Creature keeps the Law of God. Wherein 
there is failure, it is not the New Creature that fails, but 
the imperfect flesh, which is covered by the pure, white 
robe of Christ's righteousness. God looks upon it as the 
spotless body of this New Creature. Thus we stand perfect 
before God's Law; thus the righteousness of the Law 
is fulfilled in us who are walking, not according to the 
flesh, but in the footsteps of Jesus. 

LIBERTY IN CHRIST NOT THAT OF MEAT AND DRINK 

Our text enjoins that we seek God's righteousness. 
This seems to imply that for those He is now calling God 
has provided a righteousness. This righteousness is in 
Christ, and it must be accepted by every one who comes 
to God; otherwise, not having the righteousness of God 
and the assistance that goes with it, he will not be able 
to attain unto the Kingdom. 

The New Creature is so in accord with the Lord that 
he will seek to bring his mortal body fully under the 
control of the Law of Love. He will seek to be altogether 
just toward his fellowmen, toward the brethren, 
and kind and merciful toward all. His entire life will be 
given up to attaining membership in the Heavenly Kingdom. 
This will lead him to serve the cause of God's 
righteousness. Wherever God's plans are set aside, he 
would be called upon to defend them in every reasonable 
way. He will be on the side of righteousness and truth. 
All who truly seek the Kingdom have this disposition. 

When the Apostle Paul says that the Kingdom of God 
is not meat and drink, but righteousness, peace and joy in 
the Holy Spirit, we are to understand him to mean, as 
shown in the context, that the privileges of those who are 



of this Kingdom class do not consist merely in liberty to 

eat and drink things forbidden to those under the Law 

or to those in bondage to heathen superstitions, but our 

liberty is far superior to this. Those Jews who became 

followers of Christ were informed that they were now 

free from the regulations of the Law which restricted their 

food, etc. As to whether they would now eat pork or something 

else was thereafter to be regulated by conditions 

and circumstances. They had liberty in Christ that they 

had not, as Jews, previously enjoyed. 

But St. Paul points out that this is not the chief liberty — 
to be able to eat oysters, pork and other things forbidden 
by the Law. This permission would not be much 
of a blessing. The chief element of their freedom in 
Christ was that true righteousness and holiness which is 
the blessing and comfort of all those who are the sons of 
God. Nor was it the Apostle's thought that righteousness, 
peace and joy constitute the Kingdom, but that these 
are the blessed results of membership in the Kingdom 
class. They are blessings which are the heritage of those 
who are heirs of the Kingdom, even while they are still 
under age, as it were, still being tutored and prepared for 
Kingdom service beyond the veil. All of the Lord's people 
are now to rejoice in true righteousness, the righteousness 
of God, and to seek it above all else. 



R5918:page 198 

ST. PAUL AT ATHENS 

-JULY 16.-ACTS 17:16-34.— 

ATHENS THE INTELLECTUAL CENTER OF THE OLD WORLD-IMAGES 
OF THEIR GODS EVERYWHERE-PREACHING IN THE PARTHENON- 

THE ESSENCE OF THE APOSTLE'S DISCOURSE- 
THE BASIC DIFFERENCE BETWEEN GREEK PHILOSOPHY AND 
THE SCRIPTURAL TEACHINGS-THE TRUTH REJECTED BY 
THE WORDLY-WISE-GREEK PHILOSOPHY STILL HOLDS 
SWAY OVER THE MULTITUDE-ONLY A FEW BELIEVE 
THE TRUTH. 

"In Him we live and move and have our being."— Verse 28. 

WHILE Silas remained with the Bereans to 
strengthen and establish them, as Timothy 
had remained at Thessalonica and Luke at 
Philippi, St. Paul went on alone to Athens, 
then the center of the world's culture, intelligence 
and wisdom. It was a college 
city, where resided the most eminent philosophers 
of the world, as instructors in its 
great colleges, to which came the world's 
brightest and ablest thinkers. Athens 
boasted that during one century of its intellectual dominance 



it had sent forth more intellectual giants than all 

the rest of the world had supplied for five centuries. Jerusalem 

had been the center of true religion; Rome was 

the center of the world's imperial authority; and Athens 

was the world's intellectual capital. 

We can imagine St. Paul walking through the streets 
of that great city, admiring its architecture— the most 
wonderful in the world— listening to some of the scientific 
teachers of that day, and noting the numerous monuments 
with which the city was fairly crowded. Pliny, the historian, 
declares that about this time Athens contained 
more than three thousand public statues and a countless 
number of lesser images in private houses. He notes the 

page 199 

fact that in one street there stood before every house a 
square pillar supporting a bust of the god Hermes. Every 
gateway and every post carried its protecting god. Every 
street had its sanctuary. 

No wonder we read that the Apostle's heart was stirred 
within him as he beheld so intelligent a city wholly given 
over to idolatry, apparently ignorant of the true God! 
The longing seized him to tell these worldly-wise men 
about the great Creator and His Wisdom, Justice, Love 
and Power. As usual, he found the Jewish synagogue; 
and there he reasoned with the Jews and with devout persons. 
Moreover, he talked daily in the market places with 
all who were willing. Our translation says that he disputed; 
but scholars generally admit that this word does 
not well represent the thought of the original, which 
rather signifies conversed or reasoned. Disputes, in the 
ordinary sense of the word, are of little value and accomplish 
little or no good. 

Some called the Apostle a babbler, implying that there 
was neither reason nor sense in his presentations. Others 
thought more favorably, and were curious to have a formal 
discourse. So in the Lord's providence the way was 
opened for St. Paul to deliver a discourse on the Plan of 
the Ages amongst the wise men of the earth on Mars Hill, 
probably in the great structure known as the Parthenon. 
This must have seemed a favorable opening to the Apostle— 
to find intelligent people really inquiring about the Gospel 
which he was proclaiming. However, the curiosity 
of the Athenians, like that of some of the worldly today, 
was superficial. They wished to keep abreast of every 
new theory, particularly that they might the better defend 
their own position, to which they were already committed. 

THE ATHENIANS TOO RELIGIOUS 

Our Common Version reports the Apostle to have begun 
his discourse by accusing his hearers of being too 
superstitious. However true the statement might have 
been, it would have been an unwise one; for it would have 
needlessly prejudiced and offended his hearers from the 



outstart. We do well, therefore, to translate the word by 
the phrase too religious, instead of too superstitious. 
The Apostle proceeds to show that by the images 
which they had erected they recognized innumerable gods, 
and that in addition he had seen one altar to the Unknown 
God. This was being overly religious in one sense 
of the word— unwisely so. Reason should have taught 
them what Revelation teaches us; namely, that there is 
but one living and true God. The mind that roams about 
and grasps many gods is truly over-religious and under-wise. 

"TO THE UNKNOWN GOD" 

The inscription on one of the altars, "To the unknown 
God," became the text of the Apostle's discourse. He 
preached the true God and Jesus Christ, whom God had 
sent. He showed Divine Justice and its requirements, 
which the fallen race of Adam are unable to meet. He 
demonstrated that thus all mankind are under condemnation 
as unworthy of life everlasting. He showed that God 
so loved the world that He sent His Son to be our Satisfaction-price, 
to redeem mankind from the condemnation 
of death and to grant them resurrection privileges. He 
explained that this true God was neither stone nor wood, 
nor were there any such representations of Him, but that 
"they that worship Him must worship Him in spirit and 
in truth."— John 4:24. 

The Apostle thus drew the attention of the Athenians 
to a greater God than they had ever thought of. He 
showed the length and the breadth of Divine love- 
that it was not confined to one nation or people, 
but that God had made "of one blood all nations of 
men for to dwell on the face of the earth," having 
determined the appointed season in which they should 
come to a knowledge of Himself, according to the place 
of their residence; for He desires that all should seek 
Him, and that, feeling after Him, they should find Him. 

How true this is! To some of us the Lord has revealed 
Himself, and has drawn us to a knowledge of Himself 
and to opportunities for still further knowledge and 
grace. Yet many are still in ignorance. His time or season 
for their being brought to a knowledge of the Truth 
having not yet fully arrived. He is being found out by 
those who desire to find Him— those who are out of accord 
with sin, those who are feeling after God with a 
desire to find Him. To this class alone does He appeal. 
How glad we are to know that after having gathered the 
Elect of this Gospel Age, He will ultimately cause every 
knee to bow and every tongue to confess, and will spread 
the knowledge of His glory to fill the whole earth! 

The Apostle, in addressing philosophers, spoke from 
the standpoint of reason, instead of attempting to discuss 
the matter from the standpoint of Divine Revelation, as 
He would have done if he had been speaking to a congregation 
of Jews or of Christians. Thus to the Stoics 
and other learned men of Athens he became a philosopher. 



in order that he might the better assist them to the true 

philosophy and the Plan of the Ages. For instance, had 

he been speaking to Jews or Christians he might have 

noted the fact that all out of Christ are out of Divine 

favor and under Divine condemnation; but in addressing 

these philosophers, he stated the truth from another standpoint. 

He called attention to the fact that in one sense 

of the word the entire human family are brethren, and 

all of them God's children, or offspring. 

Note the logic of the argument. If humanity are the 
offspring of God, they should, as His children, resemble 
Him in some degree. This being true, gold, silver, and 
stone images must be very poor representations of the 
true God. Man himself, as the child or offspring of God, 
would better represent Him, especially in the higher elements 
of character. 

"THIS IGNORANCE GOD WINKED AT" 

St. Paul anticipated the questions of his hearers— 
"Why do you come here now to tell us of this God? If 
He is our Creator, and if we are His children, why did 
He not send us a message long ago? Are we responsible 
for not worshiping Him, when we knew Him not?" The 
Apostle's answer was. You are not responsible up to the 
present time. Such ignorance and idolatry "God winked 
at"— let go unnoticed; for until now His great Plan had 
not reached that stage of development which authorized 
the sending of the Message to you. Now God has sent 
the Message to you. He commands all men everywhere 
to repent— of sins, of unrighteousness— and to come back 
into harmony with Himself. 

The question may be asked, "Why tell men to repent 
at that time any more than previously?" We answer. 
The Apostle explains why, by saying that NOW God 
commands all men everywhere to repent because He has 
appointed another Day of Judgment. In the first judgment 
Adam was on trial. He was found unworthy of 
everlasting life, and was sentenced to death. His entire 
race has shared in his death penalty. But now, in due 
time, Christ died to redeem Adam and his race from that 
death sentence, and thus opened the way for the appointment 
of another Day of Judgment, of trial for life or 
death everlasting. 

This second trial, or Day of Judgment, would not be 
merely for those who would be living at the time, but 

page 200 

would have to do with all the race— every nation, people, 
kindred and tongue— "all men everywhere." This would 
imply an awakening of the dead. Otherwise the millions 
who have already died could never have God's grace and 
could never have an opportunity for participation in it. 
The proof that all this was God's purpose, and that He 
was able to raise the dead— St. Paul points out as already 



demonstrated by the fact that the One who had died to 
redeem the race had arisen from the dead, and in due time 
would be prepared to carry out all the provisions of the 
Divine Plan in dealing not only with the living, but with 
the dead members of the race, and giving to all a gracious 
opportunity for eternal life. Moreover, this blessed opportunity 
was now presented to those who heard. 

SOME MOCKED AT THE RESURRECTION 

No other religion than that of the Bible teaches a 
resurrection of the dead. All other religions teach that 
death is only a deception— that when men die, they really 
become more alive than before death; that when they lose 
all consciousness, they really become more intelligent than 
formerly. Only the Bible teaches in accord with the voice 
of our senses that the dead are DEAD and "know not 
anything." Only the Bible teaches that a future life is 
dependent upon the resurrection of the dead. 

Only the Bible teaches that the redemption of the dead 
is dependent upon the death of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
Only the Bible teaches that the Redeemer must come again 
the second time— not to suffer again, not as a man again, 
but as the Lord of life and glory on the spirit plane to 
change His elect Bride to His own nature, to associate 
her with Himself in His Kingdom glory, and to establish 
amongst men the Reign of Righteousness long promised, 
for which we pray, "Thy Kingdom come; Thy will be 
done on earth, as it is done in Heaven." 

The philosophers of that day at Athens, like the philosophers 
of our day and of every epoch, sneered at the 
doctrine of the resurrection of the dead. Some of them 
denied a future life entirely. Others held that human life 
persists and is indestructible. All were in opposition to 
the Bible teaching of a sentence of death, of a redemption 
by death and of a resurrection from death. All interest 
in the Apostle's teaching vanished for the majority 
when they learned that the entire philosophy rested upon 
the resurrection of the dead. 

To the worldly mind nothing seems so irrational and 
so unreasonable as this feature of the Christian religion. 
Today this doctrine of the resurrection is proving to be 
a test to many. Few can receive it. Yet all who do not 
receive it are very certain to stumble into some of the pitfalls 
of error which the Adversary is permitted to arrange 
now for all who reject the counsel of God. 

NOT MANY GREAT OR WISE 

Nevertheless the Apostle's mission was not in vain; 
for we read that "certain men clave unto him." The 
Truth is a magnet which has a drawing power upon 
hearts of a certain character. The Apostle did not expect 
to convert many of those philosophers. He knew that not 
many wise, rich, great or learned according to the course 
of this world could come in amongst those whom the Lord 



is now calling to constitute the Bride of Christ. 

(1 Corinthians 1:26-29.) He knew that their time to hear 

would be during the Millennium— in that Day of Judgment, 

or trial, of which he had been telling the philosophers. 

Some of those who declined to hear further 

said, "We may hear you again on this matter." But if 

the Truth did not appeal to them at once, it is quite 

doubtful whether the same Message would do so later. 

Does not this principle hold true today? Is it not still 
true that the Lord is seeking a Little Flock only? Is it 
not still true that acceptance of the Truth indicates those 
who are drawn to the Lord and guided by His Holy Spirit? 
Is it not still true that inability to see the beauty and the 
force of the Truth is an indication of unworthiness of it? 

Let us be content, if possible, to find and to bless with 
the Truth those whom the Lord our God has called and 
drawn. Let us be content to leave the others for His due 
time (1 Timothy 2:5,6), after we have put the Truth 
before them. The condemnation of death will continue 
upon all except the Household of Faith until the time for 
the establishment of the great Kingdom. Then Natural 
Israel will be blessed under the terms of the New Covenant, 
the blood for the sealing of which— the blood of 
Christ— is during this Age being prepared in the sufferings 
of the Head, in which the Body is permitted to share. 
(Col. 1:24.) Then, under the provisions of that New Law 
Covenant, the blind eyes of Israel shall be opened and their 
deaf ears unstopped, and reconciliation be made complete 
for them, and for the world through them. 

Evidently this privilege of reconciliation will be open 
to all the world of mankind who, by becoming proselytes, 
may share the blessings of that New Covenant with Israel. 
And how glorious will be our privilege— if we are found 
faithful— to be sharers with our Lord in putting that New 
Covenant into execution and, as its Mediator, blessing 
Israel and the world! 



R5918: page 200 

GOOD, BETTER, BEST IN BIBLE STUDY 

EVERY influence which makes for respect for 
the Bible as the Word of God is commendable. 
The Bible Study practiced in Great 
Britain and Ireland fifty to a hundred years 
ago; namely, the committing to memory of 
verses and chapters and the use of the Book 
as a reader in the Schools, had its advantages. 
Those who thus became familiar 
with the text of the Bible had a valuable 
store of information, if later they became 
Christians and sought the meaning of God's Messages. 

Other Bible Study attempts were made in various denominations 
in so-called Bible Study Classes. These, 



however, were hampered by the denominational Creeds. 
Occasionally able teachers informed their Classes respecting 
the historical setting, discussed the writer of the 
Epistle, the journeying experiences, etc. Sometimes he 
ventured off into doctrine; but on such occasions, unless 
he was very discreet and held down the Class, the result 
of the lesson was somewhat of a dispute and a general 
tangle, which left the Class more confused than before. 
Another style of Bible Study which for a time found 
favor, consisted of a number of Christian people reading 
a chapter, verse about. Each, after reading his verse, 
would make such comment as he pleased. If there were 
forty verses in the chapter there were as many little comments. 
When the meeting closed there was a feeling of 
a measure of refreshment in having handled the Bible, 
having read some interesting verses, and having communed 

R5919: page 200 

with each other; but very little knowledge of God 
or His Plan of the Ages was gained by such Bible Study. 
It is only of late— within the past ten years practically— 
that the Bible has been studied after the manner 
we mention as Berean Studies— searching the Scriptures. 
Now all over the world Berean Classes are in operation. 
Great blessing and great enlightenment are resulting. 

R5919: page 201 

For this kind of Bible Study, a textbook is used and also 

a question-book. The textbooks are the various volumes 

of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. In these volumes the teachings 

of the Bible have been collated and brought into an 

assimilable form. For instance, if the lesson appertains 

to the Holy Spirit, the study on the subject brings together 

the teachings of the Bible from every part and 

sets these in orderly array before the Class. If the subject 

be "The Man Christ Jesus," it is similarly treated. 

If the subject be "The Logos," it is treated in like manner. 

If the subject be "Justification," "Sanctification," 

"The Glorification of the Saints," each subject is treated 

systematically— brought to the minds of the Class and 

laid open for discussion, with references to various parts 

of the Bible in which these things are stated. 

It does not surprise us, therefore, that those of God's 
people who have learned the value of this method of Bible 
Study and who follow it have a clearer understanding 
of the Word of God than others. While, therefore, we 
commend any kind of Bible Study, we especially commend 
this form which the Lord has blessed above all 
others for the enlightenment of His people in this Harvest 
time. This method is for the advantage of the entire 
Class. An able leader is not so indispensable. One 
danger with able leaders with any other method of Bible 
Study is that their ability sometimes goes in a wrong 
direction and misleads. 



These Berean Studies, however, place the entire Class 
in a position of advanced scholarship in the Word of God, 
because they have the entire subject under discussion 
open before them. Nevertheless, even in a Berean Study 
and when the questions are used, a skilful leader, who 
is humble-minded, will prove a great assistance to the 
Brethren. And this is the case in nearly every Class the 
world around. We want the dear readers of THE WATCH 
TOWER to know just why we so earnestly recommend to 
them this Berean form of Bible Study. Nor should we 
wonder if the Adversary would work against a method 
which has been so blessed of the Lord. We urge upon all 
a comparison between the results in their minds, their 
hearts, their lives, as between Berean Bible Studies and 
all other kinds of which they may have knowledge or 
have tried in the past. 



R5919: page 201 

ST. PAUL AT CORINTH 
-JULY 23.-ACTS 18:1-1 1.- 

LESSONS FROM ST. PAUL'S EXPERIENCES-CORINTH A BETTER FIELD 
FOR THE GOSPEL THAN WAS ATHENS-AS USUAL, THE 
MESSAGE WAS OPPOSED AND BLASPHEMED BY THOSE 

WHO PREFERRED "THE TRADITIONS OF THE ELDERS"-ARRIVAL 
OF SILAS AND TIMOTHY-ST. PAUL ENCOURAGED AND 
COMFORTED. 

"Be not afraid, but speak, and hold not thy peace."— Verse 9. 

ATHENS did not prove to be a very successful 
field for the Apostle Paul's labors. He 
quickly perceived that, although its citizens 
were chiefly engaged in hearing new things 
and in philosophizing on every subject. 
nevertheless the tendency of science and 
philosophy, falsely so-called, occupied their 
attention and so satisfied their minds that 
they were not as ready for the Truth as were 
some others less highly educated and less 
philosophical. The Apostle's experience in this respect 
coincides with that of all who in sincerity preach the Gospel 
of Christ stripped of all human invention and philosophy, 
and also illustrates his declaration that God does 
not choose many wise or great or learned, according to 
this world's standard, but chiefly the poor of this world- 
poor socially, philosophically and financially— to be the 
heirs of the Kingdom; for this class is more inclined to 
receive the faith and to become rich therein. 

Leaving Athens, St. Paul journeyed about forty miles 
to Corinth, a prominent commercial city of Greece, noted 
for its manufactures, architecture, paintings, bronzes, etc. 



It was much less moral than was Athens, much less refined, 
but nevertheless a better field for the Gospel. 
Where religious forms and ceremonies become popular, 
they are apt to have correspondingly the less weight and 
force. But where sin, immorality and irreligion are popular, 
those minds which have a religious trend are apt to 
be more free, more open for the Truth. Unsatisfied by 
formalism, this class more keenly recognize righteousness 
because of its sharp contrast with the sin abounding. 

Similarly today, the Truth is likely to receive a cooler 
reception amongst those whose religious sensibilities are 
to some extent satisfied by forms and ceremonies. The 
heart most ready for the Truth is the one which is not 
satiated and stupefied with religious formalism, but which 
realizes to some extent the exceeding sinfulness of sin and 
longs for the righteousness which is of God. Like the 
Apostle, we are to discern the most fruitful fields and to 
spend our energy upon them, leaving the other fields for a 
more convenient season, whether it shall come during the 
present Age or during the Millennium. 

LESSONS FROM ST. PAUL'S EXPERIENCES 

Apparently the Apostle was considerably cast down at 
this time. His first letter to the Corinthian Church, written 
later on, clearly implies his discouragement and possible 
sickness. He wrote, "I was with you in weakness 
and in fear and in much trembling." His rough experiences 
at Philippi, his small success at Athens, the slenderness 
of his purse and his need of fellowship— all contributed 
to make him downcast; and he informs us that 
the Lord encouraged him with a vision. 

Soon after his arrival at Corinth St. Paul found 
Aquila and Priscilla his wife. They were tent-makers; 
and this being the Apostle's trade, he abode with them 
and labored. It was customary at that time that the sons 
of all the upper class of people should learn a trade, however 
well educated otherwise. St. Paul's trade stood him 
now in good place, enabling him to provide for his necessities 
while preaching the Gospel of Christ. From his own 
explanation of the matter we learn that even after a considerable 
number of believers had been gathered at Corinth 
as a Church, the Apostle maintained himself by his trade. 
His reason for so doing was not that it would have been 
a sin for him to receive money and support from the believers 
there, but that he hoped that the Gospel would 
commend itself the more to many if its chief expounder 
were seen to be laboring not for the meat which perisheth, 
nor for wealth, but preaching the Gospel without charge 
—laying down his life for the brethren. 

Of this period the Apostle wrote to the Thessalonians, 
"Therefore, brethren, we were comforted over you, in all 
our affliction and distress, by your faith." (1 Thessalonians 3:7.) 
Later, he wrote of his experience to the 
Corinthians, saying, "Even unto this present hour we 
both hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted. 



and have no certain dwelling place, and labor, working 

with our own hands; being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, 

page 202 

we suffer it; being defamed, we entreat; we are 

made as the filth of the world, and are the offscouring of 

all things unto this day."— 1 Corinthians 4:1 1-13. 

Many of us can find a lesson in St. Paul's experiences. 
If God permitted him to be in want, to be traduced, slandered, 
oppressed— if he needed such experiences in order 
to bring out the best that was in him and to make his 
epistles the more useful to the Church— possibly the Lord's 
dealings with us at times may be with the same end in view 
—our preparation for further usefulness in His service. 

ST. PAUL "PRESSED IN SPIRIT" 

Notwithstanding all of his discouragements and the 
fact that his tent-making labors barely sufficed to provide 
for him things decent and honorable, the Apostle never 
forgot that his chief mission in life was the preaching of 
the Gospel. If the earning of his daily bread hindered 
his preaching during the week he at least took his Sabbath 
days for the more important work whenever he could 
reach a congregation of the Jews. We read that he reasoned 
with them in the synagogue every Sabbath day. 
But apparently he was under a measure of constraint and 
did not speak with his accustomed boldness and vigor, 
perhaps because of the lack of moral support, which is an 
important factor with all and an essential with many. 

Finally Silas and Timothy arrived, bringing with them 
not only good fellowship and encouraging news from 
Berea, Thessalonica and Philippi, but also a gift, as the 
Apostle himself tells us— quite probably from Lydia, the 
seller of purple dyes, supposed to have been comfortably 
circumstanced. The effect of these encouragements is 
intimated. St. Paul "was pressed in spirit"— he felt a 
fresh vigor urging him to present his Message more zealously 
and to bring matters to a focus at the synagogue. 

After testifying with great boldness and finding that 
his Message was repelled by the majority of the synagogue, 
the Apostle forced the crisis himself by shaking his garment 
as if he would not take from them even the dust, 
saying to those who had opposed and blasphemed, "Your 
blood be upon your own heads. I am clean. From henceforth 
I will go unto the Gentiles." 

There are times when positiveness is absolutely necessary, 
even though it cause a division amongst those who 
profess to serve the same God. There are times when 
much more good can be thus obtained than by a continuance 
under disadvantageous conditions. Oil and water 
will not mix; and time spent in trying to blend them is 
altogether wasted. When positive bitterness and hatred 
are manifested, as in the case under consideration, it is 
better to withdraw. 



But neither the Apostle nor we would recognize as 
proper or at all allowable that the Lord's people should 
quarrel and take offense one with the other over trifles 
unworthy of consideration. The shaking off of the dust 
not only was what our Lord had suggested (Matthew 10: 14), 
but was a custom of the time— a warning, as it 
were, that the Apostle felt that he had discharged his 
entire duty and now left the responsibility upon their 
own shoulders. 

The effect was good in two ways: (1) It helped 
Crispus, the ruler of the synagogue, to take a decided 
stand; whereas otherwise he might have been stunted in 
his spiritual development. Crispus decided for the Lord 
Jesus, and took his stand with the Apostle and a few 
others (2) The fact that the Jews had repudiated the 
Apostle and his Message would draw the attention of the 
Gentiles more particularly to his Gospel. Some of these 
Gentiles already believed. The new meetings were held 
in the home of Justus, a reverent man who resided near 
the synagogue. Thus as the Jews attended the synagogue 
worship they would be continually reminded of St. Paul's 
Message in the synagogue, which would be an incentive 
for them to enter the house of Justus and hear more respecting 
the fulfilment of the prophecies in Jesus. 

ST. PAUL ENCOURAGED 

The result was that a considerable number of the Corinthians 
believed and were baptized, thus symbolizing 
their consecration to do the will of the Lord. Thus we 
see that opposition is not necessarily an injurious thing 
to the Lord's Cause. On the contrary, it is safe to say 
that a most dangerous condition is stagnation. 

Evidently the Lord saw that His servant Paul needed 
some special encouragement at this time. Hence another 
vision was granted, in which the Apostle was told, "Be not 
afraid, but speak and hold not thy peace; for I am with 
thee, and no man shall set on thee to harm thee, for I 
have much people in this city." 

What an insight this incident gives us as to the Divine 
supervision of the Gospel Message and its servants! How 
these words remind us of the promise that the Lord will 
not suffer us to be tempted above what we are able to 
bear, but will with every temptation provide also a way 
of escape! (1 Corinthians 10:13.) That vision and its 
message, we may be sure, were not for the Apostle merely, 
but for all the Lord's people from that time until now. 
The same God is rich unto all that call upon Him. and 
able both to shield and to deliver all of His servants. 
Therefore He will permit only such experiences as His 
infinite Wisdom sees will be advantageous to His Cause 
and will work out for His servants a far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory. 

The Lord's statement that He had much people in 
Corinth teaches us a lesson also. It shows that the Lord 
knows the hearts of all, and that He has a care not only 



for His saints, but also for those who have not yet heard 
His message, but whose hearts are in a favorable attitude 
of honesty, sincerity. A further lesson comes to us in 
this connection: We are to remember that the Lord is 
His Own Superintendent of Missions, and that He is able 
to guide His consecrated servants, not only as to direction 
and place of service, but also as respects the time they 
shall remain to accomplish His will and as respects the 
character of the experiences necessary for them in order 
best to accomplish His purposes. 

The more firmly our faith can grasp this situation, the 
more we can rely upon the Lord and use His wisdom instead 
of our own, the more successful shall we be as His 
servants, and the more happy and contented; for we shall 
realize that all things are working together for good to all 
who are His, to all submitted to His guiding care. 

EIGHTEEN MONTHS OF TEACHING 

Corinth was nicknamed the Vanity Fair of the World; 
for it was a center of frivolity, pleasure -seeking, etc. It is 
said to have been one of the most licentious and profligate 
cities of its day. At first the thought may seem very 
strange to us that this vilest of the great cities should yield 
larger spiritual results than did any other, so much so 
that the Lord would especially declare that He had "much 
people" there, and would providentially detain His ambassador 
there for a year and a half, while in other places 
he had been permitted to remain only a few days or weeks. 

The philosophy of the matter seems to be this: Outward 
morality frequently leads to a pharisaical spirit of 
self-righteousness, which is a most pernicious and deadly 
foe to true righteousness. On the other hand, where sin 
stands out glaringly it has a repulsive effect upon the pure 
in heart, upon all who love righteousness; and this repulsion 

page 203 

from the evil seems to prepare such hearts the better 
for a genuine consecration to the Lord and to enable them 
to receive His Message. This theory holds good, at least 
in the missionary work at Corinth, as in contrast with that 
of places much more respectable in reputation. 

The lesson for us in this connection is that we should 
ever be on guard in our own hearts against this self-righteous 
spirit of outward observance, which lacks true 
holiness, true sanctification. It is along this line that our 
Lord found fault with one of the seven Churches, saying, 
"Because thou art lukewarm, I will spew thee out of My 
mouth. Because thou sayest, I am rich, and increased in 
goods, and have need of nothing; and knowest not that 
thou art wretched and miserable, and poor, and blind, and 
naked." (Revelation 3:16,17.) This is our Lord's charge 
against the present state of the nominal church— so rich 
in earthly advantages, so self-satisfied. Let us be on 
guard lest in any manner or to any degree such a lukewarmness 



should come over us and we should lose the 
Divine favor. 



R5919: page 203 

GLORYING IN THE CROSS OF CHRIST 

-JULY 30.-1 CORINTHIANS 1:18-2:2.- 

THE CROSS OF CHRIST NO LONGER PREACHED-REDEMPTION 
DOCTRINE FALLING BEFORE EVOLUTION THEORY-THESE TWO 
THEORIES ANTAGONISTIC-FEW UNDER THE BANNER OF 
THE CROSS WITH JESUS AND THE APOSTLES. 

"Far be it from me to glory, save in the Cross 
of our Lord Jesus Christ."— Galatians 6:14. 

ONE can dispute that the preaching of the 
Cross of Christ is dying out. Those who 
still preach it give the impression that at 
the most it means renouncement of sin and 
the incidental self-denials. Rare indeed 
would it be to find a minister in our day 
preaching the necessity for the Cross of 
Christ— the necessity for Jesus' death as the 
Redemption-price for the sins of the world. 
-1 Timothy 2:5,6; Matthew 20:28. 

Why is this? Some would answer that they have become 
Christian Scientists, and no longer believe that there 
is such a thing as sin, and no longer believe that there is 
such a thing as death; and that hence they could not believe 
that Jesus died for sin. Others would answer that 
they have gotten too wise to believe any longer that in the 
Divine Plan the death of Jesus was necessary for human 
redemption and reconciliation to the Father. Their view 
is that the Apostles and Jesus, in setting forth the Cross, 
were laboring under the delusion of the darker time, 
which present-day education shatters under a brighter 
light. Still others would say that they have become 
Evolutionists and Higher Critics, that they no longer believe 
the Bible at all, and that they adopt the opposite 
theory to that of the Bible— namely, the Evolution theory. 

From the standpoint of Evolution there could be no 
justice, no propriety of any kind, in a Ransom-sacrifice 
by a Redeemer. Why? Because, according to the Evolution 
theory, man is merely developing, and is not yet perfect 
and not yet ready for trial along perfect lines; he is 
merely merging from a brute to an intelligent creature. 
Evolutionists would claim that without any redemption 
or any interference whatever upon God's part the process 
of Evolution will continue until by and by there will be a 
family of mankind that will reach an aristocracy of wisdom, 
efficiency and power which will enable them to live 
everlastingly by their own wits. 



Small comfort is there in this for Evolutionists of 
today or of the past. If they boast of their children of 
the future and of the everlasting life to which those children 
will be gradually evolved, they admit that personally 
they have nothing beyond the tomb— that any future life 
on their part will be representatively in their children. 
And as for their parentage, they have nothing to boast of 
there, although some of them seem to boast of their ancestry, 
after all— that their forefathers were monkeys, 
frogs and, earliest of all, simply protoplasm. 

SIGNIFICANCE OF THE CROSS 

These theories are the products of human wisdom, and 
indicate a misunderstanding and neglect of God's Word. 
How beautiful is the Gospel of the Cross as compared 
with any other! It assures us that God made man in His 
own image and likeness; and that man's fall from that 
perfection to his present condition of demoralization came 
as a result of disobedience to Divine Law and of the enforcement 
of the Divine penalty— "Dying, thou shalt die." 
(Genesis 2: 17, margin.) For six thousand years our race 
has been dying, not only physically, but also mentally, 
which includes the moral qualities. With all the experiences 
of the past and with all the education of the present, 
nobody has hope that our race can be lifted up out of its 
present unsatisfactory condition back to perfection. All 
that we can do is to combat the evil in ourselves, combat 
disease and death, and help others along the same lines. 

But meantime, God had from the very beginning 
planned the blessings of the Cross— planned that in due 
time He would send forth His Son, who would die for 
human sin, "The Just for the unjust," and thus open up 
the way for man's return to Divine favor and everlasting 
life. Thus it is written: "As by a man came death, by 
a man comes also the resurrection of the dead; for as all 
in Adam die, even so all in Christ shall be made alive— 
every man in his own order."— 1 Corinthians 15:21-23. 

For four thousand years the world waited for the redemption 
accomplished at Calvary. For nearly two thousand 
years the results of that redemption have been confined 
to a special class of humanity, under a special call, 
or invitation, to be the Bride of Christ— "the Church of 
the First-borns, whose names are written in Heaven." 
(Hebrews 12:23.) The Scriptures assure us that this selected 
company is to be associated with Jesus in the great 
Kingdom of God, which the Bible everywhere shows is to 
roll away the curse and, instead, bring back favor. 

The Kingdom cannot come until the Royal Family is 
ready to take the Throne. Jesus, indeed, has long been 
ready; but in harmony with the Father's Plan He has 
waited and has been doing a work in the preparation of 
the Church, His brethren, who are to be His joint-heirs 
in the Kingdom— otherwise styled "the Bride, the Lamb's 
Wife." (Romans 8:17; Revelation 21:9,10.) Then for 
a thousand years the Restitution privileges will be open to 



t he whole world of mankind. It will no longer be necessary 
to preach; for all will know the Lord, from the least 
unto the greatest, and unto Him every knee shall bow and 
every tongue confess. (Jeremiah 31:34; Philippians 2:9-1 1.) 
All this is to come as a result of the Cross. 

EARTHLY VS. HEAVENLY WISDOM 

No wonder the Apostle makes the Cross of Christ the 
center of his preaching, declaring: "Without the shedding 
of blood there is no remission" of sins! (Hebrews 9:22.) 

R5920 : page 203 

As the Prophet hath declared, "By His stripes we are 
healed." (Isaiah 53:5.) Our lesson quotes briefly the Divine 
prophecy that the worldly-wise would not appreciate 
the Divine Plan, and especially the center of that Plan— 

R5920 : page 204 

the Cross of Christ. Worldly wisdom would look in an 
entirely different direction. 

However, God is not seeking the worldly-wise, but 
those loving righteousness, full of faith and obedience. 
Hence the majority of mankind, including the majority 
of the wise, are still to be found on the side of the world; 
and only comparatively few have come properly and truly 
to the Lord's side, accepting the Wisdom from Above. 
These, in the eyes of the world, are foolish; but in the 
eyes of the Lord, they are wise. The wise, the great, the 
noble, the rich, the learned, are so well satisfied with what 
they have that they are not hungering nor thirsting, nor 
seeking after the Divine arrangement. Hence those who 
accept the Lord's arrangement are usually the poor, the 
unlearned, etc., who realize their lack of wisdom and seek 
it from the Fountain of Wisdom and through the channel 
of Wisdom— the Bible. 

The whole world is perishing because of Original Sin; 
and to nearly all of the world the Cross of Christ is 
foolishness. We who believe God's Message are said to 
be saved— to have passed from death unto life— because 
we have come into relationship with the great Life-giver 
"through faith in His blood." To us the great Redeemer 
is the Wisdom of God personified, and that Wisdom is 
shown in the Master's course in sacrifice. When we accept 
this. He becomes our Justifier; and being justified 
by Him, we are granted access to the Father, who receives 
our consecration sacrifices, and imparts to us a begetting 
of His Holy Spirit. Our salvation continues as 
day by day we abide in the Lord and grow in grace, 
knowledge and the Holy Spirit. Eventually our salvation 
will be completed; as it is written, our salvation shall be 
brought unto us at the glorious appearing of our Lord 
and Savior Jesus Christ.— 1 Peter 1:13; Titus 2:13. 

When the Royal Priesthood shall have entered into 



the Heavenly glory, then will begin the New Dispensation 

of Messiah's Kingdom, which will utterly scatter the 

errors of worldly wisdom and cause all the world of mankind 

to hear "the still, small Voice" of God. The Lord 

will then turn to the people a pure Message, that they 

may all call upon Him and serve Him with one consent. 

(Zephaniah 3:8,9.) Then, during the Millennium, 

will be the world's trial time; as now, during this Gospel 

Age, is the Church's day of trial, testing and preparation 

for the fulness of Jehovah's favor and for everlasting life. 

With such an appreciation of the value and the necessity 
of the Cross of Christ, we can join heartily with the 
Apostle Paul in the Golden Text of this lesson: "Far be 
it from me to glory, save in the Cross of Christ." 



R5920 : page 204 

LESSON OF THE BLIGHTED FIG TREE 

"Have faith in God."-Mark 1 1:22. 

AS JESUS and His Apostles passed along the 
road from Bethany to Jerusalem preaching 
the Gospel of the Kingdom, they had seen, 
en route, a fig tree. Our Lord, being 
hungry, went to the tree, seeking fruit 
thereon; for the time of figs was not yet 
past. But He found that the tree was barren. 
Then He pronounced a curse, a blight, 
upon the tree. The next day as they passed 
by, Jesus' disciples noticed that the fig tree 
had withered from the roots. Then Peter said, "Master, 
behold, the fig tree which Thou cursedst is withered 
away!" Jesus answered, "Have faith in God." (Mark 1 1:13,14,20-22.) 
Then He called their attention to the 
fact that it was not merely Himself who had blighted the 
tree, but that the Heavenly Father was to be recognized 
as behind Him in this. He ascribed always the honor 
to the Father. He was merely the Finger of God. "The 
works which the Father hath given Me to finish, the same 
works that I do. bear witness of Me. that the Father hath 
sent Me." "The words that I speak unto you I speak 
not of Myself; but the Father that dwelleth in Me, He 
doeth the works. "-John 5:36; 14:10. 

REAL OBJECT OF JESUS' MIRACULOUS WORKS 

Some of the people of that time, as now, had malignant 
power; and Jesus' act might have been attributed to 
that source. So He would direct the minds of His 
disciples to the things that He did as being always of 
God— thus differentiating His power from that of Satan. 
Some might wonder that God would take notice of a tree 
because it was not bearing fruit. But Jesus was not an 



ordinary person. His course was not an example for us 
to go along the street and, seeing an unfruitful tree, say, 
"Cursed be this tree; it shall not bear any more fruit 
forever!" Should we adopt this course, we might be 
finding fault with trees and with everything else. But 
our Lord was especially sent of God. He was accustomed 
to do good as He went about. He healed the people and 
taught them, giving them forceful object lessons. 

It was necessary that the disciples of Jesus be thoroughly 
convinced that He was sent of God before they 
could have developed in them the needful faith. They 
must continue this faith, consecrating their hearts and 
lives to God, before they would be ready for the Pentecostal 
blessing. Hence many of our Lord's works were 
of an outward, visible kind, intended for the enlightenment 
of His followers, for the establishment of His 
Messiahship, and for the manifestation of His future 
work for the world. Of His conversion of the water into 
wine, it is written, "This beginning of miracles did Jesus 
in Cana of Galilee, and manifested forth His [coming] 
glory; and His disciples believed on Him."— John 2:11. 

St. Paul points out that the natural man cannot see the 
deep things of God because they are spiritually discerned. 
(1 Corinthians 2: 14.) Hence there was a necessity for 
teaching of this outward, material kind to Jesus' disciples; 
for they were but natural men. Although they 
recognized Him as the Messiah, they did not realize this 
clearly at first. Jesus asked them on one occasion, "Whom 
say ye that I am?" And Simon Peter answered. "Thou 
art The Christ, the Son of the living God." Jesus said, 
"Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona! for flesh and blood 
hath not revealed this unto thee, but My Father which is 
in Heaven." (Matthew 16:15-17.) It was a grand course 
of education, then, that Jesus gave His Apostles. 

And so as regarded the fig tree, the miracles of healing 
the sick, raising the dead, casting out demons, feeding the 
thousands, etc., it was not so important that certain persons 
be physically healed at that time, nor so important 
that the multitudes should not go hungry over night, nor 
that Divine displeasure should be visited upon an unintelligent 
tree. But it was important that the disciples 
should get the needed lessons and see that the Lord's 
power could and would be exercised on their behalf; that, 
with the realization that the Lord was on their side and 
would guide and protect them, they would be able to exercise 
great confidence. It was important also that we 
should have this assurance of our Father's love and care 
over us as His children. It was important that our 
Lord's coming glory during His Kingdom Reign should 
be illustrated and shown forth. 

R5920 : page 205 

THE FIG TREE A SYMBOL 

There is a further thought as regards the fig tree. We 



believe that the fig tree is a representation of the Jewish 
nation. This nation had been God's fig tree. In due time 
God sent His Son seeking fruit from that nation, but He 
found none. The tree was barren. He found a few faithful 
individuals, but nationally nothing— no fruit as a 
nation; and the blight, or curse, of the Lord came upon 
the Jewish nation because with all their privileges and 
advantages they had not brought forth the proper fruits. 
Our Lord Jesus, five days before His crucifixion, pronounced 
their House desolate. "Behold, your House is 
left unto you desolate!"-Matt. 23:38,39; Luke 13:34,35. 

Ever since that time, the Jews have been desolate and 
blighted as a nation. But there is a promise that this 
blighted fig tree shall again become a living tree— a living 
nation. They are to be restored to Divine favor, after 
their "double" of disfavor has been fulfilled. [See 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, Vol. 2, pp. 217-230.] This 
"double" we understand has been accomplished, and this 
is the meaning of the great awakening now among the 
Jews, and of the great Zionist movement. 

Speaking of the time of His Second Advent and of 
the nearness then of the Kingdom, Jesus said, "Learn a 
parable of the fig tree: When her branch is yet tender, 
and putteth forth leaves, ye know thai summer is near: 
so ye in like manner, when ye shall see these things come 
to pass, know that it is nigh, even at the doors." (Mark 13:28,29.) 
The Jewish nation has been having a long 
winter time. But the spring time of this nation is now 
at hand. We already see this fig tree putting forth leaves. 
So we see that the lesson of the blighted fig tree was not 
merely a lesson for an hour, but a lesson to all the Lord's 
people from that time even until now. 



R5921 : page 205 

LOVE IN THE CLASSES 

"LOVE one another, as I have loved you," is the 
Master's instruction. (John 15:12.) "We 
ought also to lay down our lives for the 
brethren," writes the Apostle. (1 John 3: 16.) 
"He that loveth Him that begat, loveth 
also him that is begotten of the Father." 
(1 John 5:1.) As a matter of fact, all who 
belong to the Church of Christ have the 
spirit of love at the time of their spirit-begetting. 
And if progress be made in preparation 
for the Kingdom, that spirit of love will increase 
and abound more and more, until it will be perfected in 
the resurrection. Then we shall have our new bodies, 
which will permit our loving hearts to manifest themselves 
fully. But in the meantime, how frequently the 
dear brethren of the Lord seriously try each other, vex 
each other, and fail to provoke to love and good works— 



inciting rather to strife! 

While we should properly attribute such weakness, not 
to the New Creatures, but to the old, nevertheless we are 
never to forget that the growth of the New Creature means 
the death of the old creature, and hence in proportion as 
our flesh is not dead to sin and selfishness, in that same 
proportion we, as New Creatures, have not yet reached 
the ideal for which we strive. 

The Editor frequently receives letters from Elders of 
Classes, asking advice as to how they shall deal with 
the Classes, and from members of the Classes asking how 
they should deal with their chosen Elders and Deacons. 
The chosen servants of the Classes frequently feel that 
their brethren, who elected them, do not repose a sufficiency 
of confidence in them and entrust them fully 
enough with the management of the affairs of the Class- 
that the Class wishes to manage its own affairs and merely 
to have the advice of the Elders. In such cases we recommend 
that the Elders be fully content with such a condition- 
that it is the Class as a whole which represents 
the Lord, and that no servant of the Class has the privilege 
of exceeding the authority which the Class gives 
to him by its vote. 

It is our experience that the Bible Students feel a 
great need of protecting their rights and fulfilling the 
obligations which the Lord has placed upon them. Surely 
they are excusable even if they seem to exercise too 
great care in this matter— in view of the examples all 
around us, amongst both Protestants and Catholics, of the 
power of priestcraft, and the inclination of ecclesiastics 
to grasp power and authority and to ignore the Ecclesia. 

On the other hand, frequently the Classes feel that 
they are being ridden or "bossed" by their Elders— 
whether this is really so or not. They complain sometimes, 
for instance, that the Elders get a fever for preaching 
and desire to give lectures on every possible occasion, 
sometimes even turning prayer and testimony meetings 
and Berean Study classes into lecture opportunities. If 
intimations are given that Berean lessons are preferred, 
and that changes from the Class order are not appreciated, 
the Elders sometimes take offense with the whole Class, 
declaring that they are not appreciated; and other times 
they either take offense at the individual who has had 
the courage to kindly mention the matter to them or 
fancy that he is an exception and that they are pleasing 
the Class— a case of too much self-esteem sometimes. 

PASTORAL ADVICE 

It is difficult to know how to advise Classes in 
such cases where the Elders seem to have lost, not the 
Spirit of the Lord, but the proper balance of a sound mind. 
We generally refer inquirers to the extended treatise on 
the subject in SCRIPTURE STUDIES, Volume VI., and ask 
them to read afresh and act accordingly. But even after 
reading, some of the Lord's dear sheep do not know 



how to obtain proper Scriptural order and maintain the 
liberties of the Class and refrain from permitting an 
Elder to injure himself and the interests of the Class! 

Our general advice to the brethren is that they take 
such matters to the Lord in prayer, while watchful of 
any and every opportunity to promote what we believe to 
be the Lord's will in the Classes. On the one hand, we 
must admit that it would be entirely wrong for a Class 
to permit an elder to "boss" it or, as St. Peter said, "to 
Lord it over God's heritage." (1 Peter 5:3.) It would 
be injurious both to the Elder and to the Class interests. 

On the other hand, the Classes should seek to avoid 
captiousness and faultfinding. They should esteem the 
Spirit of the Lord, the spirit of devotion, the knowledge 
of the Truth and talents for its presentation, wherever 
these are to be found, and should gladly help one another 
to opportunities for development in grace, knowledge and 
utterance— each according to the talents which the Lord 
has bestowed upon him and in harmony with the directions 
of the Lord's Word. Forbearance, one with another, 
a willingness to wash one another's feet, symbolically, 
and to esteem each other for all Christ-like qualities, 
should be cultivated. 

While the will of the Class should be carefully sought 
by every Elder, and fully expressed by every Class in 
respect to all the order and arrangement of its affairs, 
nevertheless we should not be over-exacting in respect to 

R5921 : page 206 

how the will of the Class is expressed. In other words, 
we should consider what is satisfactory to the majority 
of the Class. Elders are not to be found fault with simply 
because the Class satisfaction has not been expressed in 
some special, particular manner. In other words, a minority 
of the Class should not feel at liberty to distract the 
Class and stir up strife simply because methods which 
the minority prefer have not been accurately followed. 
Each member of the Class has full liberty to express 
his conviction at opportune times— especially at election 
time; but he should be fully satisfied, after expressing his 
thought and preference, to abide by the preference of the 
majority, whether expressed positively or negatively. 

JUSTICE FIRST-THEN LOVE 

Let us, dear brethren, ever remember that while we 
are striving after Love and its bond of perfectness, nevertheless 
our own course of action should be squared first 
of all by absolute justice, and then love may add to that 
as much as it may please. For instance, at an election 
some brother may unwisely nominate, for some service 
of the Class, a brother who is not qualified for the position. 
We must not find fault with the brother, for he 
has his liberty of making the nomination and manifesting 
his unwisdom; but, on the other hand, we should not feel 



bound by his suggestion, nor should we allow fear of 

offending the nominated brother to hinder us from expressing, 

by vote, what we understand to be the Lord's 

will in the matter. And if voted down by the Class, the 

nominated brother has no right to take offense, but should 

rather admire the courage of the brethren, as expressed 

in his rejection. 

One thus rejected by a Class has no right to inquire 
either of the Class or of any member of it why they 
voted against him. That is their business and none of 
his. They merely exercised the right which they had 
according to their own conscience. It was a matter of 
justice. Love, in the sense of human sympathy, has no 
place in the deciding of such questions where the Word 
of the Lord lays down the rules to be followed by each 
member of the Ecclesia. A failure to recognize principles 
of justice— righteousness— seems to lie at the 
foundation of nearly all Class difficulties. We request 
that all who get into such troubles take the matter to the 
Lord in prayer and then consider the matter along the 
lines of absolute justice. 

We have advocated in the Sixth Volume of STUDIES 
IN THE SCRIPTURES that, if possible, the will of the Class 
be expressed by the majority— at least eighty-five per 
cent of the whole number. This, however, does not 
mean that either justice or love would turn over all of 
the affairs of the Class to the remaining fifteen per cent 
and allow them to dictate, as for instance, to permit them 
to determine that there shall be no Elders or Deacons 
elected because the minority would hold fifteen per cent 
of the whole amount and insist that its ideals should be 
met or that the whole work of the Class should come to 
a standstill. This would neither be loving nor just, and 
should not be submitted to. 

The majority rule is the standard of justice, and what 
we suggested in excess of that was a concession of love— 
an attempt to meet the tastes and preferences, if possible, 
of the entire Class, or at least a large majority of the 
Class. The majority should lovingly desire to regulate 
the Class affairs, so far as possible, to suit every member 
of the Class; and to whatever extent there is a failure to 
do this there is an invitation to discord and to a split in 
the Class. While, of course, a division of the interest 
into two Classes is always deplorable and should be 
striven against, and sacrifices be made by all to maintain a 
"unity of spirit in the bond of peace," nevertheless a 
division of the Class for a time would certainly be preferable 
to a continual strife, which would hinder the 
spiritual progress of all concerned. 



R5921 : page 206 

A FOURTEEN-YEAR-OLD MARTYR 



A LETTER has just been received from Wellington, 
New Zealand, saying that one of the 
Bible Students of thai vicinity, fourteen 
years old, had been imprisoned for refusing 
to register for military service because of 
religious objection to participation in war in 
any sense of the word. He was permitted 
to come out of his prison to partake of the 
Memorial Supper, April 16th, and then returned 

R5922 : page 206 

to prison. It seems very remarkable 

the hold that militarism is gaining on the whole world. 

Word comes to us from England that some of the 
Bible Students there were ordered to report for military 
duty. These registered their objection, but were refused 
immunity from service— receiving, however, the assurance 
that they would be put in non-combatant positions in the 
war. This promise was afterward neglected, and they 
were put into regular service at once. We are not to forget 
that practically all the world is claiming to be Christ's 
Kingdom, and yet that any who seek to follow the Words 
of Jesus seem to be thoroughly disrespected and hated of 
all men and all nations. What a proof we have here that 
Messiah's Kingdom is future! How glad we are that it 
is nigh, even at the door! 



R5922 : page 206 

"LET HIM BUY A SWORD" 

WHY did our Lord say to His disciples, "He that 
hath no sword, let him sell his garment and 
buy one" (Luke 22:36,38), and then afterward 
say to St. Peter: "Put up thy sword 
into its place; for all they that take the 
sword shall perish with the sword"?— 
Matthew 26:5 1,52. 

We should remember the circumstances. 
Jesus knew that His hour was come in which 
He would be betrayed, made prisoner, and 
the next day be crucified. It was necessary to show that 
His capture was not made by force, but that He voluntarily 
permitted Himself to be taken and crucified. The 
Father might know, the angels might know, and His 
disciples might know that He had power to ask of the 
Father legions of angels for His defense and protection 
from the hands of His enemies: but others could not know 
this. It was desirable that it should be clearly manifested 
that Jesus and His disciples could have defended themselves, 
as St. Peter, indeed, started out to do when he 
drew his sword and cut off the ear of the high priest's 
servant. Jesus promptly healed the ear and instructed 



Peter to be non-resistant, and surrendered Himself, 
merely requesting that His disciples be not molested. 

The circumstance demonstrated that our Lord surrendered 
Himself voluntarily, and therein was the lesson. 
Had there been no swords in the company of His disciples, 
it might have been claimed that no defense could have 
been made. The having of the swords made possible the 
exhibition of the courage of the disciples, and the willingness 
of Jesus to submit Himself. 

When Jesus said that if necessary their garments 

R5922 : page 207 

should be sold to purchase a sword, the Apostles responded 
that they had in their company two swords; and Jesus 
answered, "It is enough." They were intended merely 
for a demonstration, and not for a defense. 

Nothing in this Scripture seems to give any warrant 
to warfare, nor to the implication of some that Jesus desired 
His followers to take the sword. True, not all who 
have taken to the sword have perished by the sword, and 
not all who have avoided the sword have preserved their 
lives, but it is a general principle which the Lord discusses. 
He who prepares himself for warfare and trouble 
will be pretty sure to get plenty of it, according to the 
general course of the fallen human nature. On the other 
hand, the Lord's disciples are enjoined to "follow peace 
with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall 
see the Lord."— Hebrews 12:14. 



R5922 : page 207 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
WAS DISGUSTED WITH MAKE-BELIEVE RELIGION 

DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

A deep feeling of love for you, the honored servant of 
our Father in Heaven, prompts me to express my thankfulness 
just this once for having been brought into the light now 
shining so brightly. Hitherto I have sought to quell the desire 
from a realization that you receive many thousands such letters, 
and that I should not encroach upon your valuable time. 
Please do not feel obligated to answer this. 

I first came in contact with Present Truth in 1902, through 
reading several of the Volumes; and a profound impression 
was made upon me. At that time I was teacher of a large 
school in Jamaica, Catechist of the Church of England, Sunday 
School Superintendent, Choir Master, and the rest of it. 
Pressure on all sides was brought to bear, and my desire to 
embrace the Truth was squeezed out of me. For nearly ten 
years I never came in contact with so much as one of your 
tracts. I became intensely worldly; and, thoroughly disgusted 
with myself and the make-believe religion, I quit the whole 



thing in 1907 and started anew on the Isthmus of Panama. 

In September, 1911, my wife bought a copy of "Daniel and 
the Revelation." Trying to read this book caused me to root 
out an old paper covered Volume V. which had followed us 
around these many years. It was in trying to compare the 
two books that I got a fresh start; and the Lord, almost 
miraculously, supplied the other volumes. Determined that 
the opportunity should not slip this time, I carefully made 
up my mind, and offered myself in full consecration to God 
on January 1st, 1912. My dear wife also consecrated about 
the same time. 

Since then our path has been continuously upward. We 
have read hard, prayed much, and endeavored to live Christ; 
and oh, the blessedness! Only those who have been with 
Jesus and have learned of Him can appreciate this wonderful 
transformation of mind. 

Next to the Lord Jesus our thanks are due to you, as our 
consecration was solely the product of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
and your writings have been the most important 
element in the development of our characters. 

Enclosed are four questions which have caused a good 
deal of division of thought among us of the Panama Class. 
I am aware that all of them have been treated by you time 
and again. But we are so dull of comprehension and so leaky! 

I close with warmest love and appreciation for you and 
the Bethel family, whom we remember daily in prayer. 

I am yours by His grace, 

G.L. HARRY.-Balboa, Canal Zone. 

Questions. (1) When the Apostle Paul says, "Let your 
women keep silence in the Churches" (1 Corinthians 14:34; 
1 Timothy 2:1 1,12), does he include giving thoughts in a 
Berean Study? 

(2) Does the Church belong to the order of Melchizedek 
during the Gospel Age, actually or prospectively? In either 
case, where does the "reigning" come in? Or are we in some 
way connected with the Aaronic Priesthood? 

(3) What is meant by "intuitive knowledge"? Does the 
Lord Jesus now possess this kind of knowledge, and will the 
Church eventually attain to the same? 

(4) Since all must "honor the Son even as they honor 

the Father," wherein is Jehovah's superiority? Is it a superiority 
of mental power or merely of seniority? 

ANSWER TO ABOVE LETTER AND QUESTIONS 

Your welcome letter of the 3rd inst. is before me. I 
rejoice with you that the Lord has pursued you through His 
mercy and love, and that you have surrendered to Him. I 
trust you may continue to abide under His shadow and to 
serve Him and to thus have the necessary preparation for a 
share in the Heavenly Kingdom. 

Replying to your questions: We understand that there 
would be no violation of the Apostle's injunction in the Sisters' 
taking part in a Berean Study. If there are no consecrated 
or competent Brethren present, I see no reason why 



the Sisters might not lead a Berean Class. The Church in 
association with her Head will be the Melchizedek Priest, 
during the Millennial Age. That Priest, Prophet, Teacher, 
is not yet fully raised up from amongst the people, but will 
be entirely raised up by the close of this Age, perfected in the 
First Resurrection. (Acts 3:23; Eph. 2: 10-16.) Consequently 
no reigning takes place as yet, except as our Lord is taking to 
Himself His great power and beginning His Reign— the 
majority of the Church already with Him on the other side 
the veil, and we on this side gradually passing over. 

Intuitive knowledge would be a direct apprehension, without 
the process of reasoning, or the necessity for proof. The 
Bible assures us that all power is possessed by our Lord Jesus 
since His resurrection. This would seem to include intuitive 
knowledge. The Church has the promise that in the resurrection 
she will be like her Lord. It is further written: "Now 
we know in part; then we shall know even as we are known." 

To honor the Son even as we honor the Father does 
not mean necessarily to give Him the same degree of honor; 
but rather we might state it, "We honor the Father. Even 
so let us honor the Son also— as the Son, as the Father's 
Logos and Chief Representative." 

With Christian love to yourself and all the dear friends 
with whom you are associated or come in contact, I remain 

Your brother and servant in the Lord. 



RE SOME CLASS BUSINESS METHODS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Ever since our Class has been organized much time has 
been consumed each month in our business meetings, but since 
all matters are decided by the Class, under present arrangements, 
we do not see how such meetings can be avoided and 
less time spent. 

R5923 : page 207 

We believe that with your wide and varied experience, 
you could give us a few valuable suggestions along this line 
and we would be glad if you would give us some advice. 
Praying the Lord's rich blessing upon you daily, we remain 
Yours in His service, ST. JOSEPH [MO.] CLASS. 

In Reply 

Where a Class finds, after trial, that one or more of its 
Elders or Deacons possess good business acumen and faithfulness, 
it sometimes proves a good plan to make a Business 
Committee of such and leave much of the Business routine 
to such Committee. Care, however, should be observed not 
to put matters too fully out of the hands of the Class. Care 
also should be observed not to put too much power into the 
hands of any who evidence a desire to grasp power and to 
exceed the wishes of the Class. In all matters the easiest 
and smoothest way of obtaining results is advisable; but the 



authority of the Class should be recognized. Any one ignoring 
the Class and its wishes would better be left without any 
special service as Elder, Deacon, etc. 



DEAR FRIENDS:- 

In THE TOWER of February 15, I read some quotations 
from alleged German sermons, extracted from the Methodist 
Times, and supposed to be faithful translations from these 
sermons. Since reading them I received a package of newspapers 
from my home. Copenhagen, in one of which is an 
alleged truthful explanation of those sermons. 

Pastor Loebel, of Leipzig, does not even exist. Professor 
Rheinhold Seeby should be Seeberg; he denies absolutely 
to have said anything of the kind quoted; and, while Philippi's 
expressions are not absolutely denied, their authenticity 
is very doubtful. 

I enclose the article from the Danish paper Robenhavn. 
If you so think, a correction in THE TOWER might help remove 
some of the added bitter feelings against Germans in 
general. My sympathy is rather on the side of France and 
England; but I desire justice to all. 

Yours in His service, C. PETERSEN. 



page 209 

VOL. XXXVII JULY 15 No. 14 
A. D. 1916-A.M. 6044 



CONTENTS 

"Lest We Forget" 211 

Self Our Special Battle-Ground 211 

Never Presume Upon God's Mercy 212 

Careless Ones Unfit for the Kingdom. . .212 

What Is Universal Redemption? 213 

Universal Salvation Explained 214 

"Called" (Poem) 214 

"The Greatest Thing in the World" 215 

Superiority of the Tongue of Love. . . .215 
Lessons Taught in the School of Christ .216 

The Grace of Giving 217 

The Benefits of Systematic Charity . . .218 

Liberality an Index of Love 218 

Office of Advocate and Mediator Contrasted .220 

Conscience and the War 220 

At Peace Amongst Yourselves 221 

Militarism and Conscience 222 

Berean Lessons and Pilgrim Visits 223 

Pilgrim Brother Barton Gone Home 223 

The St. Louis Convention 223 



page 210 

GENERAL CONVENTIONS 

SIOUX CITY, IA.-July 6-9. For assignments address A. 

J. Strite, 1422 W. 5th St. 
NEWPORT, R.I.-July 9-16. For assignments address Mrs. 

Anna R. Calvert, 12 Everett St. 
PORTLAND, ME.-July 21-23. For assignments address A. 

F. Buxton, 55 Chestnut St. 
NORFOLK, VA.-July 22-30. For assignments address P. 

L. Derring, 216 12th St. 
NIAGARA FALLS, N.Y. -Aug. 19-22. For assignments 

address A. Fosbraey, 727 Pine Ave. 
NASHVILLE, TENN.-Aug. 24-27. For assignments address 

Milton E. Confehr, 1516 McGavock St. 
LOS ANGELES, CAL.-Sept. 2-10. The Long Beach Convention 

has been transferred to Los Angeles. For assignments 

address F.P. Sherman, 808 S. Figueroa St. 
SEATTLE, WASH.-Sept. 14-17. For assignments address 

H.G. Backbock, 2410 First Ave., W. 
MILWAUKEE, WIS.-Sept. 16-24. For assignments address 

C. Hilton Ellison, 2704 Wells St. 
DAYTON, O.-October 5-8. For assignments address Dr. 

Chas. E. Kerney, 475 S. Broadway. 



NEWPORT CONVENTION TRANSPORTATION 

Special New England rates to Newport, R.I., are as 
follows: 

(1) On the Certificate Plan or 

(2) Special Convention Rate, 2 cents per mile. 
Tickets to be sold and certificates issued and good going 

July 8, 9 and 10 and returning to reach original starting point 
not later than midnight of July 19. 

(3) Or Mileage Book or 

(4) Ten or more traveling together can get one ticket for 
the party at cheapest rate or 

(5) Sound Steamers can be used. The Bay State Line 
from N.Y. City to Newport, $2.05; Stateroom for 2, $1.00. 
Colonial Line, $2.35; Stateroom for 2, $1.00. 



NORFOLK CONVENTION RATES 

GENTLEMEN:— A very low rate will be named by the Seaboard 
Air Line Railway to Norfolk and return, account above 
mentioned Convention, with suitable selling dates and limits. 
We are the direct line from this territory to Norfolk. The 
round trip will be approximately three cents per mile, and we 
will be glad to furnish the exact rate from any point in the 
South when requested to do so. 



The best train for those attending from this territory to 
use is our train No. 6, leaving Birmingham 9:50 a.m., July 
21st (Friday), passing Wellington, 1 1:44 a.m.; Cedartown, 
12:54 Noon; Atlanta, 3:00 p.m.; Athens, 5:17 p.m.; Greenwood, 
8:39 p.m., arriving Norfolk 1 1:00 a.m. Eastern Time, 
Saturday, July 22d. 

We expect to provide extra equipment on this train, of 
whatever style is desired, to take care of those using it, and 
are anxious to have advice as soon as possible how many 
will go, whether they will want Pullman, and if so, if they 
will want it all the way through to Norfolk, or just for the 
night, so that ample accommodations can be provided for. 
Please address 

Yours very truly, FRED GEISSLER. 

Asst. Gen. Pass. Agt., Atlanta, Ga. 

From other points, excursion rates may be had to Old 
Point Comfort, near Norfolk. Remember that the special 
rates for parties of ten apply on all railroads at all times 
when the party travels on one ticket. 

From New York City the rate, all rail, or rail and water, 
is $14.00 the round trip. The stateroom will be extra— $1.00 
via Washington or Baltimore. 

The all-water route, $14.00, includes stateroom and meals- 
Old Dominion Line. 



POLISH CONVENTION 

CHICAGO-JULY 1-4. This is the second Polish Convention 
of this season; the first being held at Toledo, O., in June. 



ARMENIAN CONVENTION 
PROVIDENCE, R.I., JULY 2-4. 



R5923: page 211 

"LEST WE FORGET!" 

"Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without 
which no man shall see the Lord."— Hebrews 12: 14. 

ALTHOUGH the Lord's people are counseled 
by the Lord's Word to be peacemakers, and 
to pursue peace, nevertheless they are forewarned 
that they must fight. On the surface 
these injunctions seem paradoxical. 
It seems strange that we should be admonished 
to be peacemakers and then be told 
that we are to fight. These conflicting 
statements may be harmonized however. 



If we are loyal to the Lord and to His 

cause, our loyalty will bring us into opposition with whatever 

is contrary to God. It is not that we are to strive 

with people; but the very fact that we are counseled to 

be peacemakers implies that there will be opposition. 

How is it that when one wishes to do right and is 
doing this to the best of his ability he meets with opposition? 
It was so with our Master. Although He was 
perfect, yet He had opposition. We need not be surprised, 
then, if we who are imperfect should have similar experiences. 
What did Jesus do to cause people to do evil 
toward Him? He did only good and sought to bless all. 
His loyalty to the Father, however, made it a necessity 
for Him to rebuke sin and error. This brought upon 
Him the antagonism of those who upheld these sins and 
errors. The darkness hates the light because it is a 
constant rebuke to the darkness. 

Then we not only have the opposition of the spirit 
of the world, but also the opposition of our own fallen 
flesh and the virulent opposition of the great Adversary 
and his hosts. What a power this all means! At one 
time in our lives we did not know what it meant to have 
the opposition of the world, the flesh and the Devil; but 
we are learning what this means, dear brethren. Our 
great Adversary is a very wily foe, and is on the alert 
to seize every opportunity to ensnare and entrap us, to 
put our enemies in antagonism against us, and to stir up 
all kinds of persecution and opposition. One might think 
that Satan would be satisfied to have taken the wrong 
course himself; and that he would ere now have been 
ready to say, "I have had enough of it." Why does he 
not say this? It is because he is so implacable a foe to 
God and to all that is good. He has so hardened his 
heart to all that is holy that he cannot be renewed to repentance, 
to change about and take an opposite course. 

LET US TAKE WARNING FROM SATAN'S COURSE 

What a solemn warning this should be to us to resist 
stoutly and unequivocally the very beginnings of sin, to 
resist the approach of temptation to be disloyal to God 
in the slightest degree, by hastening to the Throne of 
Grace in every time of danger! The Adversary's designs 
seem to be especially against the saints of God. 
He steadfastly opposes all those who desire to walk in 
the footsteps of Jesus, rather than those who walk according 
to the course of this world; for the latter are 
already more or less under his control. He does not seek 
to run after them or seek to entrap them. All he needs 
to do is to keep them from the light.— 2 Cor. 4:4. 

Satan does not wish the glorious light of God's goodness 
to shine into men's hearts; for wherever the light 
of Truth goes it brings a transformation. We become 
changed men and women as soon as the Truth shines into 
our hearts; and this transformation goes on day by day. 
When Satan sees this, he exerts all his power to blind 



the one who has gotten out from under his domination, 
and to weave his web around him again. When the fly 
begins to struggle to escape, the spider at once proceeds 
to strengthen the web around him. If the fly escapes the 
snare, the spider will again entrap him, if possible. 

But in spite of the foes with which we have to contend, 
the foes without and within, we are perfectly safe 
so long as we keep close to the Master. Stronger and 
greater is He that is on our part than all they that are 
against us. We have learned something of the character 
of our Heavenly Friend. At first we saw that God was a 
great Being, deserving of our reverence; but now we are 
coming to see more and more how just He is, how wise 
He is, how loving and lovely He is. As we come to 
thus appreciate His glorious character, it inspires within 
us a great desire to be like Him, and we find that the injunction 
of Scripture is that we should be like our Father 
in Heaven. Jesus was like Him, and we are instructed to 
become copies of God's dear Son. "Be ye followers of 
us," said the Apostle, "even as we are followers of Christ." 

SELF OUR SPECIAL BATTLE-GROUND 

We are now God's special representatives in the world, 
fighting a good fight of faith against sin and evil, especially 
in ourselves. We are not at all commissioned to 
clean up the world. The Bible gives us no such instructions. 
The Lord will use us to do this work by and by, 
when we reach the Kingdom. We cannot now quite get 
ahead of the evil that we find in our own flesh, and so 
we need to turn our forces against sin entrenched in our 
mortal bodies. We need to exercise great care lest, while 
we preach to others, we ourselves should become castaways. 
What a thought that is, that, after having told 
others about God, His love. His power and His salvation 
in Christ, we should ourselves become castaways from 
this glorious salvation! 

R5923: page 212 

As New Creatures we should be very vigilant, should 
continue to grow, should increase in power to overcome 
the flesh. Then we shall be safe. Self is to be our special 
battle-ground. Many of the Lord's people have a great 
deal of natural combativeness. This is a good trait if controlled 
and turned in the right direction. Combativeness 
is necessary, or we could never overcome. But we need 
to restrain ourselves that we do not fight the brethren; 
and we are not to enter into a personal combat with the 
Devil. We are no match for him. But we are to resist 
him. The Lord will soon take hold of him and bind him 
up for a thousand years. He will conquer the Adversary 
and will undo all Hi s works. But it will require the entire 
thousand years to accomplish fully that work. We need 
not hope to overthrow Satan or his works while we are 
in the flesh. It is not our mission. What the Lord has 



given us to do is to conquer ourselves, to control this 
body which is of the fallen race of Adam, to keep ourselves 
that that Wicked One touch us not.— 1 John 5: 18. 

We all have natural inclinations toward sin. It is necessary, 
therefore, that we overcome the inclinations of 
the flesh, the disposition of the flesh— all these things that 
war against the Spirit. From the moment that we surrendered 
ourselves to the Lord and were begotten of the 
Holy Spirit, we were New Creatures. Old things have 
passed away, and all things have become new. We no 
longer belong to the old family, the family of Adam; we 
are an entirely new creation. We have passed from death 
unto life, from condemnation to death in Adam to a new 
life in Christ. The continuation of this new life will depend 

R5924: page 212 

upon our faithfulness as children of God. We must 
show our loyalty to the Lord by resisting everything that 
pertains to the old life. 

SCRIPTURAL ENCOURAGEMENTS TO COME OFTEN TO GOD 

None of us can fully do the things that we would. 
Some are more and some less fallen by nature. If we 
think we are succeeding fully, it is because we are more 
or less blind to our own deficiencies. We would do perfectly, 
but we cannot. But by fighting a good fight, we 
are to prove to the Lord that we are doing the best we 
can. We are not merely to make a little effort, but are to 
put forth all our strength, which will be supplemented by 
the grace of the Lord. If, then, in spite of our best efforts 
we come short, as we surely shall, what then? "The 
blood of Jesus Christ His Son cleanseth us from all sin." 

Thus we are to continue "without spot or wrinkle or 
any such thing." This does not mean that we are to keep 
from ever getting any spot or wrinkle upon our garments; 
for we could not avoid so doing. But God's wonderful 
arrangement is that we may come to Him and claim the 
merit of the blood of the Savior who died for us. We 
need not permit a spot or wrinkle to remain so as to 
blemish our glorious wedding robe. When we first came 
into the Father's family we received merit to cover all our 
past sins; but we have weaknesses and sins of the present, 
and we need the blood for these also. Thus the Lord has 
provided for our need. With this knowledge of the love 
of the Father and of our Lord Jesus, we are to come 
boldly— courageously— to the Throne of Heavenly Grace. 

Some may feel that it is rather presumptuous to come 
thus to the Lord for continual cleansing from all earthly 
defilement, for the forgiveness of our daily unwitting 
transgressions. But we are instructed to the contrary by 
the Apostle. We need the encouragement of God's Word 
thus to come to the Lord to be forgiven. The flesh says, 
"Do not go very often to the Throne of Grace." When 
we first made a mistake it was comparatively easy to take 



it to the Lord. We came without much difficulty, or perhaps 

without any. We told the Lord that our transgression 

was not wilful, and that we were sorry; and we realized 

His forgiveness. But the second time it was not so 

easy; and it becomes more difficult the oftener we have 

to come, every time we sin. We told Him at first that 

we would try to be more careful; yet we continued perhaps 

to come short of the standard which we recognized. 

So we were tempted not to come to God with the matter. 

NEVER PRESUME UPON GOD'S MERCY 

We all need to refresh our minds with the promises 
for our encouragement in continuing to come for mercy 
and grace to help in every time of need. Thus we are 
made stronger for the difficulties of the future. We are 
not, however, to presume upon the mercy of the Lord by 
becoming measurably careless as to our words and 
thoughts and deeds; for if the Lord sees anything of this 
spirit. He will not readily forgive us and restore us to 
favor. He will withhold the assurance of His forgiveness; 
and we may come to Him again and again before we 
realize the sense of His love and blessing. This will 
make us more careful not to be thus derelict another time. 

The condition of those who fail to keep their record 
clean before the Lord is a very sad one. After the first 
or second offense they say to themselves, "I cannot go to 
the Lord again; I will go to sleep and forget it." They 
wake up in the morning out of harmony with God. But 
they think, "Well, I cannot help it." At night the thought 
that all is not right with the Lord comes again. "I know 
that I have had plenty of difficulties today and more failures; 
but I cannot go to God. It is of no use." So the 
breach widens. They forget the great mercy of the Lord. 
They forget that He has said, "Like as a father pitieth his 
children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear Him; for He 
knoweth our frame. He remembereth that we are dust." 

This is a wrong course, fraught with extreme danger. 
We should clean up our accounts with the Lord every 
day. We should retire every night just as we should wish 
to do if we knew that we would not wake up in the flesh. 
In the morning before we arise our first thought should 
be, "How can I please the Lord today and be helpful to 
others, and especially how can I overcome myself?" 
Some who fail to take advantage of the grace offered for 
every time of need gradually get so far off from the Lord 
that by and by they scarcely think about it any longer. 
They have a reverence for God, but they do not love Him. 
He is not close to them, and they know it. They know 
the right way, but they feel that they cannot walk in it. 
They realize that they have spots on their robe, but they 
try to put the thought behind them. If this course continues, 
where will it end? 

These are not the things to put behind us. The things 
that the Lord has forgiven should be put behind us; but 
the things for which we have not sought forgiveness 



should trouble us until they are settled. It is not a good 
plan to wait until evening to go to the Lord if we realize 
that we have displeased Him. If we can go to our closet 
at once, we should do so. If not, we might close our 
eyes for a moment and get into communication with our 
Father in Heaven through the merits of our Savior. Let 
us keep in constant touch with the Lord, and tell Him 
about all our affairs, our mistakes, our unwitting trespasses. 
There are probably many trespasses committed by 
us that we do not recognize. But daily application for the 
blood of cleansing will keep our garments clean and white. 

CARELESS ONES UNFIT FOR THE KINGDOM 

Those who get spots upon their robes and leave them 
there will not be fit for the Kingdom of God; for the 
Bride of Christ will be composed of only those who will 
be "without spot or wrinkle or any such thing." Jesus is 

R5924: page 213 

to present this class blameless and unreprovable before the 
Father. They did not walk perfectly, without a blemish; 
but they were careful to keep their garments unspotted 
by going often to the Lord. They let nothing keep them 
away. This is the spirit of the Bride class. We each 
wish to be of that class, dear friends. If any of us are 
not sure just now as to our standing with the Lord, let 
us make haste to go to Him and see that the record is 
cleared by our dear Redeemer and Advocate. Let us not 
wait, but go at once. 

The faithful class is pictured to us in Revelation 7:3,4 
and 14:1-5. These are the 144,000 who have the Father's 
name in their foreheads. They sing the new song, which 
none can sing but these 144,000. Oh, we long to be among 
them! We cannot afford to be anywhere else. The outcome 
is all in our own hands whether we succeed or fail, 
after God has given us His Holy Spirit. It will be our 
own fault if we miss the Kingdom. There will be no 
blame to attach to the Lord; for He has arranged for our 
continual cleansing day by day. His grace is provided 
for us at every step of the way; and His loving, protecting 
providences are continually about us if we are trustful and 
obedient to the best of our ability. 

The other class who allow spots to accumulate upon 
their robes, is a "great multitude, whose number no man 
knoweth." (Revelation 7:9); that is, they are not 
of an ordained or fixed number as is the Bride class. 
These must through great tribulation wash their robes, all 
spotted and soiled, in the blood of the Lamb. These will 
then stand before the Throne, will serve God day and 
night in His Temple. The Bride class will be The Temple; 
or, in another figure, they will be seated upon the Messianic 
Throne with their Lord and Bridegroom. These 
different figures give different phases of the honored position 
and work of the Body of Christ in glory. These 



are spoken of as wearing crowns, the others as merely 
carrying palm branches, indicating final victory. 

How glad we are that our dear Heavenly Father has 
mercifully provided for those who through lack of sufficient 
zeal and faithfulness lose the "Prize of the High 
Calling"! We rejoice that even the "foolish virgins" do 
not lose all, but will through tears and travail of soul yet 
come wholly back to the Lord. They will finish their 
course in death. Theirs is an enforced destruction of the 
flesh. Although they covenanted to sacrifice it willingly 
yet they failed to do so. They love the Lord and love 
righteousness, but not sufficiently to be thoroughly loyal 
and faithful; and so they must be severely scourged, that 
their spirits may be saved in the Day of the Lord Jesus. 

EARNEST EXHORTATION TO FAITHFULNESS 

No one has been called of God to the Great Company 
class. "We are all called in one hope of our calling." 
Let us then walk with the Lord in white every day, dear 
brethren and sisters. Let us keep our robes spotless. It 
is easier to get spots on them than to get the spots off, and 
each spot will be more difficult than the previous one. 
We understand spots to be the result of a measure of 
carelessness. "It is impossible for me to keep my robe 
from ever getting spotted," you say, "but I am very thankful 
that the Lord has provided a way whereby the spots 
may be removed when I earnestly apply for the cleansing." 

Each experience of this kind should make us more 
humble, more careful, more alive to our weaknesses and 
more watchful to avoid getting spots on our white robes. 
Otherwise the Lord will chastise us by withholding for a 
time His peace, lest we think that we may be careless, and 
then may have the spot removed without any trouble. The 
Lord wishes us to realize that this is no light matter. 
Then let us each be very faithful, that we may soon hear 
the Master's sweet "Well done!" 



R5925: page 213 

WHAT IS UNIVERSAL REDEMPTION? 

WE ARE asked whether or not we believe in 
Universal Redemption, and what we consider 
to be the full scope or meaning of the 
term. We reply: 

To our understanding, many who use the 
expression, "Universal Redemption," fail to 
understand clearly its signification. They 
mean universal and eternal salvation, which 
is another matter entirely. We believe that 
the Bible teaches Universal Redemption in 
its statement that Jesus Christ, "by the grace of God, 
tasted death for every man," and that He "gave Himself 



a Ransom for all, to be testified in due time." (Hebrews 2:9; 
1 Timothy 2:5,6.) Again, "He is the propitiation for 
our [the Church's] sins and not for ours only, but also 
for the sins of the whole world." (1 John 2:2.) All these 
texts speak of the redemption of mankind; and all clearly 
and positively declare that it will be universal— that is, 
that it will apply to every member of our race. 

The universality of the Redemption, having been thus 
established, our next question would properly be. What is 
included in the word Redemption? The answer is that in 
the Greek, as well as in the English, the word has the 
significance of purchase— of the acquiring of something 
by the giving of something else in its stead. This thought 
is emphasized several times in the Bible. Not only are 
we told that we are bought with a price, even the precious 
blood of Jesus, but we have Jesus' word for it that He 
gave Himself a corresponding price, for sinners. (Matthew 20:28.) 
The word used in the Greek is lutron-anti, signifying 
a price in exact offset. St. Paul gives exactly the 
same thought when he says, "the Man Christ Jesus, who 
gave Himself a Ransom-price [anti-lutron] for all." 
(1 Timothy 2:5,6.) St. Paul again emphasizes the same 
thought when he says, "As by a man came death, by a 
Man comes also the resurrection of the dead; for as in 
Adam all die, even so all in Christ shall be made alive." 
-1 Corinthians 15:21,22. 

Thus we have the matter of Redemption and the Redemption-price 
for mankind emphasized and particularized. 
It surely is universal; it covers every member of 
our race. The sin came by one man, and he alone was 
sentenced by the great Heavenly Court to die. His wife 
and his children share with him in this penalty— not by 
direct sentence, but indirectly; for the measure of life 
which we have came from Father Adam, and it was only 
a spark, its right to exist having been forfeited before it 
came to us. It was thus, however, that our great Creator 
provided Universal Redemption. By this decree against 
one person He made it possible that one perfect man 
might redeem the condemned one. It was to this end that 
our Lord, the great Logos, left the Heavenly Courts, 
humbled Himself and was made flesh, the Man Christ 
Jesus, who tasted death for every man. His death is 
sufficient for the satisfaction of the claims of Justice 
against the first man; and all the results of that sentence 
in that man's race are provided for. 

UNIVERSAL REDEMPTION DEFINED 

In order to see what Adam and his race may expect 
as a result of this Universal Redemption, we must notice 
what Father Adam was before he sinned; for redemption 
implies the bringing of him and his race back into the condition 

R5925: page 214 

in which he was before he sinned. Note, therefore: 



(1) Adam had fellowship with his Creator. 

(2) He lived under Divine blessing, which provided 
for his every need and maintained him in life as long as 
he was obedient. 

(3) His claims had not been decided as respects 
eternity. He was in the School of Experience, gaining 
knowledge, and was assured of a continuance of his life 
as long as he remained obedient and used his knowledge 
in harmony with his Creator's will. 

(4) He was, therefore, a probationer for eternal life. 

It is our understanding that had Adam continued obedient 
under certain tests he would have been recognized as a 
graduate in the school of experience and as no longer 
properly subjected to tests and trials. But he never 
reached this position. He failed in his trial time, and 
never attained his graduation therefrom. 

Universal Redemption, therefore, means a bringing of 
Adam and his race back again to the probationary state 
in which Adam was when he sinned. That which was 
lost is that which was redeemed, and which is to be restored. 
God's provision, the Scriptures tell us, is for 
"Times of Restitution"; and those times, or years, of 
Restitution are for the bringing of Adam and his race 
back to all that they at first had. The Scriptures intimate 
very clearly that the experiences of mankind— first, under 
the reign of Sin and Death; and secondly, under the 
Restitution blessings of Messiah's Kingdom— will give 
such ample knowledge of God and of His Plan that at 
the conclusion of Messiah's Reign every member of the 
race will have had his probation in full— full knowledge, 
full opportunity. 

The Scriptures show us that some, when granted all 
these blessings, will resist them and, sinning wilfully, will 
be accounted as unworthy of any further favor of the 
Almighty, and will be destroyed in the Second Death. 
They show us clearly that in the end of the Millennial 
Age, some, even of those who will attain full human perfection, 
will not be accounted worthy of eternal life, but 
on the contrary will be destroyed in the Second Death, 
because, having enjoyed their share in the Universal Redemption, 
they have not improved the opportunities for 

such character development as would meet the Divine requirements. 
Their destruction is shown in Rev. 20:7-10. 
It is also pictured in the destruction of the goat class in 
the parable of the Sheep and Goats. -Matt. 25:31-46. 

UNIVERSAL SALVATION EXPLAINED 

But some one will inquire. Will not the redemption 
which God has provided still pursue them and recover 
them from the Second Death? We answer. No! During 
the Millennium Christ will give to all every assistance 
necessary and proper. "The world will be judged in 
righteousness." (Acts 17:31.) Besides, to suppose anything 
further to be done for these after they have gone 
into the Second Death through their own wilful course. 



would imply another sacrifice for sins. The sin which 
brought death to Father Adam was wilful sin. This the 
death of Jesus will fully offset: but the sin which will 
bring the Second Death will be individual, wilful sin 
on the part of every one who will die the Second Death; 
and the cost of redeeming each one of those sinners would 
be the death of a sinless one as a sacrifice for each. 

The case of Adam is altogether different from what it 
will be with the race then; for each one of those sinners 
would be equally as guilty as was Adam himself; and 
each one will be personally condemned to the Second 
Death. If each one were to be redeemed again, he would 
need a personal Savior. The Bible intimates a considerable 
number of goats at the end of the Millennial Age, 
who will come under the Second Death penalty; and it 
would require an equal number of perfect sacrifices for 
their redemption from that sentence. What good would 
that do if they had not profited by all the experiences of 
the present life and all the experiences of the Millennial 
Restitution time? We could not imagine their profiting 
by any experiences. 

Evidently, therefore, the Divine Plan is the only wise 
one; and no redemption will be given for the recovery 
of such from the Second Death, nor is there any kind of 
hope for them. Who would die for them? Who would 
redeem them? Not Christ; for the Apostle distinctly 
points out, "Christ dieth no more." (Romans 6:9.) 
Would a company of the holy angels voluntarily die for 
them under all these circumstances and conditions, seeing 
that they had sinned against such light, knowledge and 
loving provision? And would any of the Church, the 
Bride of Christ, die for them? We believe not. Would 
any wise or intelligent being give his life a corresponding 
price for one who was incorrigible under such favorable 
conditions' 1 We think it unreasonable so to suppose. 

A WORD OF WARNING 

It surprises us that any who have once tasted of the 
good Word, and have been made partakers of the Holy 
Spirit, should be liable in any degree to be entrapped by 
such sophistries of the Adversary. We are to remember, 
however, that the Adversary is very alert at the present 
time to find snares for the Lord's people. We are led 
to write these words by the inspired suggestion of St. 
James, "Brethren, if any of you err from the Truth, and 
one convert him, let him know that he that converteth 
such from the error of his way [course] will save a soul 
from death and hide a multitude of sins." (James 5:20.) 
This does not signify that God's people might not be 
more or less ensnared with errors; but it does signify that 
the course or tendency is to lead off more and more from 
the Truth, from the way of Life into the way of Death. 

We are in the Day of the Lord mentioned by the 
Apostle; and instead of casting aside the armor or of trying 
to make some improvement upon the plain statements 



of the Word of God or of permitting ourselves to take our 
own or other men's philosophies instead of the Word of 
God, we must be buckling on the breastplate, fastening 
our helmet, girding up the loins of our minds, grasping 
the shield of faith and taking a firm grip upon the Sword 
of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, in order that 
we may be able to keep standing in this Evil Day; and not 
only so, but that we may help others to stand against the 
wiles of our great Adversary.— Ephesians 6:12-18. 



R5926 : page 214 

"CALLED" 

"Partakers of the Heavenly calling."— Heb. 3:1. 

"Holy brethren, called and chosen by the sovereign Voice of 

Might. 
See your high and holy calling out of darkness into light! 
Called according to His purpose and the riches of His love; 
Won to listen by the leading of the gentle. Heavenly Dove! 

"Called to suffer with our Master, patiently to run His race; 
Called a blessing to inherit, called to holiness and grace; 
Called to fellowship with Jesus, by the Ever-Faithful One; 
Called to His eternal glory, to the Kingdom of His Son. 

"Whom He calleth He preserveth, and His glory they shall see; 
He is faithful that hath called you; He will do it, fear not ye! 
Therefore, holy brethren, onward! thus ye make your calling 

sure; 
For the Prize of this High Calling bravely to the end endure." 



R5926 : page 215 

THE GREATEST THING IN THE WORLD 
-AUGUST 6.-1 CORINTHIANS 13.- 

GODLIKENESS IN THE HEART, IN THE TONGUE, IN THE HANDS, 
IN THE THOUGHTS-LOVE THE ESSENCE OF THE DIVINE 
CHARACTER-DIFFERENT KINDS OF LOVE-THE SPECTRUM 
OF LOVE REVEALS THE CHARACTERISTICS ESSENTIAL TO 

MEMBERSHIP IN THE GLORIFIED BODY OF CHRIST- 
SUGGESTIONS FOR SELF-EXAMINATION-LOVE THE QUALITY 
WHICH WILL PERSIST THROUGHOUT ETERNITY-THE GIFTS 
OF HEALING, ETC., CEASE. 

"Now abideth faith, hope, love, these three; 
and the greatest of these is love."— Verse 13. 

LOVE is a quality which seems beyond the 
power of man to describe. The best that 



we can do is to describe its conduct. Those 

who possess this quality are able to appreciate 

it, but are not able to explain it; for it 

is of God— God-likeness in the heart, in the 

tongue, in the hands, in the thoughts, permeating 

all the human attributes and seeking 

to control them. 

There are different kinds of love, however; 
and the Apostle is not speaking of general affection, 
but of that particular kind of love which belongs to God 
and to the New Creation, begotten of Him. There is an 
animal love, such as the brute creation exercise toward 
their young— a love which frequently leads to the sacrifice 
of life itself in its devotion. This kind of love inheres in 
the natural man, even in his fallen condition. It is all a 
more or less selfish love; for at times it is even ready to 
rob others in order to lavish good things upon those whom 
it favors. This is not the love which the Apostle describes, 
nor is he addressing the natural man. He addresses 
the New Creation, and informs them that the natural 
man will not be able to appreciate that which he presents. 
In order to have a clear comprehension of this 
love and a hearty acceptance of it as the rule of life, it is 
apparently necessary that we be begotten from Above, by 
the Most High.-l Corinthians 2:9-14. 

THE "MORE EXCELLENT WAY" 

The Church at Corinth had been founded for nearly 
five years, and had enjoyed a wide range of Divine providences. 
In addressing this Epistle to them, St. Paul was 
evidently considering well their needs, and seeking to minister 
to them the Divine Message of grace. He may not 
have realized how great a work he was doing and how 
far-reaching would be the scope of his instructions. Perhaps 
it was better for himself that he did not know how 
important was his service to the entire Church of the 
Gospel Age. Such a knowledge might have made him 
heady— the very condition of things which the Lord was 
warding off by permitting him to have still the "thorn in 
the flesh."-2 Corinthians 12:7-10. 

In this Epistle St. Paul has been gradually leading the 
minds of his readers up to a higher appreciation of the 
blessings which they were enjoying. In the chapter preceding 
today's Study he calls attention to the various 
"gifts of the Spirit" which were conferred upon the early 
Church for its establishment and development. He closes 
the chapter with the exhortation that while esteeming these 
gifts, each member of the Church should covet earnestly 
the superior ones. Then he adds, "Yet I show unto you 
a more excellent way"— something still better than any of 
those gifts of the Holy Spirit. Our Study pertains to 
this more excellent ambition which should actuate every 
child of God; namely, the acquisition and development of 
the spirit of Love, the Spirit of the Lord. 

The gifts of the Spirit, which the Apostle discusses 



in the chapter preceding our lesson, took, with the early 
Church, the place of other blessings which we now enjoy. 
They had no Bibles, as we have, no Concordances, no 
helps in Bible study. Therefore they needed the miraculous 
"gift of tongues" to draw them together once a week 
to consider the Lord's Message. They needed that the 
Message should come in this miraculous manner, in order 
that they might the better appreciate it and realize that it 
was of the Lord, not of themselves. This made opportunity 
for another gift, "the interpretation of tongues." 
Thus by the various gifts of the Holy Spirit they were 
drawn together and edified— built up— until such times as 
the books of the New Testament gradually accumulated. 
After the death of the Apostles and the consequent cessation 
of the gifts, these Divine providences of the written 
Word were quite sufficient, as the Apostle here sets forth. 

After St. Paul had called attention to these various 
facts and to the oneness of the Church, he pointed out to 
the Corinthians that they were putting rather too high a 
value upon the "gift of tongues." While a gift had its 
proper place in the Church as a blessing, he explained, yet 
a still higher blessing lay in the ability to present the Truth 
in a well-understood tongue, or language. He declared 
himself able to speak with more tongues than could any 
of them, and yet pointed out that he preferred to speak in 
that tongue which would be understood by his hearers. 
Finally in his argument he came to our present lesson, 
which he gave as the climax to his hints preceding. 

SUPERIORITY OF THE TONGUE OF LOVE 

Boldly the Apostle sets forth a great truth, which has 
come to be more and more recognized amongst Christian 
people everywhere, in proportion to their development in 
the character-likeness of their Redeemer, in proportion to 
their development as the children of God. St. Paul declares 
that not knowledge, not wisdom, not talents, not 
gifts of any kind are the things to be sought for above 
all else, but that love should be most highly esteemed. 

God is Love; and therefore whoever would be pleasing 
to Him must develop this disposition; for according to 
the Divine Law no one will ever have full Divine approval 
or life everlasting on any plane of being without 
the full establishment in the heart, in the character, of 
this Divine quality of Love. Therefore "Love is the fulfilling 
of the Law." (Romans 13:10.) The truth of this 
statement is obvious to all. 

St. Paul forcefully declares that if he had all the 
tongues of earth and of Heaven and could speak them with 
perfection and charming rhythm, even these would not 
constitute a proof of his acceptance to life eternal. Should 
he do all this in a perfunctory manner, even to the extent 
of speaking of the Divine character and in the interests 
of his fellows, he might still have no heart in the matter, 
but be merely like sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal. 
The argument, therefore, is that tongues were not to be 



esteemed as a proof of Christian character. 

The Apostle's declaration is introduced with an "if," 
which might be challenged, to a certain extent, by the 
assertion that no one could speak forth with power the 
Gospel of Christ unless he possessed the spirit of love. 
Although we have all heard public speakers who could 
deliver very beautiful essays upon Scriptural themes, we 
have generally perceived a hollowness in their teachings 
unless they spoke from the heart, prompted by love of the 
Truth— not by love of applause, nor for love of money. 

Next he argues respecting prophecy— oratory— and the 
understanding of mysteries and knowledge and respecting 
the possession of mountain-moving faith. He asks. Would 
these abilities not signify a glorious development of character, 

page 216 

a full acceptance with God and an assurance of 
life eternal? Then he answers. No; precious as these 
abilities are, they would have no value whatever in the 
Divine estimation, would profit us nothing, unless based 
upon love. How the Apostle's argument exalts this quality 
of Love before our minds! He proceeds to say that 
although we should give all of our goods to feed the poor, 
and although as martyrs we should be burned at the stake, 
yet it would profit us nothing if the motive, the sentiment, 
behind t lie giving and behind the endurance of martyrdom 
were not love. Without proper love as the mainspring of 
our conduct, there will be no reward. 

LOVE'S CONSTITUENT ELEMENTS 

To those of the Lord's people who have never studied 
out the elements of love, its constituent parts, the Apostle's 
suggestions in today's Study will seem like a revelation. 
He enumerates nine component parts: 

(1) Patience— "Love suffereth long"; 

(2) Kindness— "and is kind"; 

(3) Generosity— "Love envieth not"; 

(4) Humility— "Love vaunteth not itself, is not puffed 
up"; 

(5) Courtesy— "Doth not behave itself unseemly"; 

(6) Unselfishness— "Seeketh not her own"; 

(7) Good Temper— "Is not easily provoked"; 

(8) Guilelessness— "Thinketh no evil"; 

(9) Honesty— "Rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth 
in the Truth." 

Despite all our pains and aches physical, what a wonderful 
world this would be if every member of the race 
were perfect in these qualities enumerated! However, it 
would be a useless waste of time to weep over what we 
have not, or to chide unnecessarily our neighbors and our 
friends because they, like ourselves, are not perfect in 
love. Indeed, the more we come to understand the teachings 
of the Bible, the more sympathy we may have with 
the poor "groaning creation." In one sense of the word 



our sympathies are all for this glorious standard which 
the Apostle holds up before us. We cannot sympathize 
with the wrong, the error, the evil. It is uncongenial to 
us. But, understanding the situation, we can sympathize 
with our fellows and with ourselves as being in a fallen 
condition, in which none can do the things he would. 
The Scriptural key to the situation is the fact that as 
a race we were born and shapen in iniquity, in sin did our 
mother conceive us. (Psalm 5 1 :5; Genesis 3:20.) The 
calamity of sin, imperfection and death has injured the 
whole world mentally, morally and physically— has made 
us what the Apostle describes as a "groaning creation." 
(Romans 8:22.) This knowledge of the facts in the case, 
possessed by so few, understood by so few, should tend 
to make these few a peculiar people in their loving sympathy 
and kindness towards their fellows in distress. Alas. 
the difficulty is that even these few who know these facts 
from the Divine Word have selfishness so ingrained in 
them, and are so oppressed by the cares of this life, that 
often their sympathies are not all that they should be! 

NEW CREATURES ALONE ADDRESSED 

It is for this reason that the Scriptures do not address 
the natural man; for his mind is so sodden with selfishness 
that his eye of pity and his ear of sympathy are well 
nigh closed. Instead of appealing to the natural man in 
general, the Scriptures represent that the Lord especially 
draws some who are possessed of certain qualities of heart 
and mind, and especially leads these to a knowledge of the 
Redeemer, leaving it open with them to accept or to reject 
the offer of Divine grace and forgiveness. 

Such as respond are still further enlightened; and, if 
further responsive, they are treated as justified because 
of their faith in the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. Then 
are granted further special opportunities, and exhortations 
to make a full consecration of themselves to God and to 
His service even unto death. If they still respond and 
make this consecration, they have then come to the place 
where the Lord is pleased to reckon them dead to earthly 
things, according to their profession, and to beget them 
of the Holy Spirit and the glorious promises of His Word, 
and to count them New Creatures in Christ— members of 
the Redeemer's Body, which is the Church. 

Now they have reached the stage where, as children of 
God, they must go to school and develop in knowledge 
and in character, that they may be made actually fit, prepared, 
suitable, for eternal life and a share with their Redeemer 
in His Kingdom. 

LESSONS TAUGHT IN THIS SCHOOL 

When we enter the School of Christ, the ultimate purpose 
of the course of instruction is set before us in the 
Great Teacher's words, "Be ye like unto your Father 
which is in Heaven." The same thought is presented to 



us in St. Paul's assurance that God has predetermined that 
only such as become copies of His dear Son— in character 
likeness— can be His joint-heirs in the promised Kingdom. 
(Romans 8:29.) When we entered the School of Christ, 
we did not know that so much would be required of us. 
We did not understand all that we did when we made our 
consecration even unto death in the service of righteousness. 
However, no advantage was taken of us; for what 
was presented to us, and what we consecrated to do, includes 
everything in our power— and no more— even unto 
death. So then, no lesson that can be set before us is 
beyond our covenant, or agreement to perform. 

In the spectrum of love given us in today's Study the 
Apostle is delineating the various parts of this one great 
lesson of Christ-likeness, which is God-likeness. He is 
pointing out what constitutes such a character as God has 
predetermined that we must have, in order to be worthy 
of the gift of God, which is eternal life through our Lord 
Jesus Christ.— Romans 6:23. 

LOVE VIEWED IN COMPARISON 

"Love beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all 
things, endureth all things." Its elements of patience and 
gentleness are love in the sense of willingness to endure 
under all sorts of opposition, wherever it sees a proper 
subject for its sympathy. Love "believeth all things" in 
the sense that it is not given to doubt, to disbelieve, to 
impugn the motives and the truthfulness of its fellows. 
Only after full and convincing proofs to the contrary will 
it cease to exercise faith. Love "hopeth all things" in the 
sense that it desires a blessing for all with whom it is in 
contact; and in harmony with its desire it is continually 
striving to do them good. Love "endureth all things" in 
the sense that it cannot be quenched wherever there is 
anything upon which it can properly exercise itself. 

Viewed from another standpoint, these qualities might 
be interpreted thus: Love "beareth all things," as enduring 
pressure on every side without being crushed. It "believeth 
all things," as being full of faith in the Divine 
promises and arrangement, doubting nothing. It "hopeth 
all things, in the sense that this perfect love toward God 
enables the heart to be filled with confidence in the Almighty, 
in whose love it reposes. It "endureth all things," 
in the sense that the soul which is united to God by the 
link of love cannot be vanquished, cannot be overcome; 
for this is the Divine will and arrangement. God will 
not suffer any of these little ones to be tempted above 
that which they are able to bear, but will with every 

page 217 

temptation provide a way of escape.— 1 Corinthians 10:13. 

The Apostle institutes a comparison between love and 
some of the gifts of the Spirit which the Corinthian 
Church properly held in high esteem. He would have us 



all see how infinitely higher love is than any of the gifts 
in which the early Church rejoiced. Love is not a gift, 
but a growth. It is a fruitage which must be developed in 
the garden of our souls, and which must be tended with 
much care, in order to its proper development. He says 
that love never fails, but that the other things will fail; 
namely, the power of prophecy— oratory— the gift of 
tongues, knowledge, etc. They would lose their value as 
changing conditions would comparatively do away with 
their necessity. Prophesying would be done away with, 
tongues would cease, and knowledge would vanish. 

The argument advanced by St. Paul is that all these 
things would necessarily come to an end, when perfection 
would come in; for all our gifts and talents are imperfect. 
Surely with our glorious "change" in t lie First 
Resurrection and with the ushering in of the Millennium 
our conditions will be so different that many things now 
highly esteemed under present unfavorable circumstances 
will then be valueless! Just so flints were once valuable 
for the striking of a light, but are now never used, having 
been supplanted by matches, electric lights, etc. Many of 
those gifts, however, including the gift of tongues, perished 
long before the morning light of the Millennium. 
Shortly after the death of the Apostles they ceased altogether; 
for they were imparted only by the Apostles. 

"GIFTS" VS. "FRUITS" 

Next the Apostle compares the gifts of the Spirit with 
the fruits of the Spirit, and shows that the former, when 
contrasted with the latter, were as the toys of childhood 
in comparison with the valuables of manhood. "When 
I was a child, I spake as a child, I understood as a child, 
I thought as a child; but when I became a man, I put away 
childish things." So the gifts of tongues, interpretation 
of tongues, etc., were given to the Church in its infancy, 
and served useful purposes then. But they were put away 
as the Church emerged from infancy to the strength and 
development accruing from a greater knowledge of God's 
great Plan. The milk of the Word and the strong meat 
of the Word were purposed by God to develop the members 
of the Body of Christ, until they all come to the stature 
of manhood in Christ. The more advanced the Christian, 
the more surely would he know that the gifts of the 
Spirit were merely like a childish plaything, to be supplanted 
by the fruits of the Spirit, much more valuable to 
the Church in its developed condition.— Hebrews 5:12-14. 

St. Paul points us further to the fact that we are living 
not merely for the present, but especially for the future; 
and that whatever will last us into the eternal future must 
certainly be the most important matter for us to acquire. 
He would have us see that to the Christian that most important 
thing is the Love which he has described in our 
Study. Our knowledge, our tongues, etc., of the present 
time are mere shadows of the great powers which will be 
ours if we attain to the glorious blessings of the First 



Resurrection. Whatever clearness of sight we have at 

the present time we shall then find to be darkness in comparison 

with the full light of the glorious Millennial Day. 

Where now we see as through an obscure glass, then we 

shall see face to face. Now we know in part; then we 

shall know even as we are known. 

The Apostle would have the Church see that faith, 
hope and love— three fruits of the Holy Spirit— are far 
superior to all the gifts of the Spirit; for these fruits 
will abide throughout the Age. Until the Millennial Morning 
we shall need faith, hope and love. We cannot get 
along without them. We cannot make any progress in 
the Master's footsteps without these qualities. But if we 
seek to contrast these imperfect qualities amongst themselves, 
he points out that the chiefest of these is love. 

Love is the Divine quality without which we should 
still be unsatisfactory to God. even if we possessed all the 
other qualities which go to make up Christian character. 
Love is the quality which will persist to all eternity. If 
we would abide in Divine favor, we shall need always to 
have Love. As for faith and hope, excellent qualities 
though they be, the time will come when they shall be 
swallowed up by sight, by the actualities of the glorious 
condition of fellowship with the Lord. But love will 
never fail. Amongst all the graces of the Spirit it stands 
supreme and eternal. 



R5926: page 217 

THE GRACE OF GIVING 
-AUGUST 13.-2 CORINTHIANS 9.- 

GIVING TO THE POOR-LENDING TO THE LORD-THE SECRET OF 
ISRAEL'S BLINDNESS TO THE GOSPEL-THE BETTER CLASSES OF 

THE GENTILES ATTRACTED BY THE TRUTH-SYSTEMATIC 
ALMSGIVING BETTER THAN SPASMODIC CHARITY-GENEROSITY 
INCULCATES BREADTH OF MIND AND HEART-DEGREE 

OF PROSPERITY SHOULD BE MEASURE OF OUR CHARITY. 

"In all things I gave you an example, that so laboring ye ought 
to help the weak, and to remember the words of the Lord 
Jesus, that He Himself said. It is more blessed 
to give than to receive."— Acts 20:35. R.V. 

CHRISTIAN benevolence— almsgiving— is the 
lesson inculcated in today's Study. The general 
disposition of the fallen nature is to 
give adherence or support to the strong and 
to expect weaker ones to rally around and 
uphold us. This is self-pleasing— the way of 
the fallen nature. But the method of the 
New Creature in Christ is to be the reverse 
of this. He is to be on the lookout for the 
welfare, the interests and the comforts of 



others, especially of those in his own family and of the 
weaker members of the Household of Faith. The stronger 
of the brethren in Christ should take pleasure in helping 
the weaker and the less able, and so far as possible in 
bringing all up to the stature of manhood in Christ. 

Our Study is addressed to the Corinthian Church, and 
is on behalf of the Christians in and about Jerusalem. 
Naturally the question arises, "Why should collections 
have been then for the Christians in Jerusalem any more 
than for the Christians at Corinth? There were three reasons 
why this should be done: (1) A severe famine had 
prevailed in the vicinity of Jerusalem; (2) Jerusalem was 
not a commercial city, and therefore money was less 
plentiful there; (3) Apparently those in and about Jerusalem 
who received the Gospel were chiefly the poor. 

Moreover, from the open persecution of the Truth there 
we can readily judge that there was also a great deal of 
quiet opposition to all who sympathized with the Gospel 
of Christ. As small shop people, they were probably boycotted; 
and as laborers, they were probably rejected as far 
as possible, except as necessity might demand their services. 
On the contrary, the cities of Asia Minor, Macedonia 
and Achaia were prosperous; and as far as we may 
judge, the class which accepted the Gospel was in many 
cases the better element. For instance, we recall the 
conversion of Sergius Paulus, the deputy governor at 

R5926 : page 218 

Paphos; that of Dionysius, one of the professors in the 
University of Athens; that of Damaris, of the same city; 
that of Justus, of Corinth, and of Crispus, the chief ruler 
of the synagogue of that city. 

BLINDED BY RELIGIOUS PRIDE 

The question naturally arises. Why should the same 
Gospel attract the well-to-do classes in Asia Minor and 
Greece and repel the majority outside the poor class in 
Judea? The answer would seem to be that amongst the 
Jews, who had been long acquainted with the true God 
and His gracious promises of Messiah, a religious pride 
had developed, especially amongst the wealthy and the 
learned. Moreover, because their religious system was in 
advance of every other religious system in the world, the 
learned attributed a like superiority to themselves individually. 
They "trusted in themselves that they were righteous, 
and despised others."— Luke 18:9. 

This was the secret of Israel's blindness to the Gospel. 
The religious leaders and theologians were so self-conscious, 
and relied so implicitly upon their interpretations 
of the Divine promises as centering in themselves, that 
they could not regard the humble Nazarene and His unlearned 
followers except as impostors. Later, when the 
Gospel began to be preached to the Gentiles, the opposition 
of the Jewish theologians was increased; for it was 



utterly contrary to every thought of their religious pride 
that God would accept either the humble Jews or the Gentiles 
to His favor, and reject themselves, the leading representatives 
of His Cause and work.— John 7:43-53. 

Amongst the Gentiles, however, the case was very different. 
While the illiterate masses were firmly bound by 
the superstition of their various religions, those who were 
of an honest mind amongst the better educated were quick 
to discern that many features of their own religion were 
merely superstitions. Probably they had been somewhat 
attracted to the Jewish religion as being much more reasonable 
than their own; for we find that the Gentiles 
readily resorted to the Jewish synagogues. But the Jewish 
religion would necessarily be unsatisfactory to them, 
since it would appear to be very narrow, limiting the Divine 
blessings in a special manner to Israelites only— a 
people whom the Greeks considered rather inferiors in the 
arts of that time. But the Gospel, throwing wide open 
the door to those who desired righteousness— of every nation, 
people, kindred and tongue— would naturally commend 
itself to the class whom we are describing as being 
the most reasonable explanation of the Jewish doctrines 
and their grand eventual outcome, the meaning of which 
had long been hidden. 

THE BENEFITS OF SYSTEMATIC CHARITY 

At all events, the saints at Jerusalem were poorer 
than were the saints at Corinth. Therefore it was appropriate 
that the Apostle should suggest to the latter the 
propriety of sending a gift to the former. Living at a time 
when the conveniences for transferring money were very 
inferior to the very poorest known today, the various congregations 
could send their gifts only at the hand of the 
Apostle when he should go to Jerusalem the following year. 

St. Paul's words intimate that the suggestion which 
he had made to the Corinthian brethren nearly a year before 
had been well received, and the collections zealously 
entered upon. For this reason it was superfluous for him 
to write in this connection any of the particulars respecting 
the necessity for this collection. But he hints to them 
that there was a bare possibility that the work zealously 
begun a year before might not have been patiently carried 
out; and that after he had boasted somewhat to 
others of their love and zeal for the Lord, he would regret, 
when he came to them en route to Jerusalem, if it 
should be found that, after all, they had failed to have 
their donation ready. 

In his previous letter to the Corinthians, the Apostle 
had suggested methodical charity, saying, "Now concerning 
the collection for the saints, as I have given instructions 
to the Churches in Galatia, even so do ye. On the 
first day of the week let every one of you lay by him in 
store, as God has prospered him, that there be no gatherings 
when I come."— 1 Corinthians 16:1,2. 

It was the Apostle's experience, as it is the experience 



of all thoughtful people, that systematic charity is better 
than spasmodic giving. Not only is the result generally 
larger, but the influence upon the giver is more beneficial; 
for it keeps before the mind an object, a service to be 
rendered as unto the Lord. With many, almost the only 
opportunity for serving the Lord's Cause is that of contributing 
money. Of course, where a consecrated child of 
God can do so, it is far better that he should give to the 
saints after the manner of St. Paul and his traveling associates- 
giving spiritual gifts and blessings, either by 
public preaching or by house-to-house visiting— presenting 
the Truth either by the printed page or by tongue or both. 
But there are those so circumstanced in life through 

R5927: page 218 

lack of talent or of strength or of opportunity— hindered 

by prior mortgages upon their time in the way of family 

obligations— that practically their only chance for serving 

the Lord and manifesting their love for Him is through 

their gifts to His Cause and to His people. For such to 

be deprived of the opportunity of exercising themselves 

in the Lord's service in this manner, either through lack 

of a case needing their assistance or through lack of instruction 

respecting this method of Divine service, would 

be to deprive them of an important opportunity of service, 

and correspondingly to deprive them of the blessings 

which follow every service rendered to the Lord. 

LIBERALITY AN INDEX OF LOVE 

We notice, therefore, that the Apostle felt very free 
to recommend to the Church the grace of giving and even 
to press upon them the fact that their liberality, in proportion 
to their ability, would in a large degree be an index 
of their love for the Lord and for the Gospel. But 
here we note, in contrast, the fact that the Apostle did not 
ask alms of these believers when first they received the 
Lord's grace, lest they should in any degree get the impression 
that the Gospel was being preached from mercenary 
motives— for filthy lucre's sake. Accordingly we 
find that rather than mention money the Apostle preached 
to these very same Corinthians for more than a year without 
even a suggestion as to remuneration; that rather 
than be chargeable to any, he labored with his own hands 
at his trade of tent-making.— 2 Corinthians 1 1:7-9. 

Let us also note the change which the full appreciation 
of the Gospel wrought upon the believers at Corinth. At 
first they were so negligent of their privilege that seemingly 
they never even thought of volunteering financial assistance 
to the Apostle while he was serving them by the 
labor of his own hands and receiving some assistance 
from believers in other places. But after the grace of 
God had entered more fully into their hearts, they began 
to appreciate the value of the Truth which they had received 
and to realize that it had brought them priceless 



blessings of hope, joy, faith and character. Then they 
had a zeal, a "forwardness," to do something financially 
in the Lord's service. 
And now that the Apostle was absent from them, and 

R5927: page 219 

after his course had proved to them that he sought not 
their money but themselves, to do them good, he felt free 
to draw their attention to the great blessing which would 
result from liberality in the Lord's Cause in proportion to 
their ability and love. To impress this matter, he gave 
them a parable, saying, "He that soweth sparingly shall 
reap also sparingly; and he that soweth bountifully shall 
reap bountifully." This reminds us of the proverb, 
"There is that scattereth, and yet increaseth; and there is 
that withholdeth more than is proper, but it tendeth to 
poverty. The liberal soul shall be made fat; and he that 
watereth shall be watered also himself." (Proverbs 1 1:24,25.) 
The evident lesson is that the Lord is pleased to see 
His people cultivate breadth of heart as well as of mind- 
generosity in proportion to their knowledge of Him and 
of His generosity. 

OUR LORD'S ESTIMATE OF OUR GIFTS 

The Scriptures nowhere declare that cases of absolute 
privation amongst the Lord's people are proofs that at 
some time in their past life, when possessed of means, they 
failed to use a portion of it in charity, in the Lord's service. 
But the inspired words above quoted come very close 
to giving this lesson. At all events, it is profitable that we 
lay this testimony to heart and that every child of God 
henceforth shall be earnestly careful that out of the blessings 
of the Lord coming to us day by day some measure 
be carefully, prayerfully and lovingly laid aside as 
seed to be sown in the Lord's service according to the 
best wisdom and judgment which He will give us. 

How many have such carefulness for themselves, either 
in using every penny as fast as it comes or in being so 
interested in laying by for the outworking of future plans, 
that they feel that they can spare nothing for charity! 
How many such can afterward see that they made a great 
mistake in so doing! When their accumulations suddenly 
vanish, either through sickness or through accident or 
bank failure or otherwise, then they have good reason to 
regret that they sowed no "seed" after the manner described 
by the Apostle in Verse 6 of today's Study. 

Our Lord showed us how He measures our gifts — 
that He esteems them not according to the amount given, 
but chiefly according to the spirit which prompts the gift 
—when He drew attention to the poor widow who cast 
two mites into the Temple treasury. (Luke 21:1 -4.) From 
the standpoint of His estimation, that poor widow had 
cast in a larger sum than had any of the wealthy who had 
given merely out of their abundance, and not to such an 



extent that they felt it. How many of the Lord's people 
would be more "fat" spiritually today, if they would give 
attention to the exercise of this talent, this opportunity for 
service, we cannot say. The Lord alone knows. But today's 
Study makes it incumbent upon us to point out a 
privilege in this direction which is within the reach of the 
very poorest of the Lord's people. 

A THANK-OFFERING TO THE LORD 

Seldom is it necessary to caution people against over-much 
giving. Yet in some instances such caution is 
proper; and in some instances in Scripture giving has 
been restrained. No one should give to the extent of 
causing privation to those dependent upon him. Nor 
should any one give to such extent as to bring upon 
himself financial bankruptcy and cause losses to others. 
The Apostolic rule for giving we have already quoted. The 
"laying by on the first day of the week" should be general— 
"according as the Lord hath prospered him." The 
degree of our prosperity should be the measure of our 
charity. Upon this, as upon every subject, the Scriptures 
inculcate the spirit of a sound mind. 

"The Lord loveth a cheerful giver." Gifts bestowed 
in any other than a cheerful spirit might just as well not 
be given; for they will bring no blessing. The Lord does 
not appreciate such giving. In His estimation it has no 
"sweet odor." To be appreciated of the Lord, the gift 
must be a thank-offering, prompted by a realization of our 
debt of everlasting gratitude to Him from whom cometh 
every good and every perfect gift. And to such, the 
Apostle assures us, "God is able to make all grace abound." 
Whoever gives anything in the Divine service— time, 
talent, strength, money or influence— will find himself 
proportionately abounding in the different graces; for such 
are in the right attitude of heart to grow in grace. 

The Apostle seems to imply that such will have "sufficiency 
in all things," as well as be able to "abound in 
every good work." Sufficiency may not mean luxury and 
every comfort; but "all sufficiency" is gained always where 
there is "godliness with contentment." In proof that he 
is inculcating no new theory respecting the Divine care 
over those who are seeking to scatter to others a portion 
of the blessings that come to them, whether temporal or 
spiritual, the Apostle quotes from Psalm 1 12:9. 

In Verse 1 1, the Apostle speaks of "being enriched in 
everything." We are not to understand him to mean that 
all of the Lord's people will be enriched financially. St. 
Paul himself was an example of the fact that the Lord's 
people do not become wealthy. He is speaking of the enrichment 
of the heart. In another place he speaks of 
himself and his colaborers in the Gospel work, "as poor, 
yet making many rich; as having nothing, and yet possessing 
all things." (2 Corinthians 6: 10.) These faithful 
servants of God made many rich in hope, rich in faith, 
rich in love and in all the various concomitant graces 



which these qualities imply. 

Our Lord Jesus Christ is the grandest Example of self-denial 
in the interests of others. He was rich in the possession 
of the spiritual nature with all its glory and 
honor. Yet for our sakes He became poor, taking the 
human nature in order that He might redeem mankind. 
To this end He surrendered life itself at Calvary, that 
through His sacrifice we might become rich— possessed of 
Divine favor and the riches of Divine grace in Christ- 
even joint-heirship with Him who now is our exalted 
Lord at the right hand of Divine Majesty. But to attain 
this joint-heirship with Him, we must study to be like 
Him, to have His Spirit and to share with others whatever 
He may give us of either temporal or spiritual favors 
—either to feed or to clothe others (particularly those of 
the Household of Faith) temporally or spiritually, as circumstances 
may dictate. 

"Thanks be to God for His unspeakable Gift!" That 
Gift is our Savior, our Redeemer. (John 3:16.) In this 
connection it is impossible for us to tell the riches of 
Divine grace toward us— the numberless blessings and 
mercies which are ours through our Lord. He represents 
to us the very fulness of every Divine provision for our 
eternal welfare. As the Apostle elsewhere says, "In Him 
dwelleth all the fulness of the Deity bodily." (Colossians 2:9.) 
As yet, only the Church can now give thanks 
to God for His unspeakable Gift. But by and by the 
whole world of mankind will be in a condition to recognize 
that Gift and to render thanks. When, at the close 
of the Messianic Reign for the restoration of the Adamic 
race to their original perfection, all wilful sinners shall 
have been destroyed, then "every knee shall bow and 
every tongue confess, to the glory of God." Then every 
creature in Heaven, on earth and in the sea shall be heard 
saying, "Praise, glory, honor, dominion and might be 
unto Him that sitteth upon the Throne, and to the Lamb, 
forever!" for the Unspeakable Gift. 



R5928 : page 220 

OFFICE OF ADVOCATE AND MEDIATOR CONTRASTED 

THE fact that the Church is "the Mystery of 
God" has become more clear within the last 
twenty years. We know that Christ and the 
Church are separate and distinct from the 
world in every particular. They are neither 
under the old Law Covenant nor under the 
New Law Covenant, but are a peculiar people, 
called, sanctified, developed, under a special 
Covenant by themselves, in which none 
of the world will ever participate. This the 
Scripture styles the Covenant of Sacrifice: "Gather My 
saints [holy ones] together unto Me [saith the Lord]; 



those that have made a Covenant with Me by sacrifice." 

(Psalm 50:5.) This special class of saints, or holy ones, 

who make the Covenant of Sacrifice have as their Head 

the Lord Jesus Himself. When this company shall have 

completed their Covenant by Sacrifice, this present Age 

will end. Moses of the Law Covenant given to Israel represented 

specially the Law Covenant which will be given 

to the world through the antitype of Moses— The Christ. 

In other words, the Mediator of the Law Covenant was 

one man; but the Mediator of the New Law Covenant of 

the Millennial Age is the new Man, of which Jesus is the 

Head— and the Apostle declares that the members are 

made up of those elected both from Jews and Gentiles. 

From the time of Jesus down, the Mediator of the 
New Covenant has been in process of selection, and the 
"better sacrifices," as the basis for the New Covenant 
have been in process of offering. During this Gospel Age 
Jesus has not exercised His office as Mediator for the 
world; and the world has no relationship with God, but 
still lies in the Wicked One. The Mediator Himself has 
been in process of development. As the Apostle declares, 
God raised up Jesus first and since has been raising up the 
Church, and soon will finish the raising up. It is this 
Mediator or Prophet of whom St. Peter speaks in Acts 3:22,23. 
(See also 1 Timothy 2:5,6.) No mediating can 
be done until the Mediator of "many members" has qualified 
for the office. His qualification consists of His sacrificing, 
according to His Covenant of Sacrifice. The Christ, 
Head and Body, are, therefore, the Mediator for the world 
in a prospective sense— in the same sense as Jesus, the 
Babe, could be spoken of as the Savior and the King. He 
is only now becoming the King and has yet saved only a 
few of His people. 

There is a wide distinction between the work of a 
mediator and the work of an advocate. The Great Mediator 
between God and man— The Christ of glory— will fill 
His mediatorial office for a thousand years and complete 
it only by the end of that time, when He will deliver over 
to the Father, fully reconciled, all who can be brought into 
harmony with the Divine arrangement. The work of an 
advocate is different, and according to the Bible, relates 
only to the work which Jesus accomplishes on behalf of 
the Church during this Age. The Church will need no 
advocate in the future. The world has no advocate now. 
"We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the 
Righteous." It is Jesus individually who is the Advocate 
for us— "the Church, His Body." He advocates our cause 
—first of all by imputing to us the merit of His sacrifice, 
thus making us presentable in the Father's presence and 
acceptable as sons of God. Because of this Advocacy, we 
have received the Holy Spirit and are New Creatures in 
Christ. As New Creatures we still need our Advocate, because 
we cannot do the things that we would— perfectly. 
We have imperfections of the flesh, which, as New Creatures, 
we cannot fully control. Hence we need a Throne 
of Grace and an Advocate through whom we may maintain 



our present relationship with the Father, and thus 
not be condemned with the world. 



R5928 : page 220 

CONSCIENCE AND THE WAR 

IN PERHAPS all the armies participating in 
the present war men have been shot or imprisoned 
as a penalty for refusing on conscientious 
grounds to take up arms as soldiers. 
We are not, therefore, to think of 
the British course at the present time on this 
subject as extreme. The fact is that, so far 
as we are aware, the United States and 
Great Britain are the only countries which 
have proposed by their law to recognize conscientious 
scruples on the part of their citizens as a reasonable 
basis for being excused from military duty. 

Of course, no country forces aliens into the army; and 
were it recognized that true Christians are aliens as respects 
earthly governments, the whole question might solve 
itself. The Bible Students' claim is that the followers of 
Jesus have their citizenship in Heaven, and that by giving 
their obedience to the Heavenly Lord they renounce in a 
degree their allegiance to earthly kings— governments. It 
is for this reason that we have long advocated that the 
fully consecrated abstain from voting on political issues. 
If they so vote, they are identifying themselves with the 
earthly kingdoms, and might properly enough be called 
upon to shoot as they vote— to support the government 
which they helped to create. 

On the other hand, the Scriptural proposition is that 
while our citizenship is in Heaven and we are aliens, 
strangers and foreigners in the world, with allegiance to 
the Heavenly King, nevertheless, like all other foreigners, 
we are to be subject to the powers that be— subject to the 
laws of the country in which we may be living. But if 
obedience to the laws does not imply military service on 
the part of the foreigner, so obedience to the laws on the 
part of Bible Students does not imply military duty. Similarly 
with the oath of allegiance required by those who 
enter the army— they are required to swear allegiance to 
the king and obedience to the officers of the king in all 
things. This oath is not required of aliens, foreigners, 
and is objected to by Bible Students, not because they are 
opposed to law and order or unwilling to be regulated by 
the government under which they live, but because they 
have already given allegiance to the higher power— the 
Heavenly Lord. To them His words. His commands, etc., 
are paramount. 

Of course, such aliens could not object to deportation, 
nor make any stand for personal rights which any other 
alien of any other government might not request. 



PUBLIC SENTIMENT AROUSED 

The papers inform us that the matter of conscientious 
objectors to military service is deeply stirring the British 
people and has led to several wordy battles in Parliament. 
The claim made is that the laws of Great Britain provide 
for the consciences of all British subjects and that while 
these laws seem to be complied with, by the appointment 
of commissioners to hear the conscientious objections, 
nevertheless the laws are really disregarded, because the 
judges appointed are military judges, whose interests are 
not judicial but military. Some of those who refused on 
conscientious grounds were sentenced to prison for two 
years at hard labor. Others were forced to put on military 
uniform, and were kicked and bruised by companions 
in the ranks, either because of their conscientious loyalty 
to the Word of the great King or because they refused 
to swear allegiance to the British king and obedience to 

R5928 : page 221 

his officers. Others were sent to the army in France, the 
threat being made that if they did not do their duty they 
would be shot forthwith. 

All this is arousing British sentiment on this subject— 
for and against warfare. No doubt the courage, the witness, 
the martyr spirit on the part of the Lord's consecrated 
people will exercise a great influence and will lead 
to a more careful study of the commands of our King and 
the rules governing all who are under His banner. Whatever 
hardships may come to these dear brethren, we believe 
that a blessing will result in showing forth the 
praises of Him who has called us out of darkness into His 
marvelous light. 

In the meantime, it is not for us to exert force in opposition, 
nor to shout loudly about our rights. We are 
to remember that, in becoming soldiers of the Cross, we 
voluntarily gave up all earthly rights in order that we 
might be participators with the Captain of our salvation, 
who permitted all of His rights to be taken from Him, 
even unto death. As the followers of Jesus are made a 
spectacle to the world and to angels, they are also permitted 
to strengthen and build up one another in the most 
holy faith by their love and zeal for the Lord and His 
Message. We may well remember our privilege of praying 
one for another under such circumstances. We may 
not pray for the Lord to hinder others or ourselves from 
having trials or tests along these lines, for it is for the 
Divine Wisdom to determine what these shall be, but it is 
our privilege to pray for each other and for ourselves— 
to pray for that grace to help in every time of need which 
the Lord has promised He will grant.— Hebrews 4:16. 

May a very faithful witness, then, be given with great 
humility and with great sympathy to those who take a 
different view from ourselves! They hold that Christ's 



Kingdom has been set up; and that the present kings of 
Europe are of Divine appointment, as they claim upon 
their coins, and that for them to be at war is for God's 
Kingdom to be at war; and that their soldiers are God's 
soldiers. Inconsistently they fail to see that if their contentions 
be true, God's Kingdom is divided and God is 
fighting against Himself! A little while, and the dawning 
of the New Dispensation will be clearer. Then all nations 
will come to see that the need of mankind is the 
Rule of the Heavenly Lord with all power. By that time 
the Bride of Christ will have passed beyond the veil. 
Crowns of glory and palms of victory will have been 
bestowed, and the time for blessing the world of mankind 
will have come. 



R5929: page 221 

AT PEACE AMONGST YOURSELVES 

WE HAVE all heard the proverb, "Diamond 
cut Diamond." All jewels are very 
hard as well as very pure. This hardness 
enhances their value. The Lord's people 
are all jewels— not only are they purified by 
the Lord's grace, but they have crystallized 
characters. This being true, as we have 
previously pointed out, there is more danger 
of cutting and scratching when they are 
together than there would be with materials 
less hard. Putty and clay do no cutting— neither do characters 
of putty-like quality. 

Remembering this, the Lord's people should be very 
sympathetic with each other and very appreciative of each 
other. We learn to appreciate, as the Lord does, positiveness 
of character, strength of character, fixity of purpose, 
even though at times these qualities of character may 
cause some trouble. No wonder then that Berean Bible 
Classes have their difficulties sometimes, as well as do 
worldly organizations! 

THE LORD'S PEOPLE NOT STRIFE-BREEDERS 

Nevertheless, the Lord's people are to remember the 
special injunction of their Master that they should be 
peace-makers and not strife-breeders. It requires no 
great skill to stir up trouble. It requires considerable of 
meekness, gentleness, patience, and the other qualities of 
the Holy Spirit amongst the Lord's people to prevent 
strife, even with only the best of intentions prevailing. 
How much we all need to be on guard lest the Adversary 
tempt us, mislead us from the paths of peace! 

It requires considerable experience and the wisdom 
that cometh from Above to enable us to judge rightly 
whether a matter of difference between others and ourselves 



is a question of principle, where some fundamental 

truth is at stake, or whether it is merely a question of 

opinion and preference without principle being involved. 

In the latter case, we should be willing to submit to practically 

anything for the sake of peace, whereas we could 

not do so where principles would be involved. However, 

the delusion is often presented to us that our preferences 

are always backed up by principles of truth and righteousness. 

We must learn from experience that this is a mistake, 

and must critically examine every such suggestion. 

asking the Lord's wisdom to enable us to see the difference 

between that which is merely our preference and 

those questions which involve principles and teachings of 

Divine origin. 

For instance, in a Class there are often brethren or 
sisters who critically insist on a matter being done in a 
certain way, because that had been the previous custom 
or because they believe it to be the better way. They 
are ready to precipitate a quarrel unless their preference 
is followed. The wiser course is to waive our preference 
in favor of the preferences of others, if they are insistent, 
provided the right result is reached— namely, provided 
the will of the Class is really attained; for the will 
of the Class is to be taken as the will of the Lord— or if 
not that, the Lord will overrule the matter and bring a 
lesson to us out of it for the Class. 

Each and every member of a Class should earnestly 
strive to promote in a Class fruits of the Holy Spirit- 
meekness, gentleness, patience, brotherly-kindness, love, 
joy, peace. This promoting is to be done by remembering 
these qualities and exercising them ourselves, thus setting 
an example to others and showing forth the influence of 
the Holy Spirit operating in our own hearts and lives. 

A FREQUENT MISTAKE 

Too often the mistake is made of thinking that the 
whole weight of responsibility rests upon us— forgetting 
that our responsibility ends when we have exercised our 
judgment and have acted upon it. 

Lack of faith in the Lord is closely associated with the 
error of bringing strife into a Class on some technical 
grounds. We should remember the Lord's interest in the 
Class and in all of His people, and that He is able and 
willing to overrule our experiences for good— likewise the 
experiences of others. If, therefore, matters are not going 
exactly to our pleasement in the Class, it will be better 
for us, and often for all, that we take the matter to the 
Lord in prayer, rather than that we should be continually 
nagging or fault-finding with that which is or which appears 
to be, satisfactory to the others, or at least to the 
majority of the Class. 



R5929 : page 222 



MILITARISM AND CONSCIENCE 

WHILE Christians are enjoined to be subject to 
the "Powers that be"— the kings, governors, 
magistrates, etc.— nevertheless this is not to 
be understood as meaning the renouncement 
of our fidelity to the King of kings and Lord 
of lords. He is our Over-Lord. Our allegiance 
to earthly lords and powers and their commands 
is merely to the extent that they do 
not conflict with the commands of our Over-Lord. 
The Jews in renouncing Jesus cried, 
"We have no king but Caesar"! The Christian's position 
is, "Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, but 
unto God the "things that are God's". Whenever Caesar 
and his laws conflict with the Divine requirements, all 
true soldiers of the Cross are left no alternative. 

It is not for us to set up standards for others. Conscience 
is an individual matter. It would be as wrong 
for Bible Students to antagonize earthly governments, and 
to oppose enlistments in the army and navy under the call 
of earthly governments, as it would be wrong for others 
to force their opinions upon Bible Students, contrary to 
our consciences. Let every man be fully persuaded in his 
own mind. Bible Students are to remember that they are 
citizens of the Heavenly Kingdom and are not to specially 
insist upon their earthly rights, except such as might be 
reasonably expected by foreigners. Messiah's Kingdom 
is not to be established by the sword of Bible Students, 
nor by their angry declamations against others, nor by 
their violation of the laws of the land in which they may 
be residing, nor by any hostility to the governments which 
undertake to guarantee their lives and happiness. We are 
to be subject to these governments. We are to appreciate 
them. But all this will not break our relationship to the 
Heavenly King and His commands. These come first with 
Bible Students— each according to his own conscience in 
respect to the meaning of the Lord's Word. 

At the present time in Great Britain many of the dear 
Brethren are enduring trying experiences with great 
loyalty. Imprisonment at hard labor is severe punishment 
for a law-abiding alien who merely refuses to engage in 
war because his Over-Lord has so commanded. Yet the 
sufferings of the faithful are. perhaps, still greater in 
other directions. One is in a very trying position when 
the finger of scorn is pointed at him; when he is proclaimed 
a coward; when he is discharged from the employment 
which brings him daily bread, while others who 
take to the sword are cheered. Not questioning the valor 
and courage in the latter, we believe that it requires still 
more courage to be in the ranks of the former— to stand 
loyal to the King of kings when opposed by the scorn of 
our neighbors and friends. 

We are sure, nevertheless, that the Lord is bringing 
a blessing to all who are seeking faithfully to know and to 



do his will. We believe, moreover, that a witness is thus 
going out in a great land to a great people— to a God-fearing 
people as a whole— such as they have not had since 
the days of persecution. How much the Lord may use 
present experiences for the finding and ripening of the 
wheat class of the British people is not for us to say. 

The Brethren of the London Office have very properly 
bestirred themselves to meet the conditions prevailing 
around them. They have sent out letters to the different 
Classes advising that the regularly-elected Elders of the 
Class may properly claim exemption from military duty 
as ministers of the Gospel, and advising that they so report 
when called upon and that the Classes report the 
names of their Elders. A petition signed by about five thousand 
has been forwarded to the Government as follows: 

A PETITION 

TO THE RT. HON. H.H. ASQUITH, M.P. 

SIR:— We, the undersigned Members of the International 
Bible Students Association, beg to present this Petition on behalf 
of the young men, associated with us in Christian fellowship, 
who are affected by the Military Service Measures now 
in operation, but whose deep religious convictions prohibit 
their engaging in such service. Many have already proved 
their fidelity to conscience by suffering, and their numbers 
are being augmented daily. We know of none who, were they 
given the opportunity, would refuse work of National importance 
under the supervision of the Committee appointed 
by the Government. 

We earnestly petition that those who conscientiously feel 
bound to refuse military service of any description may be 
recognized as loyal and law-abiding citizens, and be given an 
opportunity of effective service for the country apart from 
the machine of war, and that they be not treated as criminals. 

Your good offices and influence to end the present intolerable 
situation will be ever greatly appreciated by each of the 
undersigned: SIGNED BY 5,000. 

Accompanying this petition and signatures went the 
following letter. We have not yet learned the outcome. 
Our prayer is that the Lord's will shall be done, that His 
name shall be glorified and that His people shall be sustained 

R5930 : page 222 

with the necessary strength and grace to meet whatever 
Divine providence may permit. The situation of our 
Brethren in Great Britain may possibly find some parallel 
later amongst the Brethren in Australia and in Canada. 
And who knows but that the same conditions may ultimately 
prevail here in the United States? How thankful 
we are for the Divine promise, "My grace is sufficient for 
thee; My strength is made perfect in weakness"! 

CONSCIENTIOUS OBJECTORS 



TO THE RT. HON. H.H. ASQUITH, M.P. 

SIR:— As a British Chartered Association known as The 
International Bible Students Association, and as law-abiding 
citizens of the United Kingdom, we desire to petition you, 
the Head of His Majesty's Government, craving your good 
offices to secure consideration at the hands of the Government 
for those members of this Association whose consciences 
will not permit of their undertaking Military duties of any 
description, to the intent that they be granted permission to 
undertake work of National importance as prescribed by 
the Government Committee, and already granted to some 
other citizens who are also Conscientious Objectors on similar 
grounds. We think it right to explain that no pressure of any 
kind against Militarism is brought to bear upon its members 
by this Association; all alike are free to act as led by their 
own conscience, so that their cases are those of genuine personal 
conviction. 

At the present time there are at least 40 of our members 
in Military Prisons under sentences varying from a few days 
to two years with hard labor, and we are informed that eight 
have been sent to France. These men state that nothing can 
cause them to change their attitude towards Militarism, and 
their actions, thus far, are in harmony with this statement. 
Almost every day adds to the number incarcerated, and the 
extension of the Act to affect married men will increase the 
number still more in the future. Permit us to submit for 
consideration the fact that these men are at present an expense 
to the Country and a trouble to the Authorities, whereas their 
services are available for the public weal if permitted to 
undertake work apart from Military control. 

We feel it is only proper to state that this Association, 
which is affiliated in its religious work with the WATCH TOWER 
BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY of America, is not allied with any 
other body— political or religious— which is opposed to Militarism, 
and to state further that we have no intention of 
allying ourselves with any such body. 

Accompanying this we send lists containing 5,000 signatures 
to this Petition; also a list of names of those of our members 
known to us as being incarcerated, praying the Government 
to extend to these their clemency by granting them also the 
desired exemption from Military control. 

Yours faithfully, INT. BIBLE STUDENTS ASS'N. 



R5930 : page 223 

BEREAN LESSONS AND PILGRIM VISITS 

SOME inquire what they shall do when a Pilgrim 
visit happens to be on the same night as the 
regular Berean Study— explaining that sometimes 
they must get behind as to Berean Lessons. 
Our advice is that unless there is some 



essential reason against it, the Berean Lessons 

should take precedence and the Pilgrim Brother 

conduct the meeting, giving example of a profitable 

Berean Lesson. The same thing applies to 

the Wednesday evening Prayer and Testimony 

meeting. This should go on as usual, the Pilgrim 

leading, unless for some special reason; 

as, for instance, if the Pilgrim's appointment be but for one 

night. We esteem that there are no more important services 

held by Bible Students than these two, and regularity is an 

important feature in connection with these meetings. 

We take this occasion to express the hope that all the dear 
friends who have taken the Vow read it publicly or privately 
every morning, and that the MANNA TEXT every morning 
be not forgotten. Some additionally read the MORNING 
RESOLVE. Thousands of letters from dear brethren and sisters 
all over the world testify the great blessings in connection with 
these endeavors to keep close to the Lord. The Prayer Circle 
formed by the Vow is perhaps one of the most wonderful 
things that has ever been in the world. Think of it! approximately 
twenty thousand consecrated people of God praying 
for one another and for the Harvest work every day. The 
blessing that this is bringing to them is almost inestimable; 
it is a blessing that maketh rich indeed. 

Those who are not using the Manna daily are losing a 
great blessing; and those who do not participate in the 
Wednesday evening Testimony Meeting whose topic is the 
Manna Text of the preceding Thursday are missing a rich 
blessing. As many as believe that we are now in the Evil 
Day of special trial upon the Church of God should appreciate 
these meetings— drawing very near to the Lord and to each 
other daily. If you have not done so before, we urge that 
you make a start forthwith. 

While thus exhorting, we are prompted to remind our dear 
readers in general that quite a good many are making it a 
practice to read at least twelve pages of STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES each day, thus completing the entire six volumes 
every year. Reports show that great blessings of knowledge 
and of grace follow this course. 



R5930 : page 223 

PILGRIM BARTON GONE HOME 

BROTHER BENJAMIN H. BARTON has been 
on the Pilgrim staff of the WATCH TOWER BIBLE 
AND TRACT SOCIETY for quite a good many 
years, and is widely and very favorably remembered 
by our readers. Although always 
apparently frail, Brother Barton had a strong 
voice, and by the Lord's grace was able to do 
very efficient service up to about June 1st. We 
then heard from him that he had not been 
very well and was obliged to cancel future appointments 



in Oregon. He was kindly entertained 

by the friends, and everything possible 

for his comfort was attended to, but he continued to grow 

weak and, without special pain or suffering of any kind, so 

far as we have learned, passed away on Saturday, June 24th. 

His remains were shipped to the residence of his parents in 

Philadelphia, where they were interred Monday, July 3d. 

The Editor has most kindly remembrances of dear Brother 
Barton, not only as a faithful servant of the Lord, of the 
Truth, of the brethren, but also as a personal friend. The 
knowledge of the Truth, heart-abounding grace, the spirit 
of a sound mind, all contributed to the development in 
Brother Barton of a very noble character, highly esteemed 
amongst the friends in general, and especially amongst those 
who knew him best. We will miss him greatly; nevertheless 
we also greatly rejoice on his behalf, believing that he 
has passed beyond the veil, has experienced his resurrection 
change, and with the others of the faithful will henceforth 
be forever with the Lord. "Blessed are the dead which die 
in the Lord from henceforth; Yea, saith the Spirit, that they 
may rest from their labors; and their works do follow them." 
—Revelation 14:13. 

As one by one the number beyond the veil increases and 
the members this side correspondingly decrease, the great 
privilege of being servants of God and being found faithful 
as such looms larger and larger before our mental vision. 
We know not which of us will next be called to enter into 
the joys of our Lord in full, but we trust that all of the 
truly consecrated are in the waiting attitude, expecting, hoping, 
longing for the resurrection change, which the Apostle 
assures us is necessary, because "flesh and blood cannot inherit 
the Kingdom," shortly to be established.— 1 Cor. 15:50. 

It is remarkable that as we near the consummation of this 
Age, and the completion of the Church, the opportunities for 
serving the Household of Faith seem to increase. And 
while old, active servants are passing beyond, new, loyal, 
zealous successors are being found by the Truth. Thus the 
work on this side the veil is going grandly on. 

Well did the Apostle write that the Lord's true people, 
enlightened, encouraged and fortified by the promises in the 
Divine Word, "sorrow not as do others" in the presence of 
the great foe-DEATH. 

BROTHER BAKER'S REPORT 

This morning, June 24, at Portland, Ore., Brother Barton 
passed to his reward at 1:15. His end came suddenly, even 
though his low vitality and weakness gave evidence of his 
grave condition. Friday he appeared somewhat brighter than 
usual, sitting up for twenty minutes, after which he asked to 
lie down to sleep, as he felt tired. That evening he ate a 
hearty meal (for him), and talked hopefully of starting 
home soon. The Brother's mind was apparently clear until 
the last, but he could not articulate well, owing to trouble 
due to a slight stroke of paralysis about four weeks ago. As 
death approached the cares of his season of illness seemed 



to vanish and his features relaxed, and, with a smile on his 
lips, he passed into the Kingdom. Friday afternoon he 
expressed to Sister Baker his love for the brethren at the 
Bethel and particularly for dear Brother Russell, and that 
it was his hope to see them again. His only care has been 

R593 1 : page 223 

his mother. The desire to see and comfort her again probably 
did much to retain the slight hold he had on life for 
some weeks. 

The opportunity of serving the Brother has been a great 
blessing to all here, and while individual privileges of service 
were limited for obvious reasons, the privilege of serving his 
spiritual interests through prayer has greatly blessed all. 
His cheerful, patient endurance of his physical disability, his 
desire to please and his efforts to keep himself from being 
burdensome to those about, will prove a lasting lesson to 
all. Our loss has been his gain. How appropriate today's 
MANNA TEXT! 



R593 1 : page 223 

THE ST. LOUIS CONVENTION 

ALTHOUGH the attendance at the St. Louis Convention 
—June 22-25— was not large, it was 
an enthusiastic gathering and gave strong evidence 
of the Master's blessing. The Apostle's 
exhortation, "Be ye filled with the Spirit," seems 
to have been quite well realized by those in 
attendance. The exhibitions of the PHOTODR AM A 
OF CREATION in the evening were a very 
happifying feature of the Convention. The 
pictures and the lectures— the Bible story from 
Creation to Restoration— seem to have a charm 
for Bible Students everywhere. Like the charm 
of God's Word, they never grow stale. 

The Convention attendance varied from three hundred 
and fifty to six hundred and fifty, aside from the public meeting 
on the closing night. It was held in the Odeon Theatre 
and was addressed by the Editor of this journal. The house 
was crowded to its capacity, twenty-three hundred, and at the 
same time an overflow meeting of Bible Students was held 
in the Convention Hall to the number of about six hundred. 
At the close of both meetings, about 10:30 p.m.. Brother 
Russell came into the Convention Theatre. He was welcomed 
with the Chautauqua Salute— the waving of handkerchiefs, 
while the familiar old hymn was sung with zest: 

"Blest be the tie that binds 
Our hearts in Christian love." 

After a few words of greeting and reference to the Convention 



and its conclusion and the hope for blessings upon 

those present and the dear ones at the home towns represented 

by them. Brother Russell arranged the Love Feast, 

in which nearly all participated with many manifestions of 

earnest Christian love and zeal. Thus happily, joyfully, the 

First General Convention of the season came to an end. 



page 225 

VOL. XXXVII AUGUST 1 No. 15 
A. D. 1916-A.M. 6044 



CONTENTS 

How We Attain Development as New 
Creatures 227 

Operation of the Holy Spirit in Us. . . 227 
How the Husbandman Deals With His Vine. . . 228 

Mortification of the Deeds of the Body. 228 
Divine Recompense to Those Who Sacrifice. . 229 
Re Partially Wilful Sins Before 

Consecration 229 

We Reap What We Sow 230 

The Thought of God (Poem) 230 

Sowing to the Flesh— The Result Death ... 23 1 
The Riot at Ephesus 232 

Reformation Costing Sacrifice 232 

Journeying Toward Jerusalem 234 

Especial Dangers Amongst Elders .... 235 

"Day and Night With Tears" 236 

Munitions-Militarist Conspiracy 237 

Minneapolis— Winnipeg— Sioux City- 
Newport Conventions 237 

Interesting Letters 238 

page 226 

GENERAL CONVENTIONS 

NIAGARA FALLS, N.Y. -Aug. 19-22. For assignments 

address A. Fosbraey, 727 Pine Ave. 
NASHVILLE, TENN.-Aug. 24-27. For assignments address 

Milton E. Confehr, 1516 McGavock St. 
LOS ANGELES, CAL.-Sept. 2-10. For assignments address 

F.P. Sherman, 808 Figueroa St. 
SEATTLE, WASH.-Sept. 14-17. For assignments address 

H.G. Backbock, 2410 First Ave., W. 
MILWAUKEE, WIS.-Sept. 16-24. For assignments address 

C. Hilton Ellison, 2704 Wells St. 
DAYTON, O.-October 5-8. For assignments address Dr. 

Chas. E. Kerney, 475 S. Broadway. 



SPECIAL RATES TO NIAGARA FALLS CONVENTION 

Many of the Railroads sell special Excursion tickets to 
Niagara Falls. We recommend inquiring of your Ticket 
Agent respecting Excursion rates before purchasing. 

The Pennsylvania Railroad Company offers a $7.50 excursion 
rate, round-trip from Pittsburg. Whether other 



Railroads have a cheaper offer, we do not know. Bible 
Students going from nearby towns can buy to Pittsburg and 
there purchase the Excursion ticket mentioned. 



DOCTOR JONES' PACIFIC COAST EXCURSION 

All considering attendance at Los Angeles Convention, 
Sept. 2 to 10, or Seattle Convention, Sept. 14 to 17, or both, 
are advised to consult W.L. Jones, 4100 Mich. Ave., Chicago. 



"SPEAKING THE TRUTH IN LOVE" 

We learn that amongst Bible Students there is a division 
of sentiment in respect to some of the newspapers publishing 
Pastor Russell's sermons. Surely each person is at liberty 
to patronize whichever paper he finds most convenient in 
price, etc., and, in his judgment, most likely to be helpful 
in scattering the sermons amongst people who are not acquainted 
with the Truth! Each should consider the Lord's 
will in the matter, and each has a perfect right to express 
his judgment to others. We counsel that all papers publishing 
the sermons be considered as friendly, and advise that 
the Brethren in expressing their views use logic and not 
bitterness, and that the Lord's will and not personal prejudice 
shall prevail— "Speaking the Truth in Love." 

The Society's thought is that the Truth is best served by 
the encouragement of newspapers which reach large numbers 
of outside readers. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR SEPTEMBER 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
September follow: (1) 164; (2) 12; (3) 328; (4) 114; (5) 300; 
(6) 107; (7) 145; (8) 149; (9) 1; (10) 191; (11) 4; (12) 19; 
(13) 228; (14) 139; (15) 111; (16) 100; (17) 109; (18) Vow; 
(19) 279; (20) 307; (21) 333; (22) 165; (23) 1 13; (24) 66; 
(25) 71; (26) 208; (27) 105; (28) 226; (29) 119; (30) 313. 



STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 

THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE 
KEYS." PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION. 

SERIES I., "The Plan of the Ages," gives an outline of the Divine 

Plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and restitution: 
384 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. 



(3s. l-l/2d.) 

This volume has been published as a special issue of our journal 
at the extremely low price of 5c. a copy, in any quantity, postage included. 
(To foreign countries, 9c.) This enables people of slender 
purse to herald far and wide the good tidings in a most helpful form. 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time of 
the Lord's Second Coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper 
edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers prophecies which mark 
events connected with the "Time of the End," the glorification of the 
Church and the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom; it also contains 
a chapter on the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 384 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 75c. (3s. l-l/2d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Battle of Armageddon," shows that the dissolution of 
the present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas 
offered are valueless to avert the predicted end. It marks in these 
events the fulfilment of prophecy, noting specially our Lord's great 
prophecy of Matt. 24 and Zech. 14:1-9: 688 pages, in embossed cloth, 
35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES V., "The Atonement Between God and Man," treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features 
of Divine grace revolve. Its topic deserves the most careful and 
prayerful consideration on the part of all true Christians: 640 pages, 
in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-l/2d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week (Genesis 1 and 2), 
and with the Church. God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of the 
Body under the Head: 750 pages, in embossed cloth, 35c. (Is. 6d.) 
India paper edition, 85c. (3s. 6-I/2d.) 

The above prices include postage. 



R593 1 : page 227 

HOW WE ATTAIN DEVELOPMENT 
AS NEW CREATURES 

"If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if ye 
through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the 
body, ye shall live."— Romans 8:13. 

MORTIFICATION of the deeds of the body 
through the Holy Spirit of God is here declared 
by the Apostle Paul to be essential to 
the attainment of everlasting life. But to 
some who had become His disciples, the 
Lord said, "He that believeth on the Son 
hath everlasting life." Again, "Verily, 
verily, I say unto you. He that heareth My 
Word, and believeth on Him that sent Me, 
hath everlasting life, and shall not come into 
condemnation, but is passed from death unto life. 



(John 3:36; 5:24.) The Apostle John in his first Epistle says, 
"We know that we have passed from death unto life, because 
we love the brethren"; and "He that hath the Son 
hath life."-] John 3:14; 5:12. 

We must not understand St. Paul to contradict our 
Lord and the Apostle John. Our Lord Jesus and St. John 
were speaking from the standpoint of God's reckoning— 
from the legal standpoint. Those who have accepted Christ, 
and have received of His atoning merit, have come out 
from under the Adamic death condemnation. Their present 
imperfections, as well as their past sins, are covered 
by this merit. Through consecration and begetting of the 
Holy Spirit they have become New Creatures in Christ. 
Hence the everlasting life provided for such is already 
considered as theirs, while they abide under the Robe of 
Christ's Righteousness. They are now "saved by hope." 

The Apostle Paul is here speaking of the matter from 
the standpoint of its full accomplishment, when the Church 
shall have obtained their spiritual body and are absolutely 
perfect, and have received the actual fulness of unending 
life. This will be attained only in our resurrection. 
No life can be everlasting, in the strict sense, unless 
it is to last forever; and this is not determined until we 
have made our calling and election sure. But it is reckoned 
to us so long as we are faithfully meeting God's 
terms and conditions. Life could not last forever under 
present earthly conditions, even though the penalty of 
death were entirely removed; for these conditions are not 
favorable thereto. Conditions and environments must be 
radically changed before life could last eternally and be 
enjoyed in its fulness. 

The embryo of life that we have received from our 
begetting as New Creatures is perfect so far as it has 
progressed; but it must continue to grow and develop, to 
make progress, until we are finally born perfect, complete. 
New Creatures in the First Resurrection. "Blessed and 
holy are they that have part in the First [chief] Resurrection. 
On them the Second Death hath no power." 

OPERATION OF THE HOLY SPIRIT IN US 

The many exhortations addressed to this class of 
spirit-begotten ones would not be at all applicable to the 
world in general. The Apostle Paul is telling us as God's 
spiritually begotten sons how we are to make ourselves 
ready for our birth in due time. He says that we are to 
accomplish this great preparatory work through the Spirit, 
through the power of God. The Spirit, or power of God, 
operates in various ways. For instance, God's Message 
of Truth is given to us, embodying the different features 
of God's great Plan, showing us what is the will of the 
Lord for us. The more we study and understand this 
Plan, the greater will be the operation of this holy power 
of God in our hearts. The deeper our consecration, the 
more sympathy shall we have with all the purposes of the 
Lord and the more fervently shall we desire to do the 



Divine good pleasure. 

God through His Holy Spirit is not operating at present 
upon any but this special class. Whatever there is in 
the world of nature is all the result of the operation of 
God's Power, His Spirit, in a general way; but the Apostle 
in our text is referring only to the influence of the Spirit 
of God upon the soul. In the New Testament writings 
the work of the Holy Spirit refers only to those who 
have become God's people under the terms laid down by 
our Lord Jesus Christ. All such are under the Lord's 
special care. God began this good work in us. It is not 
of men nor by men. Therefore we must look to God to 
complete this work which He has begun, and must give 
Him our full and hearty cooperation. 

We are to go to God's Word, and are to study it 
prayerfully, using all the helps which His providence has 
furnished thereto, seeking thus to learn the meaning of 
that Word, seeking to put it into expression in our lives. 
Just as it is necessary to partake of natural food that we 
may have our bodies strengthened and sustained, so God 
has given us spiritual food, that we may get spiritual 
sustenance and strength and may understand His will. 
This operation of God upon us and in us through His 
Holy Spirit is a gradual work; that is, after we have been 
begotten. Many of us have been so beclouded with the 
errors of our former beliefs that we are unable to see 
the deep things of God at the first glance. Therefore we 
need to study, and to meet together with those of like 
precious faith. If this is not possible for some, because 

R593 1 : page 228 

of isolation, they can at least meet with the brethren by 
means of the printed page. 

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF CONSECRATION 

As we come to understand more clearly all that full 
consecration to God signifies, our thought on the subject 
gradually changes. When first we came to God, many of 
us had the thought that God's will for us was to accept 
Christ as our Savior, and then to live a good, decent, 
moral life, to enjoy ourselves in any legitimate ways, to 
take good care of our bodies, and to attend church on 
Sunday, and perhaps other meetings. We thought that 
all who did not do this would be lost, that there would be 
no future hope for them. But this is not God's Plan at 
all. We have learned better now. God has shown us 
that the only way by which the Church of Christ can 
ever attain to the Heavenly inheritance is by the destruction 
of the human nature and its interests, by the relinquishing 
of all earthly hopes and ambitions. 

At first this is a new thought to us, and the question 
presents itself, "Does God wish me really to mortify, kill, 
my human nature? Am I not to seek to cultivate all my 
natural talents and make the most of them? Am I not to 



R5932 : page 228 

live a natural life, so long as I do not sin?" One not 
begotten of God's Holy Spirit would say, "Why, certainly; 
follow the cravings of your nature, so long as you 
keep within bounds. If you would enjoy a good theatre, 
or a game of base-ball, go; and have a good time. If a 
glass of liquor does not hurt you, take it. If you have a 
natural talent for music or painting or whatever, it is 
your duty to make the most of it." This is worldly counsel. 

In Jesus' Parable of the Talents, the talents given by 
a certain lord to his several servants represented opportunities 
of service for that master. The master placed 
an opportunity in the hands of each servant and expected 
him to improve it. So our Heavenly Lord and Master 
places before His servants certain opportunities to be improved 
to His glory, and to be used as each has ability. 
These opportunities are given in harmony with natural 
ability and not in violation of it; but this does not mean 
that every ability we may possess, whether its use would 
glorify God or not, must be improved and employed. As 
New Creatures we are to employ all our powers to God's 
glory. If they cannot be so used, we are to sacrifice them 
and spend ourselves in directions that would be in harmony 
with our Covenant of Sacrifice. 

HOW THE HUSBANDMAN DEALS WITH HIS VINE 

To each consecrated one who has entered upon this 
Heavenly way we would say. You have placed yourself 
in God's hands. You have asked the Lord to transform 
you, to renew your mind, to make you entirely over, that 
you may be fitted and prepared for the glorious position 
He has promised. So all your powers are to be turned in 
the direction toward which you are to be trained by your 
Master. If the grape-vine under the husbandman could 
reason and speak, it would probably say, "It is natural 
for me to develop an abundant supply of foliage and to 
throw out branches and tendrils in every direction to support 
me." But the wise husbandman vigorously prunes 
off these superfluous branches and tendrils that dissipate 
the strength of the sap, that develop only wood and 
leaves, and that cause the vine to cling to improper supports. 
The husbandman seeks for fruit, rich, abundant 
fruit; and everything which would hinder this attainment 
must be sacrificed. The vine would tend downward. The 
husbandman trains it to grow upward. So does our great 
Heavenly Husbandman train His spiritual vine, that we 
may bring forth abundant fruitage to His praise. 

We no longer belong to the world. Our course now 
is to be that which God has marked out for us in the 
Scriptures. If we do not mortify, kill, the deeds of the 
body, we shall never gain the eternal life promised to the 
faithful overcomers alone. In order to attain eternal life, 
the life now held out to us— glory, honor, immortality— 



we must conform ourselves to the instructions given us 
by our great Training Master. We are not to do this in 
our own unaided strength. This would be impossible. 

But our Heavenly Father has promised to work in us 
while we work out our salvation with fear and trembling. 

MORTIFICATION OF THE DEEDS OF THE BODY 

The real thought of the words, "Mortify the deeds of 
the body," is not what some have thought— to mortify our 
body. According to history, and according to some present 
practices, we learn that some have imagined that they 
must torture and punish their body. They use whips upon 
their flesh until they draw blood. Then they wear hair 
jackets. Sometimes their bodies fester from the pricking 
hairs that torture the raw flesh. Some mortify their bodies 
by actually lying down for others to walk upon them and 
to wipe their feet upon them. We cannot question that 
those who do these things have a motive in so doing; and 
we could not think it a bad motive. But they have entirely 
misapprehended what is the Scriptural mortification. 

The Apostle tells us that it is the deeds of the body we 
are to mortify— the natural practices of the fleshly nature. 
"It is my nature to do so and so," says one. But the Bible 
says we are not to go in the way in which we were born; 
for we were all born sinners. We now have the Spirit 
of God, the Holy Spirit, to guide us in the way in which 
we should go. We are to mortify everything in us which 
is not fully endorsed by our new mind, everything that 
would hinder the death of the old creature— already reckoned 
dead— and hinder the growth of the New Creature. 
Certain elements of the mortal body are to be destroyed, 
warred against at all times. Other qualities of the human 
body are to be utilized in the service of righteousness. 
We were once sold under sin. But we have been purchased 
back, and now we have the mind of Christ. 

We are now to treat our human body as an earthen 
vessel to be used to the glory of God. Under the direction 
of the Holy Spirit we are to know how to use this 
human vessel. We are to remember, first, that it is reckoned 
dead as a human body, having been sacrificed with 
Christ when we made our consecration to be dead with 
Him; second, that while reckoned dead, this body has 
actually been stimulated, quickened, revivified, to serve 
the New Creature, as its property, its servant, in lieu of 
the spirit body which we are to have, but have not yet 
obtained. Every property of this body which can be used 
in the interests of the New Creature, is to be utilized. 

We are not to say, "If I use a certain natural talent 
which I possess, I can bring comfort or pleasure to others, 
or can promote some work of reform." The question for 
us is, "Will the use of this natural talent or power assist 
me as a New Creature or assist in the work of gathering 
out and preparing the Bride of Christ for her future 
work?" This is our present mission. There are those 
who can do the other things. So we find that the process 



of developing ourselves as New Creatures and of assisting 
in the building up of the brethren in the most holy faith 
requires our undivided attention, and means a continual 
warfare of the new nature against the old. The Apostle 
calls it the warring of the spirit against the flesh. Our 
development into the likeness of Christ requires that we 
do good unto all men as we have opportunity— where it 
will not interfere with our consecration vows— but especially 

R5932 : page 229 

to the Household of Faith, as the Apostle tells us. 

As our flesh is only reckonedly dead, and not actually, 
we are to be continually on guard. Our tongues are 
liable, unless carefully and prayerfully guarded, to speak 
slanderously or perhaps to make cutting remarks. All of 
our members are to be brought into harmony with God 
and His will. We are to have the sentiment of the hymn 
we often sing: 

"Let mine eyes see Jesus only." 
We are to continually look to Him to be directed. We 
are. by thus seeing Him, to become more and more conformed 
to His glorious likeness. We are to endeavor to 
see everything from the Divine standpoint. We shall 
never become perfect in the flesh; but so long as we are 
tabernacling in this body, it is our duty and privilege to 
compel the body to do the will of the New Creature. 

Our human body was once a slave to sin, a slave to 
the things of this present evil world. Now we are to say, 
"This body belongs to the Lord. I must control it to His 
glory. I am determined to increase day by day my power 
over this body, that I may use it more and more fully in 
the service of my King. I am not to do foolish things. 
I am not to leap from the pinnacle of a temple to see if 
God will not protect me while I am trying to show that 
I am a special favorite of Heaven. But under the guidance 
of the Holy Spirit, I am to get the most out of this 
body that I can, in the service of Him whom I have accepted 
as my new Master. 

All this is necessary to our development of the character 
required for our great future work, not only for 
the coming Age, but for all eternity. We are called to 
joint-heirship with Christ. We can scarcely grasp what 
this means. We would never be prepared for such an 
exaltation if we did not prove overcomers. And this 
means that there is something real to overcome. Overcoming 
means the development of character, growing 
strong in the Lord. He declares that He is calling for 
only such as do thus overcome. 

DIVINE RECOMPENSE TO THOSE WHO SACRIFICE 

The world will have a thousand years to bring their 
bodies into perfect harmony with the Lord's will, and they 
will not be required to sacrifice the legitimate desires of 
their flesh. But we are required, after we have accepted 



the present Call, to sacrifice the interests of the flesh; and 
we have but a very limited time in which to develop the 
necessary character. God is now selecting and directing 
those only who of their own will wish to lay down their 
lives with Christ. They love Him supremely; and He is 
pleased to call these holy ones His jewels. No good 
thing will He withhold from these. "Eye hath not seen, 
nor ear heard what God has in reservation for these who 
love Him." These are going on from grace to grace, 
living not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. 

To the world it looks as if these are having a hard 
time. Moreover, the Bible says, "Through much tribulation 
shall ye enter into the Kingdom." And again, "Yea, 
and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer 
persecution." (2 Timothy 3:12.) Unless a man deny 
himself and take up his cross and follow Jesus, he cannot 
be His disciple. But, on the other hand, all true 
Christians will agree with the Apostle that it is possible 
to reach that degree of development where they will rejoice 
in all these experiences, rejoice while the flesh is being 
mortified, deadened. It is not that we are naturally so 
different from other people that we would enjoy what 
they dislike, but that we see a reason why we should rejoice. 
We know that this is God's plan for us; and that 

R5933 : page 229 

by this mortification of the will of the flesh, of the things 
of the flesh, we are growing in God's favor. 

"Great peace have they that love Thy Law, and nothing 
shall offend [stumble] them." So these have the peace 
of God ruling in their hearts. They have the knowledge 
that all of their affairs are under Divine supervision. 
The world have their troubles and fears. Some who are 
rich in this world's goods worry for fear they will die in 
the poorhouse. Many misers have been found dead with 
a large amount of money secreted about them, having 
feared all their lives that they would come to poverty 
and want. Some have had various other forebodings. 
But those who have put their trust in the Lord have a 
peace that the world cannot know and cannot take away. 
It is superior to anything the world can offer. 

But we cannot explain this to the world. They would 
be unable to comprehend it. The world sometimes say 
of the Lord's consecrated people, "Is he a fool?" They 
cannot understand our hopes, which are so blessedly real 
to us. Those who have entered the School of Christ, and 
who have learned of Him, know. We all know that for 
everything which we deny ourselves now our God gives us 
abundant compensations in our spiritual blessings and joys 
even here; and then we have all the unspeakable glories 
promised to His saints awaiting us just beyond the veil. 
"Then let our hearts be surely fixed 
Where truest joys are found; 
And let our burning, loving praise 
Yet more and more abound. 



And gazing on 'the things unseen,' 

Eternal in the skies. 
From glory unto glory, 

O Savior, may we rise!" 



R5933 : page 229 
RE PARTIALLY WILFUL SINS BEFORE CONSECRATION 

SIN is to be viewed from two different standpoints. 
The Bible declares that all are sinners; 
for in Eden the whole race was judged 
and the whole race was condemned. These 
sinners may more or less sear their own 
consciences by doing things which they 
know are wrong, and may thus further degrade 
themselves mentally, morally and 
physically; or they may strive against sin 
and their own weaknesses and try to improve 
their character and their life. To whatever extent 
they do either the one or the other they are advancing 
or deteriorating. 

But with the world God is not at present taking account 
of either of these courses. He has provided that 
all who will come back into harmony with Him shall have 
the favorable provisions of the Millennial Age, restoring 
them fully to God's image and favor. That will be their 
trial time. It is not what mankind do now that will determine 
their eternal destiny, although their present course 
will affect their character, making them more or less likely 
to respond to the opportunities of the next Age. The present 
lives of some seem to be so hardening them that many 
stripes will be necessary in the Age to come before they 
can be brought into an obedient and teachable attitude, if, 
indeed, they ever respond and come into heart-harmony 
with the Kingdom arrangements. What men do now may 
degrade or elevate them, but will not bring them either 
eternal life or eternal death; for the world are all under 
sentence of the first death, all under the Adamic penalty. 

God has plainly declared that there is to be a future 
life, a future hope, and why this is so and how release 

R5933 : page 230 

from this sentence is to be brought about. Moreover, He 
has given a special Message during this present Age to 
which some of us have gladly responded. We have determined 
that if God thus graciously designs to offer eternal 
life to every human being, and will now receive those 
who desire to be in harmony with Him, we will turn away 
from sin and live contrary to it, and will be servants of 
God and of righteousness. All who take this stand are 
directed of the Lord through His Word and His providences 
to the terms and conditions upon which they may 



become members of the Christ company, the Church company. 
God's provision is so broad that it has made ample 
arrangement for all their necessities. 

Only now, therefore, is there such a thing as sin unto 
death, wilful sin, that will decide their eternal destiny. 
The Apostle Paul says, as the mouthpiece of the Lord, 
that if we, the Church of Christ, sin wilfully after we 
have received the Spirit of God— after we have come to a 
knowledge of the Truth as it is in Jesus, and have tasted 
of the Heavenly gift— there remaineth no more sacrifice 
for sins— only destruction. (Hebrews 6:4-6; 10:26-31.) 
If we sin wilfully after we have left sin, then our course 
indicates perversion of mind, change of heart, a returning 
to a wallowing in the mire. None but the Church can do 
this; for only these have passed from death unto life. 
We made a bonafide contract with the Lord, and He will 
not ignore it. He will hold us to it; and we must either 
fulfil our covenant or meet the penalty— eternal death. 

THE CASE OF SAUL OF TARSUS 

But no sins that we committed before consecration are 
those wilful sins which will bring the Second Death. Such 
wilful sins are committed after consecration. Let us take 
the experience of Saul of Tarsus as an illustration. It 
would seem that Saul did not commit wilful sin when he 
persecuted the Church of Christ; for he said afterward 
that he verily thought he was doing God service. We 
can readily see how a strong character like Saul of Tarsus 
might think he was serving God in stoning St. Stephen 
and in other acts of like nature. He supposed that the 
followers of Jesus of Nazareth were violating the Jewish 
Law and trying to overthrow Judaism. He thought he 
was upholding God's institutions. He had no intimation 
whatever that he was doing anything contrary to God's 
will. When he was stricken down by the supernatural 
light and heard the Lord saying, "Saul, Saul, why persecutest 
thou Me?" he was astonished, and said, "Who art 
Thou, Lord?" It was a strange thought to him that he 
was persecuting the Lord; for he supposed that he was 
serving God. But as soon as he saw his error and realized 
that he was persecuting the Lord's people, he turned 
about at once and came into full harmony with the Divine 
will. He evidenced by his sincerity of heart that he had 
not wilfully done wrong. 

We cannot suppose that if Saul had been committing 
wilful sin in stoning St. Stephen, the Lord would have appeared 
to him and would have sent His servant Ananias 
to give him instruction. Nevertheless, Saul had done 
wrong, and he received a measure of stripes, of chastisement. 
His semi-blindness for life was in measure a retribution, 
a correction, as well as a means of keeping him 
humble in view of later revelations.— 2 Corinthians 12:7-9. 

As we understand the Scriptures, the merit of Christ's 
death does not cover wilful sin of any kind, but only those 
sins which are done unintentionally by us. It would seem 



that those who love sin, who prefer sin, are not likely to 
be reached by the Gospel Message of this Age. Those 
who are not satisfied with themselves, but who are in 
difficulties merely on account of the weaknesses of the 
flesh, are the kind most likely to be reached. If at 
any time before coming to the Lord these honest-hearted 
ones have committed sins which had some measure of 
wilfulness, they probably had some later experiences that 
were in the nature of stripes, some sufferings therefor, 
either before consecration or subsequently. 

WE REAP WHAT WE SOW 

When one becomes a New Creature in Christ, we understand 
that all the affairs of the old creature are settled 
legally before God's Law. Whoever comes into Christ 
becomes dead as a human being, in God's reckoning. But 
if in his past life he has violated the laws of his being 
by a course of improper living, by committing sins that 
affected his health, the seeds of those sins will still be 
in his body; and he may throughout his entire life be 
obliged to suffer the results of this past wrong-doing. Or 
if in a moment of passion or under the influence of drink, 
for instance, he may before becoming a Christian have 
committed a crime, he may have to suffer to the end of 
his life because of this. But this would not mean that 
these sins had not been covered by the merit of Christ. 
It would be the natural retribution for wrong-doing, for 
violating Divine Law and perhaps human law. His sins 
would be the result of Adamic weaknesses and not purely 
wilful; and when he gives his heart to the Lord, they are 
no more remembered against him. 

Our thought would be, then, that there are no sins of 
the Christian prior to consecration to be reckoned for 
after consecration, though the weakness or disabilities resulting 
from former sins may remain with him while he 
remains in the flesh, and he— or she— may always have 
these weaknesses or their results to contend with. "As 
a man soweth, so shall he also reap," is a universal Law 
of God operating in our being, even though, through the 
Ransom-sacrifice of Christ, one may be received into the 
family of God and forgiven. Had it not been for the 
redemption through Jesus, all these sins would have meant 
death eternal. No one can indulge in sin without its making 
its impression upon the mind and upon the body, and 
the New Creature has that much more to struggle with. 
But he will have the Lord's sympathy, and he has the constant 
application of the merit of his Savior as a covering 

R5934 : page 230 

for those sins and infirmities against which he is fighting. 
He has the Throne of Grace to which he may daily go for 
cleansing, through the precious blood, and to which he 
may go in every time of need. 
The fact that sins indulged in will leave their effects 



in both mind and body which may require years to eradicate, 
should cause even those who are not consecrated to 
the Lord to live clean, pure lives, to seek to be in harmony 
so far as possible with the laws of their being. If all the 
world could realize the importance of this and would act 
accordingly, they would be greatly advantaged in the Age 
to follow this, when the whole world will be on trial for 
life or death eternal. 



R5934 : page 230 

THE THOUGHT OF GOD 

"I look to Thee in every need, and never look in vain; 
I feel Thy strong and tender Love, and all is well again. 

The thought of Thee is mightier far 

Than sin and pain and sorrow are. 

"Discouraged in the work of life, disheartened by its load, 
Shamed by its failures or its fears, I sink beside the road; 

But let me only think of Thee, 

And then new heart springs up in me. 

"Thy calmness bends serene above, my restlessness to still; 
Around me flows Thy quickening life, to nerve my faltering will. 

Thy presence fills my solitude; 

Thy providence turns all to good." 



R5934: page 231 

SOWING TO THE FLESH-THE RESULT DEATH 

"Be not deceived; God is not mocked; for whatsoever 
a man soweth, that shall he also reap."— Galatians 6:7. 

IN THIS text the Apostle seems to be emphasizing 
the fact that it is not enough that we 
make a consecration of ourselves to God, 
but we need to show by the earnestness of 
our conduct that we have received a transforming 
power into our lives. If we say 
that we are New Creatures and make a 
change merely in our profession, while still 
sowing to the flesh, the result will be not 
according to our profession, but according 
to our doing; and we shall reap the reward— corruption. 
Others may be deceived, and we may be deceived ourselves; 
but God will not be deceived. If we, on the contrary, 
to the best of our ability to understand the Lord's 
will, lay down our lives, sowing to the Spirit, then shall 
we reap everlasting life. 

The Apostle is addressing the saints, the consecrated 



people of God, those who have presented their bodies 

living sacrifices, and whose sacrifices have been made acceptable 

through the merit of Christ. Being made New 

Creatures by the begetting of the Holy Spirit, these are 

to go on to reach perfection on the spirit plane. 

If we, then, who are of this class, live after the flesh- 
according to the desires of the flesh— we shall die. This 
does not mean that if any of God's people should have 
some earthly desire or some wrong sentiment spring up in 
their minds they would die instantly, or that they would 
instantly be cut off from any hope of future life on the 
spirit plane. The thought is that if we live after the flesh 
—pursue the desires of the flesh, follow that course in life 
—the end will be death. And every seed thus sown tends 
toward death. If we sow to the flesh, we shall of the 
flesh reap corruption. 

CERTAIN CARE FOR THE BODY NECESSARY 

It would not be necessarily true in such sowing that 
we would wish to sow to the flesh. The Apostle intimates 
that the class he is addressing do not wish to sow to the 
flesh, but wish to do otherwise. But if we do sow to the 
flesh— to sensuality or to any earthly desires contrary to 
the new nature— the crop will come by and by. We might 
like to have better clothes and delicious food; we might 
desire to live on a good street and in a fine house; and 
these would not necessarily be sinful things. All these 
things are of the flesh, but they are not what the Apostle 
has especially in mind here. He is thinking of things of 
the fallen flesh, which are always contrary to the Spirit. 

If we practice those things which our understanding 
of God's Word teaches us He would not approve, seeds 
are thus sown to the flesh. Every inch that we yield— 
whether in thought, word or action— means so much decrease 
of spiritual power; and the New Creature grows 
weaker. This might be done as respects our food and 
clothing, our home, our time, etc.; and this would be 
sowing to the flesh in such instances. If in accordance 
with our judgment of the Lord's will, we follow a course 
with a view to keeping our body in condition for best 
service, and if then our body, our flesh, has a craving for 
certain things that would not be for our spiritual welfare, 
the New Creature is to say, "No, you cannot have it"; or 
"These things are too expensive for you." 

There are not many who have made a sacrifice of their 
flesh; but it is to those who have done this that the 
Apostle is speaking. I, as the New Creature, say to the 
Old Creature— the body— "I shall give you what I 
think is for your good. I do not understand that the 
Lord wishes me to kill you at once, for I need your service; 
but the Lord wishes me to have some practice in 
self-denial. You shall not have your desire now, because 
you do not really need it. I may, however, give it 
to you some time again, if I think that then you need it 
and if you are good." 



THE BLACKSMITH AND THE DONKEY 

If the New Creature gives a free rein to the old creature 
about what he shall read, or eat, how long he shall 
sleep, at what time he shall get up, where he shall go and 
how long he shall stay, etc., the New Creature will have 
his hands full— will he not? The Spirit of the Lord is 
to actuate the New Creature in thought, word and action 
and decide what he is to do, what he shall eat, where 
he shall go— is to control everything. If we sow to the 
Spirit, if we walk after the Spirit, we shall be overcomers, 
we shall reap life -everlasting. We must not yield to the 
old creature. By yielding we are sowing seed to the 
flesh, and by and by the old creature will say, "You have 
been in the habit of giving that to me, and you must let 
me have it"; and the result is likely to be disastrous to 
the New Creature. 

The matter reminds us of one of AEsop's fables which 
many of us have read. On a cold, frosty morning, a 
donkey pushed his nose in at the door of a blacksmith 
shop, where it was warm from a glowing fire. The blacksmith 
said to the donkey, "Get out!" The donkey replied, 
"You are stingy! I am only getting my nose warm." 
Presently the blacksmith looked around and perceived that 
the donkey had his whole head in. The blacksmith said, 
"Now get out, will you?" But the donkey pleaded that 
he was only getting a little breath of warm air, that his 
head surely would not trouble the blacksmith. After 
awhile the blacksmith looked again and saw that the 
donkey was half-way into the shop. Then he shouted, 
"Get out! get out!" But the donkey still insisted that he 
was only getting a little warm. So the blacksmith yielded. 
By and by he looked again and saw that the donkey was 
altogether in the shop. Then he sprang forward shouting 
excitedly, "Get out!" But the donkey said triumphantly, 
"Which of us will get out?" And thereupon he turned 
around and began to kick at the blacksmith. The donkey 
was in full control. 

"THE END OF THAT WAY IS DEATH" 

So it will be with us if we begin a course of yielding 
little by little to the desires of the fleshly mind. The end 
of the way which the flesh craves, the Apostle teaches us, 
is death. St. Paul does not say that the beginning of that 
way is death; but that the beginning of that way leads 
toward death. If the old creature has gained a leeway, 

R5935: page 231 

every step that is taken must be retraced, or the case 

is hopeless. The New Creature is to say to the old creature, 

"You are not to be my master!" The old creature is 

to be made to know that the New Creature is the Master. 

The New Creature develops at the expense of the old 



creature, the old nature, which must be put to death. 

These things are not true of the world now, but will 
be true of them as respects their sinful flesh, by and by. 
If any during the Millennium shall yield to the fallen flesh, 
gradually becoming more and more alienated from the 
Lord, the end of that way will be death. But they will 
have every assistance in their efforts to resist sin and to 
develop righteousness. To the Church of Christ our text 
is applicable now and in the fullest sense. Let those of 
us now on trial for life or death eternal, watch and pray! 



"Thou seest our weakness. Lord! 

Our hearts are known to Thee; 
O, strengthen Thou the weary hand, 

Confirm the feeble knee! 
Let us in life— till death— 

Thy steadfast Truth declare. 
And publish with our latest breath 

Thy love and guardian care." 



R5935 : page 232 

THE RIOT AT EPHESUS 
-AUGUST 20.-ACTS 19:29-41.- 

COMPLETION OF ST. PAUL'S SECOND MISSIONARY TOUR-HIS 
THIRD TOUR BEGUN-APOLLOS AT EPHESUS ASSISTED BY 
AQUILA AND PRISCILLA-BAPTISM UNTO REPENTANCE 
NOT BAPTISM INTO CHRIST-THE GOSPEL PREACHED IN 
EPHESUS-OPPOSITION BY DELUDED AGENTS OF THE ADVERSARY- 
BUSINESS DEPRESSION CHARGED TO CHRISTIANITY 
-TOWN CLERK A MAN OF REASONABLY SOUND JUDGMENT- 
REAL SECRET OF OPPOSITION TO THE TRUE GOSPEL. 

"The love of money is a root of all 
kinds of evil."-l Timothy 6:10. R.V. 

AFTER leaving Corinth, St. Paul completed his 
second missionary tour and returned to Antioch. 
En route he stopped at Jerusalem, 
where he greeted the Church and doubtless 
gave them an account of the Lord's blessing 
upon his recent ministries in Europe. Aquila 
and Priscilla went with the Apostle as far 
as Ephesus. The vessel upon which he 
sailed remaining at the port, over the Sabbath, 
St. Paul improved the opportunity to 

speak for Christ in the synagogue of Ephesus. His discourse 
was in the nature of a preparation for a future 
work which he hoped to do there. Doubtless he spoke 
along the lines of first principles— respecting the glorious 
Messianic prophecies, the fulfilment of which should now 



be expected. His discourse was well received, and he was 
urged to remain longer, whereupon he gave his promise 
of a later return. 

We are not informed how long the Apostle remained 
at Antioch; but "after he had spent some time there, he 
departed and went over all the region of Galatia and 
Phrygia in order, establishing all disciples." While he was 
energetic in the establishment of new companies of the 
Lord's people, he was not slack in looking out for the 
spiritual welfare and growth of those which he had already 
established, as is evidenced in the fact that this was 
his third visit to these Churches. 

When St. Paul returned to Ephesus, he found that 
during his absence a Christian brother named Apollos had 
come there and had preached in the synagogue, using such 
close, logical and convincing arguments that he had secured 
twelve converts to Christianity. Apollos was a Jew, 
born at Alexandria, one of the chief cities of that time, 
especially noted for its schools and its extensive libraries. 
The Common Version says that Apollos was eloquent; the 
Revised Version, that he was learned. As the Greek word 
seems to be translatable either way with equal propriety, 
in all probability he was both learned and eloquent. However, 
he was not as far advanced in the knowledge of the 
Truth as were Aquila and Priscilla, who had for a time 
companied with St. Paul. As soon as they heard Apollos 
in the synagogue, they recognized him as a Christian 
brother, and invited him to their own home, where they 
had good opportunity to communicate to him "the way of 
the Lord more perfectly." 

Having heard from Aquila and Priscilla the glorious 
work which the Apostle Paul had accomplished at Corinth, 
Apollos went thither, taking with him a letter of introduction 
from his newly found friends at Ephesus, who had 
very recently left Corinth. Incidentally, we are told that 
his going to Corinth proved a blessing to the Church 
there. Because of his thorough acquaintance with the 
Scriptures and his ability in expounding them, Apollos 
could "forcefully confute the Jews, and that publicly, 
showing by the Scriptures that Jesus is The Christ." 
(Acts 18:28.) That the Corinthian brethren were greatly 
pleased with his masterful ability as a teacher of the Truth 
is evidenced by the fact that some of them were disposed 
to say that they were followers of Apollos; while others, 
also sectarian in spirit, claimed to be followers of St. 
Paul, and still others of St. Peter— all of which sectarianism 
the Apostle subsequently reproved in his letter to 
them.-l Corinthians 1:10-17; 3:3-7. 

ST. PAUL'S MINISTRY AT EPHESUS 

While Apollos was at Corinth, the Apostle Paul came 
to Ephesus and began a ministry which lasted for two 
years. St. Paul speedily found the twelve persons whom 
the ministry of Apollos had reached. Our Common Version 
seems to give the inference that the Apostle was surprised 



that these believers at Ephesus had not as yet received 
the gifts of the Holy Spirit. But not so. He 
merely wished to bring to their attention the fact that 
such gifts were possible to them; for only an Apostle 
could convey the gifts of the Holy Spirit. (Acts 8:14-17.) 
The preaching of Apollos had been merely along the 
lines of the first principles of the doctrine of Christ, 
represented in the baptism of John to the Jews; while these 
believers were evidently Gentiles. 

Apollos had explained to these Ephesians the Gospel 
merely to the extent of repentance from sin and faith in 
Christ as the Redeemer. He had no knowledge of the 
deeper meaning of baptism as explained by St. Paul (Romans 6:3-5) 
—a baptism of consecration, to suffer with 
Christ— to be dead with Him, to participate in His resurrection 
to the new nature and ultimately to be sharers 
with Him in the Heavenly Kingdom. The Apostle explained 
to them this "mystery" of fellowship with the 
Messiah— participation in His sufferings now, and by and 
by in His glory. (Colossians 1:26,27; Philippians 3:8-11.) 
When the Ephesian converts heard this, they were baptized 
into the name of the Lord Jesus— as members of 
His Body, to fellowship in His sufferings, even unto death. 

There are many believers today who, like these Ephesians, 
are members of the Household of Faith, but who 
are not members of the Body of Christ— who have gone 
so far as a baptism of repentance and reformation and 
faith in the Redeemer, but who have not been instructed 
respecting the great privileges which belong to the Gospel 
Age. They know not that we may become "heirs of 
God and joint-heirs with Christ, if so be that we suffer 
with Him, that we may be also glorified together."— Romans 8: 17; 
2 Timothy 2:11,12. 

Wherever we go, let us each seek by the grace of God 
to explain the way of the Lord more perfectly to these 
already partially indoctrinated ones. So long as there are 
any such with whom to labor, it would be unwise, yea, 
contrary to our commission, for us to devote our lives 
and energies to the world. Although we are to do good 
to all men as we have opportunity, it is to be "chiefly unto 
the Household of Faith." (Galatians 6:10.) All around 
us, in the churches of the various denominations, are 
thousands who are in the condition of those mentioned 
above, knowing only the baptism of repentance, but not 
the baptism into Christ— the baptism of full consecration, 
the baptism into His death. Let us be diligent in this 
highest department of the work of the ministry, feeding, 
instructing, the Lord's flock. 

REFORMATION COSTING SACRIFICE 

St. Paul continued to present the Truth in the synagogue 
until opposition to it became quite marked, and certain 
of the Jewish adherents began to speak evil of both 
the teachings and the believers. Then the Apostle and 
those who believed withdrew from the synagogue, and began 



a separate meeting, apparently in a rented hall, called 
"The School of Tyrannus." St. Paul probably labored at 
his trade during the forenoon, and during the afternoon 

page 233 

preached the Gospel Message to such as had hearing ears, 
not only in the public hall, but also by visiting those whom 
he had reason to expect would be amenable to the Truth. 
Apparently this was his usual manner of life.— 1 Thess. 2:9. 

During his ministry the Lord performed through the 
Apostle many marvelous healings of the sick and other 
miracles, amongst which was the casting out of demons. 
We may reason that the manifestation of Divine power 
here was necessary to the establishment of the Church and 
to the general influence of the Gospel in that region— as 
an offset to the blinding influences of Satan's agents and 
power. From the earliest dawn of history Satan's arts, 
employed in all parts of the world, have been in the nature 
of wonder-workings, of magic, black art, witchcraft, 
etc. The Scriptures call attention particularly to the magicians 
of Egypt, to the soothsayers of Babylon, and in the 
Book of Acts show us that the same wily arts of the 
Adversary were general throughout the Roman Empire, 
and especially in the wealthy city of Ephesus. 

Perceiving the Apostle's power to be greater than 
their own, certain magicians essayed to use the name of 
Jesus as a charm or magic word, just as they were in the 
habit of using other magic words in their incantations. 
The efforts of some of these, sons of one of the principal 
priests, resulted disastrously to them, but beneficially to 
many others. This matter becoming widely known, many 
who long had had confidence in such wonder-workers became 
convinced that the Apostle's teachings were correct 
—that the black arts were of Satan, while St. Paul's 
miracles were of Divine power. 

The sincerity of some of these converts was manifested 
by the public burning of the books in which were recorded 
the various magic words and recipes by which incantations 
could be made, affecting and counteracting various 
of the ills of life. At that time all books were precious; 
for they were made of skins instead of paper, and were 
pen-printed instead of printed by type. These books of 
magic were especially high-priced because each possessor 
of a copy was interested in restricting the information, 
and hence was unwilling to permit any one to make a copy 
of his book. Viewed from this standpoint, the number of 
books would not necessarily be very great in order to 
amount to fifty thousand pieces of silver— about $8,500, a 
piece of silver representing about 17 cents of our money. 
But, when we remember that each piece of silver represented 
a day's wages, it might be considered equivalent 
to at least one dollar in our day. Thus the total value 
of the books burned would be at least $50,000. 

Everything throughout the Scriptures indicates that the 
Lord especially loves and appreciates those who are thorough-going. 



not only in their zeal for righteousness and 

truth, but also in their opposition to unrighteousness and 

error. We believe that the same principle applies to the 

sale of books which inculcate Satan's lies; and we recommend 

that if the Lord's people have books of this kind, 

black with false doctrines, misrepresenting the Divine 

Character and Plan, they would do far better to burn them 

than to sell them and give the money to the Lord's work. 

OPPOSITION BASED ON SELFISHNESS 

After St. Paul had spent nearly three years at Ephesus, 
he purposed going again to Jerusalem, but first would 
visit the Churches of Macedonia and Achaia— Philippi, 
Berea, Thessalonica and Corinth. Evidently it was this 
visit to Corinth to which he referred in his letter to them. 
(1 Corinthians 4:17-19.) He proposed to take from them 
a contribution to the poor in Jerusalem— not as seeking 
a gift, but as an evidence of their love for the Lord, manifested 
in their desire to help the brethren at Jerusalem, 
who were chiefly poor and greatly disadvantaged by their 
loyalty to the Truth. 

About this time occurred the riot described in today's 
Study, which probably would have determined the Apostle 
to leave Ephesus, if he had not already purposed so to do. 
The Lord permitted persecutions to drive St. Paul out of 
every place— thus seemingly indicating the proper time 
for terminating his ministry at each point. The record 
says, "There arose no small stir about that way." (Acts 19:23.) 
Very evidently the way of the Lord's people differed 
decidedly from the ways of others, not only as concerned 
their future hopes, but also regarding their course 
in the present life. And the way is the same to this day, 
as concerns those who are faithfully walking close to the 
Lord and to the teachings of His Word. The difficulty 
with many professed Christians is that they have gotten 
out of the way. As a result, nominal church ways are, 
alas! too much like those of the world, with very similar 
hopes, aspirations and endeavors. 

Ephesus was one of the great cities of that time. Just 
at the head of its harbor stood one of the "seven wonders 
of the world," an immense temple of "Diana of the 
Ephesians"— the deity of Asia Minor. To her shrine 
came thousands of people, believing that they received 
from her a special blessing, which affected favorably the 
prosperity of their homes. Her blessing was supposed to 
increase greatly their flocks and herds and the birth of 
children. Unlike the Greek Diana, this one was represented 
to be the mother of all things living. 

Of course the fame of this great idol attracted general 
attention; and those who could not go to Ephesus 
to worship at the shrine of this image were pleased to 
purchase from merchants certain charms or amulets, which 
consisted of small copies of her shrine wrought in silver. 
In the Apostle's day the business of making these shrines 
was immense, employing thousands of men. 



A man named Demetrius was the representative of the 
silversmiths' guild, or union. Becoming incensed at the 
propaganda of the early Church at Ephesus, he aroused 
his fellow-craftsmen by a stirring speech, in which he 
painted a black picture of the business depression that 
would result if this man Paul were permitted to preach 
much longer in their city. He called attention to the fact 
that not merely at Ephesus, but throughout all Asia Minor, 
this new religion was spreading, and that it opposed the 
worship of Diana. He reasoned that if the people in that 
region lost respect for Diana and her temple, they would 
no longer purchase her shrines; and that the falling off 
in demand would mean loss for all engaged in the manufacture 
of these shrines. With a wonderful cunning he 
combined the thought of their duty of supporting the religion 
of their city with that of looking out for their 
pocketbooks. That he was successful in arousing prejudice 
and in creating a riot causes us no wonder. 

THE OVERRULING OF DIVINE PROVIDENCE 

Soon the city was in an uproar, touched to the quick 
on humanity's very tenderest spots— religion and worldly 
prosperity. Doubtless the Adversary helped on the matter, 
with the result that shortly the people were in a 
frenzy of despair, as though the anticipated collapse of 
their religion and their business were already upon them. 
The home of St. Paul was known; and thither the mob 
rushed, seeking the chief factor in the impending troubles. 
In the Lord's providence, St. Paul was absent. Aquila and 
Priscilla, who kept the home, were there and, although not 
arrested, evidently were loyal to the Apostle to the very 
last degree. (Romans 16:3,4.) As working people and 
home-keepers they were not molested; but two of the 

page 234 

Apostle's assistants were taken by the mob, and hurried 
to the theater, whose capacity, we are told, was 56,000 
people, thus indicating that Ephesus was an immense city. 

Learning of the commotion, St. Paul would have courageously 
entered into the thick of the trouble in defense 
of his friends and, above all, of his Master and His Message. 
But wiser counsels prevailed, and he remained 
away. The brethren suffered him not; for they concluded 
that his presence would have accomplished nothing 
with people in so unreasonable a state of mind. 

The Lord, however, did not neglect the two brethren 
who were arrested— Gaius and Aristarchus. The town 
clerk came to their assistance, and with words of wisdom 
dispersed the mob. This official was not interested in the 
Gospel of Christ and its service. But he was interested 
in the doing of his duty as an officer of the city. He 
pointed out to the mob the fact that they had become unduly 
excited, that everybody knew the greatness of the 
goddess Diana, and that neither one Jew nor many Jews 



could injure her fame. Then he declared that if the disturbance 
were not merely a quarrel between the silversmiths 
and the propagators of Christianity— if the assembly 
had any other charge against St. Paul and his associates— 
the matter should be brought before the law 
courts in the lawful manner. He showed that the meeting 
was nothing short of a riot; and that if it were to be 
reported to the imperial government at Rome, it would 
greatly reflect to the discredit of Ephesus. With this he 
dismissed the assembly. 

PRINCIPLE AND LACK OF PRINCIPLE 

Notice the contrast between the two groups whose acts 
are recorded in this chapter. In the first case, many people, 
realizing that they had been working in conjunction 
with the powers of evil— the demons— burned their books 
of magic, etc., as a result of the influence of the Gospel 
Message upon their hearts. After they had come to a 
knowledge of the situation, they were willing and glad to 
suffer financial loss and be thought foolish by their neighbors 
rather than to do injury to others by the sale of the 
books of magic, black art, etc. 

On the contrary, the chief actors of the second group 
were moved to frenzy and to riotous conduct by their love 
of money— their fear of financial loss. Evidently it was 
not their respect for religion, but their love for filthy 
lucre, which prompted their actions. Moreover, the worship 
of Diana was demoralizing. Hence we perceive the 
strong contrast between those who raised a riot in order 
to perpetuate idolatry and to bring money into their own 
purses, and those who, on the contrary, were ready to sacrifice 
their earthly interests rather than do harm and in 
order to do the more good. Verily, there is a wonderful 
power in the religion of Jesus Christ, our Redeemer! 

Be it also noted that the Apostle and his associates 
were not guilty of the charge made against them— blaspheming 
the goddess of Ephesus. Here we have a point 
of importance and a valuable lesson. St. Paul's commission 
was to preach the Gospel, not to quarrel with false 
gods or their worship. The persecution was therefore for 
right-doing. So it is with us. It is not necessary for us 
to do or to say anything unkind toward our friends in 
Babylon. Nor is it necessary for us to tirade against their 
systems or doctrines. We have plenty to do in setting 
forth the Gospel Message. 

Of course, St. Paul did not fail to call attention to the 
fact that Diana was the work of men's hands and not, 
as claimed, a divinity. So we may properly enough set 
forth to our friends the fact that there is but the one true 
Church, organized by our Lord and established at Pentecost; 
and that all other churches are, therefore, merely 
human systems. But we are not commissioned to tirade 
against these churches. The command, "Speak evil of no 
man," may properly be applied also to religious systems, 
particularly those that recognize the redeeming merit of 



Christ's death as the foundation of Christianity and that 

teach morality. Undoubtedly the Lord has permitted sectarianism 

for some wise purpose, even as He has permitted 

the Gentile governments to hold sway until the 

end of "the Times of the Gentiles." Let us not interfere 

with the fulfilment of the Divine purposes. Let us be 

content to fulfil our mission of assisting the brethren by 

building them up in the most holy faith and telling the 

Good Tidings to whoever may have an ear to hear. 



R5935 : page 234 

JOURNEYING TOWARD JERUSALEM 
-AUGUST 27.-ACTS 20:16-27.- 

ST. PAUL'S ADDRESS TO THE ELDERS OF THE CHURCH AT EPHESUS- 
A BRIEF REVIEW OF HIS OWN EXPERIENCES-THE KINGDOM 
OF GOD THE THEME OF HIS PREACHING-THE DOUBLE 
RESPONSIBILITY UPON ALL ELDERS-WARNING AGAINST 
FALSE TEACHERS-'WOLVES IN SHEEP'S CLOTHING"- 
DECLARING THE WHOLE COUNSEL OF GOD. 

"I commend you to God and to the Word of His grace."— Verse 32. 

WHEN St. Paul fled from Ephesus, after the 
rioting, he made a tour of the European 
Churches which he had founded. Passing 
through Macedonia to the city of Corinth, 
he came by vessel again to Miletus, about 
fifty miles south of Ephesus. He was accompanied 
by representatives of several of 
the Churches of Greece and Asia Minor, and 
was en route for Jerusalem, for whose poor 
he had suggested that collections be made 
in the four provinces where he had been preaching. The 
vessel on which the party were to go to the Jerusalem port 
was detained indefinitely at Miletus. Word was then sent 
to the Elders at Ephesus, and they came to Miletus. 

Today's Study calls attention especially to the Apostle's 
address to these Elders. We are not to think of it as a 
boastful statement, but rather as a plain rehearsal of matters 
which his hearers would fully concede and of which 
he boasted nothing. It was given, not for his own sake, 
not as indicating personal vanity and self-praise, but with 
a view to quickening the memory of his hearers and making 
the lesson of the hour the more impressive upon them. 
He reminded them that for the space of three years they 
had known him intimately— his manner of life, his devotion 
to the Lord, to the service of the Truth and of the 
brethren. He also reminded them of his humility of mind 
—that his conduct had not been haughty and overbearing, 
that he had not sought to lord it over the Church, but 
that on the contrary he had endured amongst them many 
trials and difficulties with the Jews, with "false brethren." 



The Elders knew of his work, of his endurance and of 
his holding nothing back from them that would be helpful 
to them: they knew that he had taught them publicly and 
privately, as circumstances had opened to him opportunities 
of service. He had testified to both Jews and Greeks 
that there is only the one Gospel of Christ, to be accepted 
through faith and turning away from sin. By calling attention 
to these elements of his own character, he was 

page 235 

laying the foundation for his subsequent exhortation to 
them that they should copy his zeal, his fidelity. He had 
been a faithful overseer, or bishop, watching over their 
interests. He had been a faithful pastor, guiding their 
welfare and seeing to their nourishment in spiritual things. 
Knowing the truthfulness of his presentations and having 
the whole situation in mind, they would be the better prepared 
to hear from him his parting exhortation— the great 
lesson which he had to give them. 

St. Paul informed the Elders that although possessed 
of his physical liberty he felt a mental restraint which he 
could not shake off; that he must go to Jerusalem; that 
this was the Lord's providence for him; and that he had 
received assurances from others through the "gifts of the 
Spirit" that bonds and imprisonment awaited him at Jerusalem. 
Then he added these encouraging words: "But 
none of these things move me; neither count I my life 
dear unto myself, so that I might finish my course with 
joy, and the ministry which I have received of the Lord 
Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the grace of God. And 
now, behold, I know that ye all, among whom I have gone 
preaching the Kingdom, shall see my face no more." 

The Apostle had become more intimately acquainted 
with the Ephesian Church, apparently, than with any of 
the others. By the Lord's providence he had spent more 
time with them; and apparently the results procured had 
justified his prolonged stay. Partings between friends are 
always grievous; and parting with no hope of seeing each 
other again on this side the veil is a doubly severe ordeal. 

"PREACHING THE KINGDOM OF GOD" 

Incidentally we note the Message which the Apostle 
delivered, and which he here particularly emphasizes as 
the Gospel of Christ— "preaching the Kingdom of God." 
It is right that we should recognize that this is the same 
Gospel which we are preaching today. If otherwise, then 
we are not preaching aright. The grace of God was 
manifested in the gift of His Son, that He by the grace 
of God should taste death for every man. The grace of 
God was further manifested in an outline of the manner 
in which the death of Christ was designed to bring blessings 
to our race: 

(1) By ultimately establishing a Kingdom under the 
whole heavens for the rule of mankind, for the suppression 



of Sin and Death, for the uplifting of those who 
have been bound by these enemies. 

(2) As a precedent to that general blessing to the 
world, for which we pray, "Thy Kingdom come; Thy will 
be done on earth, as it is done in Heaven," the Divine 
proclamation first calls out a Little Flock to be joint-heirs 
with their dear Redeemer in that Kingdom. 

Thank God that these precious truths respecting the 
grace of God and the Kingdom of God, so long covered 
and hidden from our sight by the traditions of the Dark 
Ages, are now being revealed to our eyes of understanding 
by the enlightenment of the Holy Spirit, in order that 
we might know the things that are freely given us of 
God, and that thus we might be assisted in making our 
calling and election sure! 

No wonder the Apostle could add the forceful words, 
"I testify unto you this day that I am pure from the blood 
of all men; for I have not shunned to declare unto you 
all the counsel of God." What he preached to the Church 
at Ephesus during his sojourn of nearly three years 
amongst them is surely the same Message which, by Divine 
arrangement, has come down to us in his Epistles addressed 
to the various Churches. We note that St. Paul's 
Message contained not even one word respecting eternal 
torment, which is no part of the Divine Plan. Surely 
from these Epistles we now perceive that St. Paul was 
very patient in reproving, instructing and encouraging the 
Lord's dear people! He was much used of the Lord because 
he had given himself so thoroughly to the Lord. 

RESPONSIBILITY OF ALL ELDERS 

The Apostle's thought in calling the Elders was to impress 
upon them the fact that, like himself, not only were 
they consecrated to the Lord, but, as teachers in the 
Church, they had a double responsibility— in respect to 
themselves and in respect to the Church of which the Lord 
had made them overseers. Notice his words, "Take heed 
therefore to yourselves, and to all the flock, in the which 
the Holy Spirit hath made you overseers [Greek, episcopos 
—bishops], to feed the Church of God, which He 
purchased with blood of His own [Son]."— Verse 28. 

(1) They needed to take heed to both themselves and 
the flock. Whoever attempts to do shepherding in the 
Church will need, first of all, to watch lest he fall into 
temptation; for, as the Apostle declares, those who accept 
the position of Elders in the Church— pastors, overseers- 
are exposed to especial trials, especial difficulties. They 
need primarily to take heed to themselves lest, having 
preached to others, they themselves become castaways. 

(2) "Those who accept the ministry, or service, of the 
Church as Elder Brothers under the Divine regulation 
should realize that they have assumed a weighty responsibility, 
respecting which they must give an account to God." 

This does not mean fault-finding with the brethren. It 

does not mean merely preaching to them, nor merely visiting 



the sick and counseling the troubled. It means a 

spiritual oversight, a care of all the interests of both 

the congregation and the individuals composing it. 

Those who are overcharged with the cares of this life 

are not in a condition, in any sense of the word, to accept 

the responsibilities of this service in the Church of 

the living God. Only those who seek first the interests of 

the Lord's Kingdom and the righteousness which it inculcates 

are in any sense or degree properly suited to 

such service in the Church. 

Several points in Verse 28 are worthy of careful attention. 
The Revised Version, quoted above, says, "In 
the which the Holy Spirit hath made you bishops," thus 
agreeing with the general Scriptural statement that the 
Elders of the Church are NOT OVER THE CHURCH in the 
sense of being a superior class, or "clergy" class, but 
are IN THE CHURCH-members of it-overseeing 
members, assisting members, by the appointment of the 
Lord through the channel of the Church. They should 
consider it a part of their responsibility to notice how 
the other members are progressing, especially in their 
spiritual interests. They should feel it a part of their 
duty to warn, to encourage, to assist all of the other 
members, as opportunity may offer. 

ESPECIAL DANGERS AMONGST ELDERS 

It is not the prerogative of all the brethren and sisters 
in the Church to endeavor to set each other right, 
unless it be in some personal matter especially related to 
themselves. In such cases the advice given by our Lord 
in Matthew 18:15-17 should be strictly followed. An 
Elder, however, by his very election to his office, has been 
asked to take such oversight of the affairs of the congregation, 
to give such advice, to administer such reproofs, 
as the nature of the case may demand— in meekness, remembering 
himself also, lest he should be tempted, if not 
along the same lines, then possibly along some other line 
of temptation. He, too, of course, should practice 
Matthew 18:15-17.-Galatians 6:1. 

By way of impressing this duty of oversight upon the 

page 236 

Elders, St. Paul reminded them that the Lord had purchased 
this Flock with the precious blood of the Lamb 
of God, and that this value in the Lord's sight should be 
so deeply impressed upon their minds that they would be 
willing to lay down their lives for the brethren in any 
service which they could render. 

Emphasizing the caution already given, the Apostle 
prophetically declared that there would be great need of 
their taking heed to themselves, because of their own 
selves, of the Flock itself, and especially amongst the 
Elders, men would arise speaking perverse things, to 
draw away disciples after them. Desirous of being 



leaders, they would not hesitate to produce a schism, or 

division, in the Church, in order to help along their ambition. 

The word rendered perverse in Verse 30 signifies, 

in the original, distorted, twisted. The thought is that 

those who begin to lose the Spirit of the Lord begin also 

to lose their clear appreciation of the Truth. As personal 

and selfish ambitions cloud their vision, they see the Scriptures 

more and more vaguely, and feel free to distort 

these so as to support their own ambitious sentiments. 

How true are the Apostle's words! How great a danger 
there is along these lines, especially to the Elders, 
the overseers of the Flock! Evidently selfish ambition is 
one of the greatest of foes with which they must contend. 
Nor do these ambitions suddenly germinate, bloom and 
bear fruit. The process is a gradual one, and hence the 
more dangerous, the more deceptive, the less likely to 
have our notice. How important, then, it is that all of 
the Lord's Flock, and especially the Elders, take heed to 
themselves and scrutinize their conduct, and particularly 
the motives lying behind their deeds! Let us remember 
that absolute purity of the will is essential. Every admixture 
of selfishness, however little, is a poisonous virus 
which, if unchecked, would lead to the Second Death. 

"Grievous wolves" are ferocious wolves. For a time 
they may deceive the sheep by an outward manner and an 
outward profession, covering their wolfish nature. They 
and the outward conduct by which they deceive the Flock 
are Scripturally designated, "Wolves in sheep's clothing." 
(Matthew 7:15, 16.) The Shepherd knows their character 
long before it becomes manifest to the sheep. But 
the docile, innocent sheep are deceived until these wolves 
begin to bite, to devour and to scatter the Flock. The 
howls of anger, malice, hatred, envy and strife are noted in 
the Scriptures as "works of the flesh and of the Devil"— 
not works of righteousness, peace and love, the Spirit of 
the Lord. The wolf does injury with his mouth; and so do 
these "grievous wolves"— slandering, back-biting and doing 
every evil work. The Apostle warned the Elders of 
Ephesus what to expect, and his words were true. The 
same principles are still at work. The same warning still 
needs to be heeded. Indeed, the Scriptures imply that 
the severest experiences along these lines would come 
upon the Church in "the evil day" with which the Gospel 
Age would close, the time in which we now are living. 

"DAY AND NIGHT WITH TEARS" 

In Verse 3 1 the Apostle sets two points before us. 
First, the Elders are to watch against these evils so 
graphically portrayed. They are to watch for the interests 
of the Flock as against the wolves. They are to watch to 
give the wolves as little opportunity as possible to tear the 
Flock and to backbite them. They are to warn the sheep 
lest any of them, becoming inoculated with the rabies of 
the wolves, should display signs of hydrophobia and begin 
to backbite one another, with the usual symptoms of hydrophobia- 



with an apparent thirst for water, symbol of 
Truth, yet refusing to drink it— turning against it. 

Second, the Elders are to watch also against those 
sure to arise "of your own selves." Proper watching begins 
with our own hearts, saying, "Lord, is it I?" And 
proper watching will in time discern such characters and 
expose them— not from any bitterness towards them, but 
for the protection of the Flock.— 1 Timothy 1:20; 
2 Timothy 1:15; 2:17. 

St. Paul reminded the brethren that such had been his 
own course— one of great watchfulness, interest, care, 
over them and over all the Churches of Asia Minor. The 
expression, "Night and day with tears," shows us clearly 
that he felt properly the weight of responsibility resting 
upon him as a servant of God, an ambassador of the King 
of kings, an over-shepherd, an overseer, of the Lord's 
Flock, a "minister of the New Covenant," delegated by the 
great Head of the Church to assist in calling out and 
preparing those who will be members of the glorified 
Body of Christ, to reign with Him a thousand years. 

DIVINE ASSISTANCE PROVIDED 

In the closing words of his exhortation the Apostle's 
thought seems to be that he desired his words, his earnest 
address, might not only awaken the Elders to a keen 
sense of their responsibilities, but might lead them to inquire 
as to what defenses could be depended upon for the 
crisis thus pointed out. He draws attention to the fact 
that God, the great Center of all our blessings, from whom 
comes every good and every perfect gift, is on our part, 
is on the part of all who are seeking to cooperate with 
His arrangements. 

By way of further explanation he mentions the Scriptures, 
the Word of God's grace, the Gospel Message. He 
tells them, and us also, that the Word of God is able to 
build us up, to give us the necessary development of character 
and to give us ultimately a share in the great inheritance 
which God has in reservation for all those who 
are sanctified by this Message. Let us lay this well to 
heart. Neglect of God's Word, neglect of His promises, 
means a deficiency of strength to bear the trial which is 
our portion. It means also the opening of the door for 
Satan to put darkness for light and light for darkness, to 
our confusion. Let us make no mistake. It is a question 
of inheritance or no inheritance, amongst them that are 
sanctified in Christ Jesus. 

Verses 33 and 34 are a noble testimony. The Apostle 
had used his trade as a tent-maker not only for his own 
support, but for the financial assistance of those associated 
with him in the Gospel work. Praise God for so noble 
an example of devotion! Although the Apostle did not, 
could not, endure as much as did our Redeemer, nevertheless 
the illustration of a full devotion which his life 
affords does us all great good; for we remember that he 
had like passions with ourselves, as he himself declared. 



He was imperfect, and was obliged to keep his body under 
—in subjection to his new mind, the will of God in 
Christ.- 1 Corinthians 9:24-27. 

In Verse 35 he reveals the secret of his success as a 
servant of the Lord. He constantly remembered and put 
into practice the Master's words. The art of GIVING 
HIMSELF is one of the secrets of a happy Christian life. 
He first gives his will to the Lord, then his time, his 
energy, his talents, to the Lord's service and for the 
Lord's people. He has pleasure in the giving and a blessing, 
whether others know it or not. By and by his time 
will come for receiving his full reward. To such the 
Lord will give eternal life, eternal glory and association 
with Himself in His Kingdom. 



R5935 : page 237 

THE MUNITIONS-MILITARIST CONSPIRACY 
BY HON. W.J. BRYAN 

THE real fight before the country at this time 
is to defeat the munitions-militarist conspiracy— 
a conspiracy which has for its object 
a revolutionary change in the nation's 
character and policy. It is a conspiracy organized 
with deliberation and supported by 
unlimited means. The conspirators are men 
of prominence and influence. The manufacturers 
of munitions are selling war supplies 
to Europe at the rate of more than three 
hundred millions worth a year, and they are selling at an 
enormous profit. The Du Pont Company recently declared 
a dividend of 23 per cent, on powder, and the 
stock in the Bethlehem Steel Company has risen beyond 
the dreams of the speculators. Among the stockholders 
in the munition companies are many of our big financiers, 
and these men largely control the metropolitan press. 
These manufacturers and their influential stockholders 
know that their dividends will dwindle when this war is 
over unless they can fasten themselves upon the taxpayers 
of the country, and grow fat as the people grow poor. 
Hence the newspaper crusade for frenzied preparedness, 
such a crusade as we have not seen in a generation. 

The second group in the conspiracy is made up of professional 
soldiers— militarists who stand with the militarists 
of other countries. And the militarists of all countries 
stand today where the militarists stood two thousand 
years ago; they know no way of correcting a mistake of 
the mind except to cut off the head— no way of curing an 
error of the heart except to stop its beating— no way to 
settle a dispute between nations except to take human life. 

To judge the militarists of the world by their program, 
they have never learned that nineteen hundred years ago 
a Prince of Peace was born, and brought into the world a 



Gospel of Love which is destined to supplant the bloody 
doctrine of force and violence. 

These two groups, one working for money and the 
other magnifying the profession of arms, have joined 
their forces in an effort to commit this government to the 
European plan of trying to preserve peace by terrorism. 
Although the plan has written history in characters of 
blood and has led the warring nations into the present conflict, 
we are asked to adopt this policy and join the "pistol-toting" 
nations in the worship of brute force. 

The big corporate employers of labor are aiding and 
abetting the conspiracy because they want a large army— 
not made up of state militia, but of regulars— to keep their 
workmen under subjection. 

And how much are we asked to invest in this false 
philosophy? Two billions to "get ready," with one thousand 
and seventy-nine millions a year to keep ready! We 
are now spending two hundred and fifty millions a year 
on the army and navy— the most we have ever spent in 
time of peace. During the past fifteen years we have 
spent more on our navy than any other country in the 
world except Great Britain. We are now spending on 
the army and navy more than ten times as much as we 
are spending on the department of agriculture, and yet 
the army and navy experts, taking advantage of the excitement 
of a foreign war, demand that we multiply our 
war appropriations by four! The navy experts want A 
BILLION AND A HALF for new ships and SEVEN HUNDRED 
AND SIXTY MILLIONS a year thereafter to keep the navy 
in fighting trim. The army experts want FIVE HUNDRED 
MILLIONS to put the army in a respectable condition and 
THREE HUNDRED AND NINETEEN MILLIONS annually to keep 
it up to the requirements of their program. 

Eight hundred and twenty-nine million dollars per year, 
the sum which the army and navy experts ask us to add 
to the annual appropriations for the army and navy, is so 
large that the mind cannot comprehend it. As the body 
becomes insensible to pain after a certain degree is 
reached, so the mind to ciphers after it has taken in a 
certain number. We can only understand large sums 
by comparison. Here are four comparisons: 

(1) The farmers of the nation collected a little more 

R5936 : page 237 

than FIVE AND A HALF BILLIONS from all their crops last 

year— the banner year in our history. If we compute the 

farmer's NET income at 8 per cent, of his gross income, 

we find that the net income of all the farmers from all 

their crops was about $440,000,000. THE ARMY AND NAVY 

EXPERTS WANT TO ADD TO WHAT WE ARE NOW SPENDING ON 

THE ARMY AND NAVY NEARLY TWICE THE ANNUAL NET 

CROP INCOME OF ALL OUR FARMERS. And they question the 

patriotism of those who protest against the demand. 

(2) The cost of a macadam road, 16 feet wide and 
six inches thick is, according to agricultural department 



statistics, a little more than six thousand dollars per mile. 
If we estimate the average length of the United States 
at three thousand miles, and its average width at twelve 
hundred miles, it can be gridironed with macadam roads 
twelve miles apart, east and west, north and south, for 
less than $4,145,000,000-the amount which the army and 
navy experts would, IN FIVE YEARS, add to the army and 
navy appropriations. 

(3) This sum, eight hundred and twenty-nine millions 
per year, would in five years duplicate every bank in the 
country, capital and surplus, and thus double the amount 
of bank capital and surplus available for borrowing. 

(4) It costs the nation about $800,000,000 a year to 
educate the 25,000,000 school children of the land. Think 
of making an ANNUAL increase in our army and navy 
appropriations equal to the ENTIRE ANNUAL COST OF EDUCATION, 
FROM KINDERGARTEN TO UNIVERSITY! And yet the 

army and navy experts, backed by the munition manufacturers, 
demand this and resent any opposition as if they 
had a vested right to decide for the people the amount to 
be expended. They are attempting to perpetrate an outrage 
upon the taxpayers of the country, and their conspiracy, 
if successful, would menace the peace of the 
world. No party can afford to stand for such a policy- 
least of all the Democratic party, the champion of the 
masses and the friend of peace. —The Commoner. 



R5936 : page 237 

MINNEAPOLIS-WINNIPEG-SIOUX CITY-NEWPORT CONVENTIONS 

MINNEAPOLIS, MINNESOTA: 

We had a very enjoyable time at this little Convention, 
which served about four hundred of the friends, 
many of whom will not be able to attend any of the larger 
Conventions. July 6th will long be a bright page in our 
experiences. We had a delightful meeting and fellowship 
with the friends to the number of nearly four hundred, 
and at night a public meeting attended by about one 
thousand. The attendance and attention were splendid, 
especially when the extreme heat of the weather is remembered. 
At the conclusion of the evening meeting we 
took the train for the 

WINNIPEG ONE-DAY CONVENTION, JULY 7: 

When our train reached the Canadian line a representative 
of the Canadian Government announced to the Editor 
that under instructions from the Government he was 

R5936 : page 238 

obliged to prevent our entry into Canada. This, of course. 



was quite a disappointment, and yet we realize that nothing 
can happen to us or to the Lord's cause without His 
knowledge, and there being nothing we could do, we 
cheerfully submitted to the arrangement and wired the 
brethren at Winnipeg not to expect us. 

We understand, nevertheless, that the Convention was 
a splendid success, and the Auditorium in which we were 
to have spoken was crowded to overflowing and some 
turned away, and that one of the local brethren took the 
opportunity for giving an address on the subject that had 
been advertised for the Editor's public meeting. 

It seems quite probable that the result may be for good 
rather than for ill. The Canadian brethren attending the 
Convention, some of them coming hundreds of miles, 
felt greatly disappointed, of course, but as the news 
reached the public it apparently brought sympathy for our 
side of the question from some who otherwise might have 
paid little heed. Anyway, the Canadian people and many 
in the States were put on notice that the Bible Students 
Association believes that they are taught by Jesus and 
the Apostles not to participate in human carnage, but to 
follow peace with all men, and holiness without which no 
one shall see the Lord. 

The following letter to the Editor, signed by 204 of 
the Winnipeg Conventioners, is much appreciated, and will 
be of interest to all of our readers, we are sure: 

TO OUR BELOVED PASTOR:-Greetings in our dear Master's 
name! 

We, Associated Bible Students, assembled in convention, 
desire in this message to convey to you our heartfelt sympathy 
and deep Christian love, while feeling that our dear 
Lord's overruling has been that we may not greet you face 
to face, and hear your kindly words of Christian love and 
helpfulness at the present time. 

We are realizing that the Lord under the existing circumstances 
is pouring out to us a great blessing. By receiving 
His appointment in the proper spirit, and with this 
additional indication before us that "the night wherein no 
man can work" is rapidly closing in, we do the more firmly 
resolve that we each will be loyal to the Lord, the Truth, and 
the Brethren. 

It is already manifest that the action that has, for the present, 
prevented our sweet fellowship face to face, is another 
mark of the further accomplishment of the great work of the 
Harvest. We rejoice with you Brother, and, as admonished 
by the Master, lift up our heads with rejoicing, seeing that 
our deliverance draweth nigh. 

We are praying that the dear Lord's blessing shall abide 
with us all, till we are assembled beyond the veil, to bring 
the long-promised blessings to the poor world. 

With much Christian love, and great appreciation of the 
honored position our dear Lord has called you to in this 
great work of the Harvest, we the undersigned, tender to 
you, not only the love of those in Convention here, but of 
the dear ones in this portion of the Harvest field unable to 
meet with us. 



Your brethren by His Grace, 

THE WINNIPEG, MANITOBA, CANADA CONVENTION. 

SIOUX CITY CONVENTION, JULY 6-9: 

The attendance at this Convention varied from three 
hundred to four hundred, but the interest was splendid 
and the spirit manifested by those in attendance was very 
loving indeed. The four days were filled with spiritual 
feasting, the evenings being given over to the PHOTO-DRAMA 
OF CREATION. On Sunday morning, July 9th, the 
Editor's topic was "The Good Shepherd," who gave His 
life for the Sheep, and who when He puts forth His own 
Sheep goeth before them, and who has other Sheep of a 
different fold who also, in due "Times of Restitution," will 
be brought into Harmony with the Divine arrangements, 
and have a share in the blessings of the Lord for all who 
love Him and who seek to walk in His way. After the 
discourse, the Love Feast followed, participated in by 
about four hundred. 

The afternoon session was for the public, the topic 
being, "The World on Fire." The attendance was excellent, 
about 1,200 being present, on an extremely warm 
day. One very interesting feature noticed by nearly all 
the brethren is that never before has the public given so 
close, thoughtful and intelligent attention to subjects related 
to the Truth. 

NEWPORT, R.I., CONVENTION, JULY 9-16: 

About one thousand Bible Students attended the Newport 
Convention, although not all of them found it convenient 
to remain during the entire eight days. Newport 
is a delightful summer resort of high class. The days were 
given to the Convention Program, and the evenings to 
the presentation of the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION. As 
we expected, the public did not give any great heed to the 
Convention, but we were pleased to note that they crowded 
the DRAMA and apparently took great interest in its presentation. 
The final public meeting, addressed by the Editor 
on Sunday, July 16th, was the only one in which the 
public to any great extent participated. The attendance 
at that meeting was approximately twelve hundred. We 
trust that the interest manifested and the large number of 
cards requesting literature may eventually lead to a considerable 
dissemination of the knowledge of the Truth, 
and ultimately bring some hungry hearts into closer relationship 
with the Lord and His Word of Truth, and that 
the latter may be more digestible and helpful than anything 
they have yet enjoyed, even from the same source. 



R5936 : page 238 

INTERESTING LETTERS 



RE MEETINGS AND DISTRIBUTING TRACTS 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

In addition to information in accompanying weekly report 
I want to add a few observations of some Kansas conditions 
—not because these conditions are general throughout the 
State, but sufficiently prominent to impress me. 

I do not know of any State containing a larger proportion 
of brethren who will go almost any distance to attend 
a Pilgrim meeting or a Convention, and yet will not make the 
little effort necessary to have a regular class meeting, even 
when there are several interested. If such brethren could 
realize that they are disregarding the admonitions of St. Paul 

R5937 : page 238 

in Hebrews 10:25, concerning "not forsaking the assembling." 
etc., it might make them more faithful upon this point. "Not 
forsaking" means the keeping up of attendance at meeting 
with some regularity. And it seems to me that if we ignore 
this word of advice it will make it easier to neglect other 
Scriptural suggestions. 

Quite a number use their automobiles for country volunteer 
work, but the character of this service is very discreditable. 
Instead of nicely folded tracts they are sometimes 
twisted into a shape that makes them unreadable when 
straightened out. Friends have seen newsboys do this with 
their newspapers, but they forget that a large newspaper has 
so much body to ii that such treatment does not harm it. 
whereas the same procedure ruins a little two-leaf paper. 

Then as the auto is going twenty-five miles an hour they 
pitch a tract at each mail-box on the road. Probably one in 
ten lands somewhere near the box while the rest fall from 
five to fifty feet away. Some tracts land in the mud in the 
middle of the road. A week later you can find mud-covered 
literature for miles. These brethren reason that the work is 
the Lord's and He will overrule it all for good; they make 
this as an excuse for not doing their best. Such ought to 
know that fifty tracts conscientiously distributed will accomplish 
more than five hundred distributed in the other fashion. 
On account of confusion caused by literature getting mixed 
with mail intended for carrier, money for stamps, etc., I find 
there is a general order against putting literature in mail-boxes; 
some carriers even throw it out. However, if it is 
laid squarely on the ground under the mail-box it will almost 
always be picked up by the person coming for the mail. But 

R5937 : page 239 

such distribution should be avoided in windy or wet weather. 

An even better plan is to carry a supply of pins, and pin 
each tract near its corner to the post supporting the box. 
A pin is easily pushed into the post sufficient to hold the tract, 
and its unusual position is sure to attract the person collecting 
from the box. It takes a moment's time, but results are better. 



Another successful way to waste tracts is adopted by some 
brethren. These go through a train and whenever they come 
to an empty seat they place one on it. In a few moments the 
porter comes through and, gathering the literature from unoccupied 
seats, proceeds to destroy it. Besides, this course 
embitters the railway employees; and they are more likely to 
stop the next brother who attempts to distribute tracts. Hundreds 
of thousands of tracts have been wasted as a consequence 
of thoughtlessness. 

I continue to enjoy the opportunities for service, waiting 
actively and patiently for the Kingdom. 

Yours by His grace, B.H. BARTON 



DO THEY ABOUND? 

MY BELOVED BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

I believe it is nearly a year since last writing you; and 
while realizing how much there is to take up your time, yet 
I feel I cannot put off longer sending you my Christian heart-love 
and affection, sympathy in trial, and rejoicing in faith 
and hope. I have been endeavoring to follow your suggestions 
in respect to developing Love, and wish to say that I have 
received a blessing thereby, with some good results, I believe; 
even though I can hardly specify any great thing, yet a general 
flow of help has come to me, and I hope by God's grace 
has gone out to others. 

One thing that has impressed and helped me much is the 
thought of the Apostle Peter, "If these things be in you and 
abound." Yes, perhaps they are in me but do they abound? 
I have a great desire to abound in the fruits and graces of 
the Holy Spirit, and try to think daily, "Am I abounding in 
love now, in this act or word? Am I abounding in faith, trust 
and hope? Do I abound in sympathy?" and so on. Dear 
Brother, I want to abound toward you now in love and appreciation 
and sympathy and to send you much from my heart. 
The words "More than conquerors" have also impressed me 
much, and an article of yours about Lot and Sodom. So with 
regard to sin, I want to keep a thousand miles from Satan. 
Dear Brother, I want your prayer in respect to the above 
mentioned desires. I must add a word of gratitude for THE 
MORNING RESOLVE. Its words have become very precious, and 
a great help to me. 

I know that you will be interested to hear that by God's 
grace the work in British and Dutch Guiana continues prosperous; 
and much interest is manifested by the public, even 
though, as ever, true wheat is scarce. We hope to give a 
public lecture here Thursday on "Control of the Earth." 

The brethren in these parts love you dearly, and would 
more than rejoice to see you in the flesh some day, if such 
were possible— God's will! With much love. 

Yours by grace, in our dear Redeemer's Name, 

ADDISON B. BLAKE.-British Guiana. 



A RECOMMENDED CURE FOR PELLAGRA 

DEAR FRIENDS:- 

Frequently I have seen in THE WATCH TOWER little helpful 
hints to the Lord's children about their health and various 
similar things. It prompts me to write you concerning an 
affection, pellagra, which seems to be very wide-spread and 
is taking a large toll of death every year, especially among 
the poor. I have been making a special study of the disease 
for two years, having had its early symptoms myself, and 
can highly recommend a most simple treatment which I believe 
will relieve every case, unless the patient is practically 
dead, and which is easily available to every household. 

As you know, pellagra is beginning to rank with tuberculosis 
as a scourge to the poor, and it may be that the Lord 
has led me to use my medical knowledge in His service in 
lieu of my deficiency in Truth knowledge. It might be more 
in keeping with the spirit of humility to omit my name in 
telling the brethren of this, though I have stood sponsor for 
it publicly by reading a paper on the subject before the 
meeting of the Texas State Medical Society held at Galveston 
on May 9th last. Trusting for your continued favor 
in the Lord, I am 

Very sincerely, GEORGE D. FAIRBANKS, M.D. 

[This formula we will be pleased to mail to any of our 
readers or their friends suffering from pellagra. Address 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, Health Dept., Brooklyn, 
New York.] 



FROM WAR-FRONTED GREECE 

MY BELOVED BROTHER:- 

I feel ashamed because for so long a time I have not 
written to you, yet I assure you, my Brother, that all the 
while you were in my heart; and I always remember you before 
the Throne of Heavenly Grace— that the Lord strengthen 
you and bless you abundantly. 

I have seen, beloved Pastor, in the pamphlet, "A great 
Battle in the Ecclesiastical Heavens," about your trials and 
the assaults of the Adversary and the fiery darts of slander; 
and this deepens more and more my love toward you and 
my appreciation of your work of love and faithfulness to 
our dear Lord. Believe me, dear Brother, that these darts 
pierced my heart as well, and I wished I could stand between 
these darts and you. 

I again express my deep appreciation of the STUDIES IN 
THE SCRIPTURES and THE WATCH TOWER, and humbly thank 
the Lord for His great blessing and abundant food, which are 
before the Church. Never before were these books so precious 
to me as in the past year. This is the seventh time that I 
have read them, and I find them as fresh as they were the 
first time I read them. I more and more appreciate the 
Chronology as found in the 2d Volume, and rejoice because 



our salvation draws near. 

I still try to walk in the narrow way; and day by day the 
Lord guides my feet and gives me grace to help. These last 
years I have passed through many painful experiences, because 
two of my little ones have fallen asleep, waiting for 
the Voice of the Lord to call them forth. Even in these 
experiences the Lord blessed me and led me, and gives me 
grace to trust Him still. 

Remember me, beloved Brother, in your prayers that I 
may stand faithful to the Lord and prove worthy of the 
highest blessing. With deep Christian love. 

Your Brother in our Blessed Redeemer, ATH. KARANASSIOS. 



PURIFYING INFLUENCE OF THE "PAX" PIN 

DEAR FRIENDS:- 

Should like to tell you briefly an incident in connection 
with the purifying influence of even the little PAX PIN: 

A working man of our city who attended and greatly enjoyed 
THE PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION, was wearing the PAX 
PIN. He had been in the habit of stopping for a glass of beer 
on his way home from work. On looking down at the Pin 
he thought, "I can't disgrace that Pin by taking it in the 
saloon!" So he put it in his pocket. But, on further reflection, 
he could not even enter the saloon with the pin 
about him, though hidden, and he went home. 

Realizing he felt better able to work next day without his 
accustomed drink, he decided he would not drink any more, 
but wear the Peace Pin in peace of mind. Some eighteen 
months have elapsed and he has not taken any liquor in all 
that time! 

This has impressed me that we do not fully realize how 
much good the DRAMA and all connected with it may have 
done in such ways as this! 

Trusting the Lord will assist us to live up to our great 
privileges in the spread of the Truth, I remain 

Your sister in Christ, MAUD HODGSON.-Md. 



GOLDEN OPPORTUNITIES 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am just wondering if it isn't an opportune time for sending 
tracts pertaining to the War (Time of Trouble), such as 
"Armageddon," "Distress of Nations," "End of the World in 
1914," etc., to the soldier boys of our vicinity, now on the 
Mexican border. If each class would engage in this work, 
serving their own regiments, the entire National Guard of 
the United States would be quickly served, and indirectly 
through this channel many in the standing Army might be 
reached, thereby permeating the whole Army with the Truth 
upon subjects which would be interesting to them at this particular 
time. 



Praying the Lord's richest blessings upon you in your 
labor of love, I remain 
Your brother and servant in the Lord, A.B. DABNEY. 



page 241 

VOL. XXXVII AUGUST 15 NO. 16 
A. D. 1916-A.M. 6044 



CONTENTS 

Confession of Sin Essential to Forgiveness 243 

Basis of True Fellowship 243 

Shortcomings and Faults are Sins 244 

Injustice to the Brethren Inexcusable 244 

Military Duty Exemptions in Britain 245 

Ordinations— True and False 246 

Some Important Questions 246 

St. Paul's Sorrows and Joys 248 

The Arrest of St. Paul 249 

St. Paul a Prisoner in the Castle 251 

The Divine Scroll— Who is Worthy to 

Look Therein? 252 

Deep Things Unfolded at Jordan 252 

Gradual Opening of the Seals 253 

Norfolk Convention a Success 253 

Our Vow Unto the Lord 253 

Interesting Letters 254 

A Voice From London Office 254 

Objectors Sing, "Stand Up for Jesus!" 255 

"V.D.M." Questions Found Profitable 255 

page 242 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 



each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



GENERAL CONVENTIONS 

NIAGARA FALLS, N.Y. -Aug. 19-22. For assignments address A. 

Fosbraey, 727 Pine Ave. 
NASHVILLE, TENN.-Aug. 24-27. For assignments address Milton 

E. Confehr, 1516 McGavock St. 
LOS ANGELES, CAL.-Sept. 2-10. For assignments address F.P. 

Sherman, 808 Figueroa St. 
SEATTLE, WASH.-Sept. 14-17. For assignments address H.G. Backbock, 

2410 First Ave., W. 
MILWAUKEE, WIS.-Sept. 16-24. For assignments address C. Hilton 

Ellison, 2704 Wells St. 
DAYTON, O.-October 5-8. For assignments address Dr. Chas. E. 

Kerney, 475 S. Broadway. 



NIAGARA FALLS CONVENTION 

This is a most beautiful place in which to hold a Convention of 
Bible students. The surroundings are ideal, and the friends remember 
with appreciation the last Convention held there. Perhaps no time of 
the year other than August 19 to 22 would be better for this Convention. 
Brother Russell expects to be there on Sunday and Monday, August 
20th and 21st, the very midst of the Convention. This location is specially 
convenient for the Canadian friends, and we are hoping that a 
good many of them may be in attendance. Friends from the States will 
appreciate this privilege of meeting with their Canadian brethren. We 
are hoping for a good attendance. The Program seems to be one of 
the best, and the speakers are able brethren. 

$5.00 excursions are announced from Pittsburgh— and possibly from 
other points— for the 19th. 



RAILROAD RATES TO NASHVILLE CONVENTION 

Thirty-five railroads in the South, composing the Southern Passenger 
Association with headquarters at Atlanta, Ga., Joseph Richardson, Chairman, 
have issued Joint Passenger Tariff, No. Exc. 6747, publishing reduced 
rate arrangement on account of the I.B.S.A. Convention to 
be held in Nashville, August 24-27. The rate is a very attractive one, 
about one-half the usual fare. No doubt this will enable many to attend 
who would not feel able to go if a higher rate were in force. 



The Capitol building will be used for the sessions of the Convention, 
and the great Ryman Auditorium will be used for the DRAMA. Pastor 
Russell will give a public lecture in one of the largest theaters. The 
Program, we believe, is an excellent one; and the speakers are able. 

When purchasing ticket, ask for Excursion rate to Nashville, Term., 
and return, according to Joint Passenger Tariff Exc. 6747, in effect 
August 22d, 23d, 24th. In case your town is not on this tariff, your 
ticket agent will be able to figure your fare from your place to the 
nearest point covered by the tariff, from which latter place, you will 
have the benefit of the one and one-half cent excursion rate. 



R5937 : page 242 

GREEK BRETHREN AS BIBLE STUDENTS 

Learning of considerable interest among the Greeks, the Editor invited 
them to meet him at the Bethel Home, July 27th. Twenty-two 
came (19 brothers, 3 sisters). We had a most enjoyable season of fellowship- 
conferring respecting our Father's Plan and the meaning of 
His Word. Three symbolized their consecration to be dead with Christ. 

For some time they have been publishing THE WATCH TOWER in 
Greek at a cost of over 35 cents per copy, or $9.00 per year each, for 
their 80 subscribers. Now their funds are exhausted. We advised that 
under the circumstances they should discontinue the publication. They 
demurred that they needed the Heavenly food or would starve. Finally 
one of their number guaranteed the publication for one year upon assurance 
that they would each set apart 2c daily for this spiritual food. 
They do their own translating and print on a small press of their own. 
The meeting and the results gave us a clearer insight into their loving 
loyalty to the Lord and to His Truth. We pass on this Cup of refreshing 
to our readers. 

The progress of the Truth amongst Italians, Slovaks, Greeks, etc., 
during the last two years has surprised and cheered us greatly. The 
PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION, apparently, had much to do with this interest. 
The EUREKA DRAMA can now be supplied with lecture records 
in many languages. 



R5946 : page 242 

DOCTOR JONES' CONVENTION TRAIN SCHEDULE 

Doctor Jones informs us that he is proceeding with his Convention 
Train for the Pacific Coast Convention. He has not informed us how 
many cars he will have, but has sent us the schedule, which we place 
before our readers below. Convention points are marked thus (*). All 
other places where the time is sufficient and the local Class of Bible 
Students so desire, meetings either public or semi-public will be held: 

SEPT. 4TH-SEPT. 26TH, 1916. 

CHICAGO-LOS ANGELES-SEATTLE-DULUTH-MILWAUKEE-CHICAGO 
Lv. Chicago Sante Fe 9:50 a.m. Tuesday, Sept. 5 Train 9 



*Ar. Los Angeles 


" 7:10 a.m. Friday, Sept. 8 " 


9 


Lv. Los Angeles 


" 1 1:59 p.m. Friday, Sept. 8 " 


78 


Ar. Santa Ana 


' 1:30 a.m. Saturday, Sept. 9 " 


78 


Lv. Santa Ana 


" 5:23 p.m. Saturday, Sept. 9 " 


75 


*Ar. Los Angeles 


" 6:30 p.m. Saturday, Sept. 9 


" 75 


Lv. Los Angeles 


" 1 1:59 p.m. Monday, Sept. 11 


" 78 


Ar. San Bernardino 


" 9:43 a.m. Tuesday, Sept. 12 


" 50 


Lv. San Bernardino 


" 6:45 p.m. Tuesday, Sept. 12 


" 16 


Ar. San Francisco 


9:40 a.m. Wednesday, Sept. 12 


1 " 15 


Lv. San Francisco S 


. Pac. 8:20 p.m. Wednesday, Sept. 


13 " 16 


Ar. Portland 


7:20 a.m. Friday, Sept. 15 " 


16 


Lv. Portland Gt. North. 12:30 a.m. Saturday, Sept. 16 


" 360 


*Ar. Seattle 


7:30 a.m. Saturday, Sept. 16 " 


360 


Lv. Seattle 


10:30 p.m. Sunday, Sept. 17 " 


44 


Ar. Spokane 


12:20 p.m. Monday, Sept. 18 


" 44 


Lv. Spokane 


8:00 a.m. Tuesday, Sept. 19 " 


2 


*Ar. Duluth 


8:40 a.m. Thursday, Sept. 21 " 


36 


Lv. Duluth 


1 1:10 p.m. Thursday, Sept. 21 " 


17 


Ar. St. Paul 


6:30 a.m. Friday, Sept. 22 " 


17 


Lv. St. Paul CM. & St. P. 8:25 a.m. Friday, Sept. 22 


" 18 


*Ar. Milwaukee 


" 6:40 p.m. Friday, Sept. 22 ' 


' 18 


Lv. Milwaukee 


" 7:25 p.m. Sunday, Sept. 24 


" 6 


Ar. Chicago 


9:30 p.m. Sunday, Sept. 24 " 


6 


Lv. Chicago Penn. 


R.R. 12:05 a.m. Monday, Sept. 25 " 6 



R5938 : page 243 

CONFESSION OF SIN ESSENTIAL TO FORGIVENESS 

If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just 
to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all 
unrighteousness."— 1 John 1:9. 

THE Apostle John is not here addressing the 
world of unbelievers, unjustified persons, 
"sinners" in the ordinary sense of the word. 
On the contrary, he is addressing the justified 
and sanctified in Christ Jesus; and he 
classes himself with these, using the plural 
pronoun "we." The frequent mistake of applying 
this and similar passages to sinners 
in general has been injurious in two important 
particulars. 

First. It has been injurious to the unregenerate, in 
that it has given some the impression that there is no 
difference between the Church and the world; and that 
all alike have access to God in prayer and for the forgiveness 
of daily trespasses. It has thus hindered some 
from realizing the necessity of faith in the Atonement, 
and from definitely entering into covenant relationship 
with the Lord under the terms of the Grace Covenant— 
the Covenant of Sacrifice. (Psalm 50:5.) On the contrary, 
all should be informed of the fact that repentance 
and a positive acceptance of Christ as their personal 



Savior are absolutely necessary before they can be "accepted 

in the Beloved," and be treated as "sons of God," 

and enjoy the privileges of this relationship— prayer, fellowship 

with God, Divine care, or providential oversight 

of their affairs and interests, and the favor of forgiveness 

of daily trespasses through the merit of the great High 

Priest, Jesus Christ the Righteous. 

Second. This oversight has had an injurious effect 
upon some Christians, who have gone to the extreme of 
claiming that they can never commit sin, after their past 
sins have been graciously forgiven by the Lord, and after 
they have entered into covenant relationship. Hence we 
have the very wrong views and teachings of so-called 
"perfectionists" who claim, not merely that they are reckonedly 
perfect now, but that they are actually perfect in 
all their thoughts, words and deeds-DECEIVING THEMSELVES 
and laying themselves liable to many grievous errors, 
as the Apostle declares in connection with our text. 

BASIS OF TRUE FELLOWSHIP 

The Apostle John in writing this Epistle clearly states 
his object, saying, "These things write we unto you, that 
your joy may be full." It is a noteworthy fact that the 
vast majority of Christians never experience the fulness 
of joy, peace and blessing that they might possess. Too 
many are content with simply diluted first principles of the 
doctrine of Christ. Therefore, as the Apostle Paul declares, 
such are merely "babes in Christ." (1 Corinthians 3:1,2; 
Hebrews 5:12-14.) Of course, they have a blessing 
in any relationship to the Lord, but they have not the 
fulness of joy which would be theirs if they progressed 
in grace and in knowledge to the full stature of a man in 
Christ. The object of the Apostle's writing them was to 
stir up the pure minds of believers to an appreciation and 
enjoyment of their privileges, that thereby they might 
grow and develop. 

The Apostle follows the example of our Lord Jesus 
in symbolizing truth and righteousness as Light, and sin 
and every evil as so much of opposing Darkness. God 
Himself thus considered would be the very perfection of 
Light— "in Him is no darkness," no sin, no imperfection. 
With this thought before the mind, the Apostle points 
out that any growth of fellowship with God to which we 
may aspire must be along the lines of goodness, purity, 
and that it would be sin for us to say to others or to 
imagine in our own hearts that we are walking with 
God and having fellowship with Him, if our course of 
life is a dark, a sinful one. Such are merely deceiving 
themselves and others. They are not deceiving God, and 
they are not getting the blessings enjoyed by those who 
"walk in the light." 

Moreover, to the extent that we walk in the light and 
in harmony and fellowship with God, we shall find ourselves 
in fellowship with all others who are like-minded. 
So then, if we do not "love the brethren whom we have 



seen," so as to be able to have fellowship and spiritual 
pleasure with them, it would be an indication that we are 
not wholly in harmony and fellowship with God. 

But who are the "brethren"? Our Lord tells us that 
not all who profess His name are true brethren. He says, 
"Not every one that saith Lord, Lord, shall enter into the 
Kingdom of Heaven [be recognized as His brethren and 
joint-heirs], but he that doeth the will of My Father which 
is in Heaven." We thus see that it is by our deeds, and 
not merely by our professions, that we are accepted of the 
Lord. Again He says, "Who are My brethren?... 
Verily, I say unto you. He that doeth the will of My 
Father, the same is My brother."-Matthew 7:21; 12:48-50. 

We are not, therefore, to anticipate "fellowship" with 
all who name the name of Christ as proof of fellowship 
with the Father, and that we are in the light. We are 
merely to anticipate this true fellowship with those who 
are earnestly seeking to do the Father's will, to serve His 
cause and exemplify the instructions of His Word, in their 
deeds as well as in their professions. Between all such 
there must be, whether hidden or open, a bond of fellowship 

R5938 : page 244 

and union. That bond is the one faith and one 
baptism into the one Lord. 

SHORTCOMINGS AND FAULTS ARE SINS 

But while this fellowship between us and our Lord 
and all who have His Spirit is based upon our walking in 
the light, our following in His footsteps to the extent of 
our ability, nevertheless it does not imply absolute freedom 
from the imperfections of sin. Although under our 
Grace Covenant arrangement nothing is charged up to us 
as sin except in proportion as it has been wilfully done, 
nevertheless, because of the manifold temptations and the 
weakness of our flesh, the result of inherited predisposition 
toward sin, it is impossible for us to avoid shortcomings 
and faults. These may properly be termed sins, as in 
our text; for "sin is a transgression of the Law," however 
unintentional it may be. 

But the Divine arrangement under the Grace Covenant, 
on behalf of the Lord's people, is that these unintentional 
faults and shortcomings need not be charged up 
against us as sins; but may instead be cleansed away upon 
our application to the great High Priest, through the merit 
of the precious blood. Thus it is that the blood of Jesus 
Christ our Lord cleanseth us from all sin— keeps us clean 
from sin, if we continually make application for forgiveness, 
because of realization of imperfections of our flesh. 

AN INSIDIOUS SNARE OF THE ADVERSARY 

Further on in this Epistle, the Apostle uses the word 
"sin" in a different sense from the above, saying, "Whosoever 



abideth in Him sinneth not; whosoever sinneth 

hath not seen Him nor [even] known Him. ..He 

that committeth sin is of the Devil. ..Whosoever is 

begotten of God doth not commit sin; for His seed remaineth 

in him, and he cannot sin, because he is begotten 

of God." Again he says: "We know that whosoever is 

begotten of God sinneth not; but he that is begotten of 

God keepeth himself, and that Wicked One toucheth him 

not."-l John 3:6-9; 5:18. 

In these passages the Apostle uses the word "sin" in 
its full or absolute sense, meaning wilful sin, deliberate 
sin, intentional sin— not merely shortcomings and faults, 
due largely or wholly to the imperfections of the flesh, inherited 
from our ancestors. No one, the Apostle assures 
us, who has been begotten of the Spirit of the Lord, the 
Spirit of holiness and truth, could have any sympathy 
with sin so as to wilfully, knowingly and intentionally 
engage therein. All who so love sin and wilfully do it 
and approve it after they have a knowledge of the Truth, 
are children of darkness, who love darkness and who thus 
show that they have the spirit, or disposition of Satan. 

INJUSTICE TO THE BRETHREN INEXCUSABLE 

At first thought, many may be inclined to say, "Well, 
I am in no danger of that sin; for I am sure that I would 
not commit sin wilfully, intentionally, designedly." But 
let us notice, dear friends, that there is a way in which sin 
may come upon us without being at the time a wilful sin, 
but which later might become wilful sin. For instance, 
any transgression committed, either in total ignorance or 
with only a partial acquiescence of our wills, might become 
a full, wilful, deliberate sin afterward, if we should 
come to a clear knowledge of the truth respecting the 
subject, and fail to repent of it to the Lord and to undo 
so far as is in our power the wrong toward our fellow-creatures. 
To consent to a sin clearly and fully understood 
simply because at the time of its committal we were 
in ignorance, and to refuse to make amends for it, and 
thus endorse the sin intelligently, would appear to make 
of it a will-ful sin. 

With this view of the matter, the children of God 
cannot afford to sanction in their own minds even the 
slightest injustice or untruth toward each other, or toward 
any. The essence of this thought is found in our Lord's 
command: "If thou comest to the altar [if we have anything 
to offer to the Lord, either of service or of worship 

R5939 : page 244 

or of thanks], and there rememberest that thy brother hath 

R5939 : page 244 

aught against thee [that some one has been wronged by 
you, either in word or thought or act] leave there thy 



gift before the altar [do not think that it will be acceptable 
to God while in your heart or outwardly you are 
practising injustice toward others]; first go and be reconciled 
to thy brother [make amends to him, apologies, explanations 
in full, of whatever injury you have done him], 
and then come and offer thy gift [assured that in such an 
attitude of heart the Lord Almighty will be pleased to 
accept your gift]."— Matthew 5:23,24. 

In describing those who sin wilfully, the Apostle Paul 
uses very strong, figurative language, declaring that inasmuch 
as they are in heart-sympathy with sin, and not in 
opposition to it, they are the opponents of the Son of 
God, who was so out of sympathy with sin in its every 
form that He laid down His life to redeem us from its 
power and curse. The Apostle declares that such wilful 
sinners may be esteemed as the enemies of Christ, who 
really trample Him and His goodness and love under 
their feet, figuratively, disdaining His mercy and favor as 
well as His instruction in righteousness. He says that 
inasmuch as they were once sanctified, as a result of their 
faith in the precious blood and its cleansing from sin, 
their turning now into harmony with sin would imply that 
they now disesteem the atoning blood, counting it not 
a sacred thing, but common— these do despite to the 
spirit of Divine favor which had held out to them freedom 
from the yoke of sin and ultimate release from its 
penalty, death, and the attainment, as the Lord's people, 
of the crown of life eternal.— Hebrews 10:26-29. 

CONFESSION OF SIN PRECEDES FORGIVENESS 

But let us return to the consideration of the other use 
of the word "sin" as found in our context, and apply 
the terms to the faults and imperfections which God's 
people are zealously striving against, seeking to stamp out 
of their mortal bodies, and against which they are continually 
fighting a good fight and coming off conquerors, 
and more than conquerors, through Him who loved them 
and bought them with His precious blood. The Apostle 
intimates that there is danger that some will go to the extreme 
of denying that they have any faults, and thus deceive 
themselves and get into a snare of the Adversary. 

It may be asked. What difference can it make if they 
are seeking to live godly, whether they claim to live perfectly, 
or admit that they are imperfect and apply continually 
for cleansing through the precious blood? We 
reply that it makes a great deal of difference. Only as 
we confess our sins can they be forgiven. Consequently, 
those who deny that they have any sins, faults, imperfections, 
have a great load of them uncancelled, unforgiven, 
charged up against them; and because of this they would 
be accounted unworthy to be taken further along in the 
path of light, under the lead of the Holy Spirit, into the 
heights and depths and lengths and breadths of the love 
and wisdom of God, revealed in His Word as meat in 
due season for the Household of Faith. 



Thus we see that there is but one proper course of 
faith and conduct in which we may have a complete fellowship 
with the Lord. Those who take any other course 
are making God a liar; and He would not fellowship with 
them, but will leave them to the darkness of their own 
way. Can we wonder, then, that so many are in darkness 

R5939 : page 245 

and lack evidences of fellowship with God when we 
see how few confess their faults and seek to overcome 
them and to be cleansed in the only way of Divine appointment 
and approval? 

These things are written not to cultivate in us the 
thought that we may sin with impunity, may be overtaken 
with faults through carelessness and inattention to the 
Divine Word, and then go to the Lord for forgiveness. 
Quite to the contrary, these assurances of Divine favor 
and willingness to forgive are designed to have upon our 
hearts a mellowing influence which will make us all the 
more careful to avoid sin and to maintain fellowship with 
Him who is the perfection of light and holiness. "These 
things are written that we sin not"— that we become not 
boastful of self, self-righteous, self-justified, and thus 
abominable in the Lord's sight; but that, fleeing from our 
weaknesses and imperfections, we lay hold upon the grace 
of God in Christ for their forgiveness, and for grace and 
strength to fight a good fight against sin. 

OUR TEXT APPLIES TO THE CHURCH 

If any man [in Christ] sin, we have an Advocate with 
the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous." Here again "any 
man" does not refer to those who are out of Christ, but 
to those who are under the terms and conditions of the 
Covenant of Grace. Such alone are addressed in this 
Epistle. The world has no Advocate with the Father, because 
it has not accepted Christ; and He is the Advocate 
only for those who have accepted Him and who are 
striving to overcome sin. 

Our Advocate is more than an advocate, more than a 
representative at the bar of Divine Justice, interested in 
our welfare and forgiveness; He is in addition the One 
who gave Himself for us, who at Calvary finished the 
work of providing a propitiation (satisfaction) for our 
sins. This is the reason why we may come "with boldness 
[confidence] to the Throne of Grace," not only realizing 
that God is for us, and that the Lord Jesus sympathizes 
with us, and is our Advocate, but also and especially realizing 
the merit of the sacrifice which He has already deposited 
with Justice, and which He fully imputed on behalf 
of all who love and obey Him. upon their acceptance 
of the Father's terms. 

But, says the Apostle, "He is the propitiation not only 
for our sins [the Church's sins], but also for the sins of 
the whole world." What does this mean? Is He the Advocate 



for the whole world? No. The world has not 
been called and drawn to holiness and truth. During the 
present Age "no man can come unto Christ except the 
Father draw him." At present the drawing influence of 
the Truth is extended only to "him that hath an ear to 
hear." The great mass of mankind have never in any 
sense of the word heard of the grace of God and of the 
propitiation and forgiveness provided for all in Christ. 
Indeed, it is a remarkably small number who "have tasted 
that the Lord is gracious." 

Yet so surely as the propitiation is "for the sins 
of the whole world," just so surely shall every member 
of the race of mankind be brought to a knowledge of 
the fact, and to an opportunity to avail himself of the provided 
blessing. It is to this end that the great Millennial 
Age has been promised and is being prepared; and it is 
concerning that Age of blessing to "all the families of the 
earth" that the Lord declares through the Prophet, "In 
that day the blind eyes shall be opened and the deaf ears 
shall be unstopped." It is of that time that the Lord 
Jesus also declared, "And I, if I be lifted up, will draw all 
men unto Me." It is by virtue of His having been lifted 
up as the Propitiation, the Sin-offering, "for the sins of 
the whole world." that our glorified Lord will eventually 
be privileged to be the Judge of the world and to grant 
forgiveness, reconciliation and restitution to all who will 
heartily obey Him; while "whosoever will not obey that 
Prophet will be cut off from among the people"— in the 
Second Death.-Acts 3:23. 

THE TEST OF OBEDIENCE 

As the drawing now done by the Father is not a compulsion, 
but merely a constraining by the Truth, through 
a knowledge of it, so the drawing of the Millennial Age 
upon the world of mankind will not be a compulsion, but 
merely the influence of righteousness and Truth constraining 
toward love for righteousness and thus to the reward 
of righteousness— eternal life. 

The Apostle seems to intimate in the Epistle from 
which our text is taken that quite a good number may 
claim an intimate knowledge of God falsely. Hence with 
great plainness of speech he informs us that, "He that 
saith I know Him, and keepeth not His commandments, is 
a liar, and the Truth is not in Him." It is thus very 
evident that the Apostle does not mean merely a knowledge 
about God, but an intimate knowledge of God, implying 
fellowship and communion with Him. He then 
gives us a test by which we may judge accordingly 
whether or not we are New Creatures in the Lord and 
have the love of God developed in us to any extent. The 
test is obedience. In proportion as we keep the Lord's 
Word, in like proportion the love of God is perfected in 
us; for if we have received the mind of Christ, the Holy 
Spirit, the Spirit of God, the effect will be to cause us 
to will and do His good pleasure— to the extent of ability. 



This ability should be continually on the increase year 
by year. And although we may not hope to be perfected 
until we shall be "changed" and granted our new resurrection 
bodies, nevertheless, all the while we may keep so 
close to the Lord in the spirit of our minds that we may 
have continual fellowship with Him, and by confessing 
our faults and seeking His forgiveness we may continue 
to the end of our journey clean from sin. even 
though we must still acknowledge the imperfections of 
the flesh— that in our flesh dwelleth no perfection. 



R5942 : page 245 

MILITARY DUTY EXEMPTIONS IN BRITAIN 

OUR London Office writes: "We are trying to 

get our regular office helpers and the Elders 

of the I.B.S.A. meetings exempted from 

military service. The War Office is agreeable 

to having the case stated before the 

Civil Courts soon. At present, about 60 

brethren are in prison for refusing military 

orders; about 60 have been exempted so long 

as they do work considered of national importance; 

about 20 have joined the non-combatant 

corps arranged for by the Government. You 

will see by these figures that the majority of the brethren 

involved declined to accept military authority. The above 

figures refer only to single men. The married men's compulsion 

is only beginning to come into operation. These 

also will appeal for exemption; but it remains to be seen 

whether they will refuse to accept the non-combatant 

corps and, by so doing, forfeit the allowance provided for 

the wives and children of soldiers. The situation is certainly 

trying. Some of our brethren, eight at least, were 

taken to France, and afterwards sentenced to be shot for 

disobedience. The sentence was reduced to ten years 

R5942 : page 246 

penal servitude, and we have just learned that they are 

now in civil prisons in England. The military powers 

seem to care little for the civil authorities. These experiences 

are doing good to the Church as a whole, by 

sending it to prayer and causing an increased exercise 

of love and sympathy. No doubt, too, all this is a stiffening 

process in preparation for harder and darker 

days to come." 

We wish our dear Brethren of the warring nations 
to know of the loving sympathy of their dear Brethren 
of the neutral countries. Surely, many prayers are ascending 
from Brethren of the I.B.S.A. everywhere! Examples 
of loyalty to the King of kings are everywhere 
having a strengthening and stimulating effect. 



We quite agree with the proposal to gain exemption 
for Class Elders as ministers under the laws. This does 
not mean that we recognize a "clergy" class as distinct 
from a "laity" class in Christ's Church. "All ye are 
brethren— all are ministers (servants) of Christ. But if 
one law excuses some Brethren, and another law or arrangement 
excuses other Brethren, and if no law excuses 
still others, it is for us to obtain for each other all that 
the laws permit us to have. 



R5939 : page 246 

ORDINATIONS-TRUE AND FALSE 

THE WORD ordination, as applied to the Christian 
ministry, seems to be very imperfectly 
comprehended by the majority of people- 
including ministers. The ceremony practised 
by some Christian people in connection 
with the appointment of their ministers— 

R5940 : page 246 

such as the laying on of hands, etc.— is not 
ordination, but merely a ceremony connected 
with the ordination. The word ordination 
signifies simply the setting apart, authorization 
or appointment, to some particular work or office. 

The proper thought connected with ordination is that 
which the Bible gives when we read that the Apostle 
"ordained Elders in every Church." (Acts 14:23.) 
Similarly, amongst the Lord's people today. Elders are 
chosen, or appointed, or authorized, by the congregation 
by the stretching forth of their hands— by the congregational 
vote. Every Elder and every Deacon Scripturally 
chosen by the vote, "the stretching forth of the hand" 
(not by laying on of hands), is thus ordained, or appointed, 
or authorized, to serve in the capacity indicated. 

In thus ordaining Elders and Deacons, the Lord's people 
are instructed that they are to seek to know the mind 
of the Lord. Their voting for and electing one of the 
brethren to be a Deacon or an Elder implies that they 
believe that such a person possesses the Divinely indicated 
qualifications for the service. No one should be voted 
for who does not give evidence of having received the 
begetting of the Holy Spirit, which is the Divine authorization 
to preach or to teach, as set forth in Isaiah 61:1. 

All of the Lord's spirit-begotten people are ordained 
in this general way to speak in the Master's name the 
wonderful Words of Life, according to their opportunities. 
But when a congregation of such ordained, spirit-begotten 
children of God chooses from its midst some to be Elders, 
others to be Deacons, it implies that they consider the 
ones chosen to be especially qualified, "apt to teach"— 



ensamples to the brethren in word, in conduct.— 1 Tim. 3:2. 

The wrong thought respecting ordination is the one 
which ignores the Divine anointing (Isaiah 61:1), and 
which merely looks to the education and the talents of 
the one elected. Thus ignoring the Divine test, many 
today are serving as Ministers and Elders in the Church 
of Christ who would make no profession of being spirit-begotten 
and who give no outward evidence thereof. Such 
are not properly ordained Ministers of God, and their 
church ordination gives no Divine blessing or power. 

The most erroneous thought respecting ordination is 
that held by the three oldest Christian denominations— 
the Roman Catholic, the Episcopal Church of England, 
and the Greek Catholic Church. With these ancient 
churches, ordination has a different meaning entirely. 
They claim to have Apostolic succession of authority— 
that originally only the Apostles had a right to teach or 
to preach, and that any other teachers or preachers needed 
to get authorization and Divine power from the hands of 
the Apostles. They claim that before the Apostles died, 
there was a special order of bishops ordained in the 
Church; and that apostolic power and authority passed to 
those bishops, and has thus come down to our day and is 
possessed by the bishops of these denominations. They 
claim that only such as they ordain are Christian ministers. 

In a word, these three ancient churches have set aside 
entirely the Divine ordination, the anointing of the Holy 
Spirit, and substituted an authorization through a so-called 
"apostolic succession" of power and authority. Not 
only did Jesus tell us that there were only Twelve Apostles, 
but Revelation 2:2 points out this grievous error of 
those who claim to be apostles and are not, but do lie. 

SOME IMPORTANT QUESTIONS 

The above condensed statement of what is really meant 
by the ordaining of Christian ministers should be read 
over repeatedly until fully comprehended. Then the following 
questions and answers will be better understood: 

(1) Are all Elders and Deacons chosen by congregations 
of God's people to be considered Divinely ordained? 

No, no one can be considered Divinely ordained who 
has not received the begetting of the Holy Spirit. For 
a congregation to ordain any one who does not profess 
to be fully consecrated to God and to have received the 
begetting of the Holy Spirit is for them to do what they 
have not been authorized by the Lord to do. The person 
thus chosen would be merely the representative of the 
church thus ordaining him, but would not be a representative 
of the Lord. 

But for a congregation to recognize the Lord's authorization 
of a Brother, and to recognize further his 
aptness to teach and his possession of the qualities fitting 
him for service according to the Divine Word, means the 
giving to that Brother of a proper election or ordination to 
be the representative of the congregation in the name of the 



Lord. No Brother should attempt to serve a company of 
the Lord's people without their request, and their request 
or their vote constitutes their appointment of him to that 
service— in other words, their ordination of him, or appointment, 
for the service, whether for a day or a year. 

(2) If it is proper that all Elders and Deacons should 
thus be ordained and should not attempt to serve regularly 
without ordination, what did St. Paul mean when he declared 
that he was an Apostle not of men nor by men, 

but by the Lord Jesus Christ?— Galatians 1:1. 

No man or congregation is competent to appoint or 
elect an Apostle. No congregational vote would make one 
of the brethren an Apostle. That is a special office or 
function which is of Divine appointment solely. Thus 
the Lord Jesus appointed only Twelve Apostles— "Twelve 
Apostles of the Lamb"— St. Paul taking the place of 
Judas, who lost his apostleship. (Rev. 21:14; Psalm 109:8; 
Acts 1:20.) It is in this particular that the Church 
of Rome, the Church of England, and the Greek Church 

R5940 : page 247 

do violence to the principles of God's Word, in that they 
claim to make, but do not really make. Apostolic Bishops 
—bishops possessed of apostolic power and authority. 
St. Paul did not desire us to understand that he took 
no notice of earthly appointment, except in respect to his 
apostolic office. On the contrary, the Church at Antioch 
ordained Paul and Barnabas and afterwards Paul and 
Silas, to be their representatives and apparently at their 
expense to carry the Message to others. The Antioch 
Church did not ordain the Apostle Paul to be an Apostle, 
but ordained him to be their missionary; and he accepted 
their ordination and rendered reports to them, as the account 
in Acts shows.— Acts 14:26-28. 

(3) Does the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
ever "ordain" ministers or representatives in connection 

with the Harvest Work? 

It does. All the Pilgrims are thus ordained, appointed, 
or set apart for the special work of the ministry. Keep 
in memory always that ceremony is not ordination, but 
that appointment and direction are ordination. The Society 
ordains, authorizes, directs the course of the Pilgrims 
who are its representatives as well as the representatives 
of the Lord and His Word. 

(4) Has the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
the right to withdraw ordination from a Pilgrim brother? 

Yes, surely! If it has the power to appoint and direct, 
it has power also to withdraw its past appointment and 
direction. 

(5) Would the withdrawal of the Society's appointment 
or ordination mean that the Pilgrim thus suspended 
from its service would have no right to preach thereafter? 

Surely not! In withdrawing its appointment from a 
Pilgrim the Society would merely be indicating that for 
some reason it no longer was represented by that Pilgrim, 



and that it no longer was responsible for him or his 
teachings or his conduct or his maintenance. The Pilgrim 
brother thus dropped from the Pilgrim List might 
still be a Brother and be so esteemed by the Society, but 
might not be any longer considered a suitable person to 
represent the Society, either by reason of showing some 
weakness of character or some lack of the aptness to teach 
or some other reason which the Society would believe 
should not be encouraged, or for which it would not wish 
to be held responsible, or for various reasons, illness, etc. 

(6) What is the meaning of V.D.M., and what would 
be signified by the conferring of the V.D.M. Degree? 

The title V.D.M. is a very old one. Indeed, it has 
been out of use so long that comparatively few know its 
meaning. The three letters represent the Latin words, 
Verbi Dei Minister. The English of this is, "Minister 
of the Divine Word." When, during the Dark Ages, the 
Divine Word fell into disuse and creeds were substituted, 
this title was generally lost and ignored. There were no 
ministers of the Divine Word; for the Divine Word was 
not preached, but, instead, the creeds of men. Instead 
of these simple words so expressive of the proper thought 
in connection with all the Lord's public servants, we today 
have high-sounding titles, such as Reverend and 
Doctor of Divinity, which are quite unscriptural. To 
confer the degree of MINISTER OF THE DIVINE WORD would 
not mean to ordain, but merely imply that the Society in 
giving this degree had looked into the reputation, and so 
far as possible into the character and especially into the 
doctrinal development of the person to whom the degree 
was given, and that he was in the estimation of the Examining 
Board found worthy of being called a Minister 
of the Divine Word. 

(7) Are there any such Ministers of the Divine 
Word now? 

Yes, assuredly! Every Pilgrim sent out by the Society 
is sent out as a Minister of the Divine Word, not 
a minister of creeds, nor of "isms"; but purely and simply 
a Minister of the Word of God. And in every case where 
a congregation of the Lord's people has elected a consecrated, 

R5941 : page 247 

spirit-begotten child of God to be an Elder, they 
have by their election ordained, or set apart, or indicated, 
that Elder as being a Minister of the Divine Word— one 
who serves, distributes, dispenses the Truth of God's Word. 

(8) What is the object of the Society in getting out 

a list of questions with the intimation that the person who 
could answer those questions in a manner satisfactory to 
the Society would be considered a MINISTER OF THE 
DIVINE WORD? 

Those questions are designed to fill a long-felt want. 
The questions are quite unsectarian; they are all Scriptural. 
The Society desires to know from the Pilgrims 
who are now in the service, or from any others who may 



at any time represent the Society as Pilgrims, what are 
their thoughts, their sentiments and their understanding 
as respects these fundamental questions appertaining to 
the Gospel of Christ. Any Brother not willing to answer 
those questions would be considered to be confused in his 
mind, unstable, and hence not qualified to teach— not "apt 
to teach." This would not imply that he might not still 
be a Brother, but that he would not be considered a 
Brother suitable for the Pilgrim service. Neither would 
it mean that the Brother must not preach, but merely that 
the Society would not recommend him as an exponent of 
the Divine Word. 

Any Brother willing to answer the questions, but showing 
considerable confusion in his replies, would to us 
indicate that he needed further instruction before he could 
properly represent the Society and what the Society believes 
to be the Truth respecting God's Word. Such a 
Brother would probably be brought to Brooklyn and have 
an opportunity to participate for a time in other features 
of the service, as well as in the Bible Study classes held 
at every meal time; and, by fullest liberty, have an opportunity 
of asking any kind of questions on subjects connected 
with the Truth, that thus the whole matter might 
be thoroughly regulated and clearly seen and understood. 

A FRIENDLY SUGGESTION 

Many of the Sisters in the Bethel Family, learning 
about the questions, made a special request that they 
might have a list of these and give their answers, 
with a view to practise and instruction which they might 
thus derive. Elders and Deacons in various classes have 
similarly requested the questions. We believe that it 
would be profitable for all of the classes of Bible Students 
everywhere, if they would choose to Eldership such as 
could answer these questions so as to be worthy of the 
Society's V.D.M. degree. This might make a good 
many changes amongst the Elders, but we believe that 
they would be profitable changes. Furthermore, we believe 
that all Elders earnestly desiring to teach the Truth, 
and the Truth only, would be glad to have the very assistance 
which these questions would bring to them. 

We have been surprised, sometimes, how careless 
some of the dear friends seem to be in respect to those 
whom they elect or ordain as Elders— often novices, contrary 
to the direction of the Lord's Word, thus doing 
harm both to the novice and to the class. ( 1 Timothy 3: 1-7.) 
Next to the importance of the election of only 
a consecrated, spirit-begotten child of God to Eldership 
should be the question— To what extent has he availed 
himself of the privileges of study, information? It is 
our thought that it is unwise to choose as an Elder any 

R5941 : page 248 

Brother who has not read at least once the entire six 



volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, or who is not a 
regular WATCH TOWER reader. Let it be borne in mind 
that the Society exercises no authority, makes no criticism, 
but merely gives advice; and that in the interest of the 
Lord's Cause and the Lord's people. 



R5941 : page 248 

ST. PAUL'S SORROWS AND JOYS 
-SEPTEMBER 3.-2 CORINTHIANS 1 1:21-33.— 

ST. PAUL THE HERO-HIS LOYALTY, FAITHFULNESS, ENDURANCE 
-HE SUFFERED FOR CHRIST'S SAKE-AND FOR THE BRETHREN'S 
SAKE-IN THAT HE DELIGHTED TO CARRY THE MESSAGE OF 
GOD'S GRACE-WHY THE ENUMERATION OF HIS SUFFERINGS 
IN THIS LESSON-SURELY "A CHOSEN VESSEL!" 

"My grace is sufficient for thee; for My power is 
made perfect in weakness."— 2 Corinthians 12:9. 

WHAT a wonderful man was St. Paul! Doubtless 

the secret of his brilliancy lay in the 

fact that he so fully gave himself up to 

God— to do, not his own will, but the 

Father's will— that the Lord could use him 

as an Apostle, as a mouthpiece, as a servant, 

to a greater extent than He ever used any 

other man, perhaps. In this we are not 

implying that Si. Paul was greater than his 

Master. Our Lord had only three and one -half 

years of service, while St. Paul had a long ministry 

—a long period of service for God and for the Church. 

Besides, it was not possible for the Master to go into the 

details of the Divine Plan; for even His devoted followers, 

including the Apostles, were natural men, who did 

not receive the begetting of the Holy Spirit until Pentecost. 

Hence we read that Jesus' teachings were chiefly 

in parables and dark sayings.— 1 Cor. 2: 14; Matt. 13:10-17. 

On one occasion the Master declared to His disciples, 
"I have many things to tell you, but ye cannot bear them 
now. Howbeit when He, the Spirit of Truth, is come. 
He will guide you into all Truth;. ..and will show 
you things to come." (John 16:12,13.) There were no 
such limitations on St. Paul and the other Apostles. Their 
epistles were addressed to the saints of God in various 
quarters, to whom they wrote freely upon every feature of 
the great subject— the Divine Plan of Salvation. Some 
of their writings were along lines that they declared were 
suitable for "babes" in Christ, and others were "strong 
meat"— the deeper things of the Divine Plan. (Hebrews 5:13,14; 
1 Peter 2: 1-3.) But they wrote only to the 
spirit-begotten, not to the worldly. 

ST. PAUL'S QUALIFICATIONS 



It is not strange that the Adversary was able to stir 
up some little sectarianism even in the primitive Church, 
as St. Paul remarked, criticizing it: Some said that they 
were of Paul; some, that they were of Apollos; some, 
that they were of Peter. (1 Corinthians 1:11-13; 3:1-7.) 
But all such partisan sentiment the Apostle rebuked, reminding 
them that not one of these teachers had died for 
them; and that they should all be Christians, taking none 
other name than that of the Master. This same spirit 
manifested itself otherwise, too. The Apostles needed to 
grow in grace and in knowledge, as well as did the remainder 
of the Household of Faith; and although they 
had special blessings of the Lord, yet they did not all 
have the same length of vision at the same time. 

St. Paul, the most learned of The Twelve, the one 
who took the place of Judas, had naturally the best opportunity 
for breadth of thought. True, as Saul of Tarsus, 
he had showed himself to be very narrow and bigoted 
in his warfare against Christ and His followers. But 
after his eyes of understanding had been opened, and 
after he had become a spirit-begotten New Creature, St. 
Paul manifested a wonderful insight into the things Divine. 
Explaining this insight, he declared that he had 
visions and revelations more than had all the other Apostles 
of the Lord together.— 2 Corinthians 12:1,7, 1 1,12. 

All this was in harmony with what the Lord had said 
respecting him: "He is a chosen vessel unto Me... 
I will show him how great things he must suffer for My 
name's sake." (Acts 9:15,16.) Naturally, the Lord 
could use a well-talented man. a well-educated man. who 
had fully given up his own will, to better advantage than 
He could use an illiterate man; and of some of the remainder 
of the Apostles it is written that even the multitude 
perceived that they were unlearned and ignorant. 
(Acts 4:13.) Not so with St. Paul, however. He had 
education and a wonderful breadth of mind. All the 
spirit-begotten children of God, able to understand the 
deep things of the Bible, are surely amazed at the logic, 
the wisdom and the power of St. Paul's writings! We 
know of nothing in the world that will compare with them. 

Pushed to the front as the Lord's mouthpiece to the 
Gentiles, St. Paul's mind grasped more quickly than did 
the minds of the other Apostles, the things pertaining to 
the New Dispensation; and he perceived that the Gentiles 
were to be fellow-heirs with the Jews in the Kingdom 
privileges. (Ephesians 3:1-12; Colossians 1:25-27.) Naturally, 
some thought that St. Paul was going too far; and 
the argument was raised that he was not one of The 
Twelve, that he was not to be ranked as an Apostle, etc. 

However willing St. Paul might have been to be nothing 
and to let others take their own estimate of him, 
nevertheless he felt a duty toward the Truth. This led 
him to tell us in no uncertain terms that he had full 
proof of his apostleship, and that he was not a whit behind 
the very chiefest of the Apostles in the understanding 



of the Divine Program— yea, that to him more than 
to all the others the Lord had revealed more of those 
things to come of which our Lord Jesus had spoken.— 
John 16:13; 2 Corinthians 1 1:5; Galatians 2:2-10; etc. 

R5942 : page 248 

HIS SUFFERINGS FOR CHRIST 

St. Paul labored hard with the Church at Corinth; 
and to have them fail to make proper progress in the 
Truth because they thought of him as an incompetent 
teacher seemed to him to be a pity. Hence in our lesson 
he is doing what he styles "foolish boasting." He did not 
approve of boasting; and yet for the sake of his hearers, 
he would inform them along certain lines. And how 
glad we are that the Holy Spirit so directed the Apostle, 
that we also may know him better and may fully appreciate 
his loving loyalty to the King of kings and the fact 
that he was the chosen vessel of the Lord for the communication 
of the Truth even to the Household of today! 

But the Apostle did not boast about himself— about his 
talents, about his oratory, about how the people were spellbound, 
about how many people recognized his ability, etc. 
No; he rather would boast of the things which others 
would think to be for his shame. He would tell them 
what God's providence had permitted him to suffer for 
the Truth's sake— scourging, whipping with rods, imprisonment, 
perils of the deep, perils from false brethren, 
perils from the heathen. To him these things were the 

R5942 : page 249 

marks of Divine love and favor, and bore witness also 
that he was a lover of the Lord and His righteousness, 
and that he had been willing to suffer for the Lord's sake, 
for the Truth's sake. 

Thus seen this lesson is a very valuable portion of 
the Word of the Lord. It gives us information which we 
find in no other quarter. It sets before us crisply a picture 
of a soldier of the Cross and what he endured. It 
says to us, "Be thou faithful unto death"— follow in the 
footsteps of Jesus and this noble follower of His— boast 
not in yourself, but in the Lord and in your privileges 
of service in connection with His Truth. 

THE SECRET OF HIS SUCCESS 

By and by will come the time when the noble St. Paul 
and the less prominent of the Lord's followers will all be 
received by Him into eternal glory, and be presented before 
the Father without spot or blemish. (Ephesians 5:25-30.) 
But we may be sure that every one in that 
glorious company will have been a faithful soldier, not a 
deserter, not ashamed of the Lord, not ashamed of His 
Truth. Of such the Master declares that He will not 



be ashamed, but will confess their names before the 
Father and His holy angels.— Matthew 10:32,33. 

The secret of the Apostle's endurance of so great privations— 
scourgings, imprisonments, buffetings of various 
kinds— is presented to us in the words of our Golden 
Text. The Lord's grace was sufficient. The Lord's 
power was made perfect in his weakness. And is this not 
the secret of every successful Christian life? Was it not 
even so of our Master— that the Father's Spirit in Him, 
His reliance upon the Father, and His looking for the 
light of the Father's countenance, were indeed the power 
of God working in our Savior to will and to do the 
Father's good pleasure? 

The same is true with every follower of the Lord since 
His day. The Master truly said to His followers, "Without 
Me ye can do nothing." (John 15:5.) It is the 
Divine Power which operates through our Lord Jesus, 
through the Word of Truth, through the followers of 
Jesus; and this Power can operate in the weakest members 
of the Body of Christ as well as in the strongest. 
The Lord's grace is sufficient for all and for every time 
of need. We are not to forget, however, that this great 
sufficiency is not poured out upon the Lord's people unconditionally, 
but in answer to their appreciation of their 
need and their prayerful request for grace Divine in 
every time of need. 



R5942 : page 249 

THE ARREST OF ST. PAUL 
-SEPTEMBER 10.-ACTS 2 1:27-40.- 

RETURNING FROM THE APOSTLE'S THIRD MISSIONARY TOUR-- 
THE MISSIONARIES CORDIALLY RECEIVED BY THE CHURCH 

AT JERUSALEM-'THE FEAR OF MAN BRINGETH A 
SNARE'-CONCESSION TO PREJUDICE UNSUCCESSFUL-ST. 

PAUL IN DANGER FROM MOB VIOLENCE-THE ROMAN 
GARRISON FROM FORTRESS ANTONIA CALLED OUT-CHRIST'S 
AMBASSADOR MADE A PRISONER-GIVEN AN OPPORTUNITY 
TO WITNESS TO THE TRUTH-SUFFERING FOR CHRIST. 

"Thou shalt be a witness for Him unto all men 
of what thou hast seen and heard."— Acts 22:15. 

WHEN St. Paul and his companions arrived at 
Jerusalem, he was returning from his third 
missionary tour amongst the Gentiles. He 
had been absent for seven years. On his 
way to Jerusalem the Lord had permitted 
forewarnings to reach him, informing him 
that he might expect trouble— bonds and 
imprisonment— in the Holy City. Undeterred, 
however, this noble ambassador 
for Christ and his associates had arrived 



there. They had brought with them money collections 
from the Churches in Asia Minor and Greece for the 
Church at Jerusalem, which apparently was in a measure 
of financial distress. 

Their reception on their arrival was of a private and 
personal character, and they had further manifestations 
of the same loving brotherhood especially noted in our 
Study for August 27. On the following day, which probably 
was Pentecost (Acts 20:16), the Church was called 
together to receive the Apostle and his companions in a 
more formal manner. St. James the Less was apparently 
the recognized leader in the Jerusalem Church. St. Paul 
recounted his experiences during his third missionary tour 
and the Lord's blessing upon his ministrations of the 
Truth, notwithstanding the tribulations permitted. We 
may presume also that at the same time he turned over 
the collections from the Gentile brethren. 

A DISADVANTAGEOUS COMPROMISE 

The brief record indicates that the brethren at Jerusalem 
were considerably perturbed by St. Paul's presence 
with them. Not merely did they fear for his personal 
safety, but they were also alarmed lest his coming might 
stir up persecution against them all; for the Apostle's 
activity and persistency made him well known to the Jews 
in the influential part of the world in which he had been 
laboring. The Jewish custom that the zealously religious 
come frequently to Jerusalem to keep the feasts (Deuteronomy 16: 16) 
brought the Jews in the Holy City into 
touch with the religious interests of the whole world. 

St. James and his associates realized that in all probability 
there might be present at the Pentecostal feast Jews 
from Ephesus, Athens, Corinth, Thessalonica, etc. They 
knew that St. Paul's activities had already been reported; 
and that some, even of the Hebrew Christians, were 
troubled at his reported teachings that the Law was dead 
and that no one was obligated to pay any further attention 
to it. The brethren urged St. Paul to contradict these 
partial misconceptions by going into the Temple and associating 
with some brethren who had taken the Nazarite 
Vow. (Numbers 6:1-21.) They did not suggest that he 
take this vow; but that he be present with these brethren, 
as a recognition of what they did; and that he bear their 
expenses, which included not only the shaving of their 
heads, and the burning of the hair, but also the cost of 
sacrificing for them four animals each. 

Evidently St. James and the leaders of the Church 
understood St. Paul's position properly enough, although 
apparently their minds did not grasp so clearly as did his 
the complete breaking down of "the middle wall of partition" 
which previously had separated Jews from Gentiles, 
nor did they appreciate so fully as he the fact that the 
Law was merely a servant, designed to lead to the School 
of Christ, prepared for the sons of God. 

St. Paul taught the Gentiles that it was not necessary 



for them to become Jews or to obey the Jewish ritual; 
but that instead of looking for Divine favor through the 
types and shadows, they should look to Christ and His 
antitypical fulfilments of the requirements of the Law. 
He taught that the Law could save neither Jew nor Gentile, 
but that only faith in Christ could bring the soul into 
relationship to God. He taught that while certain blessings 
of God yet remained for the Jews (Romans 1 1 :25-29), 

page 250 

yet during this Gospel Age God is selecting a Spiritual 

Seed of Abraham from both Jews and Gentiles. He taught 

that if any one— either Jew or Gentile— attempted to keep 

the Law with a view to thus merit eternal life, such would 

surely fail; for "by the deeds of the Law, shall no flesh 

be justified in God's sight."— Romans 3:20-31; Ephesians 3:1-7; 

Galatians 3:8,16,29. 

ST. PAUL'S COURSE NOT WRONG 

Nothing in all this, however, really interfered with St. 
Paul's doing just what the Elders at Jerusalem urged him 
to do for the four men under the Nazarite Vow. The 
shaving of their heads and the offering of the sacrifices 
demanded by the law which governed their vow interfered 
in no sense of the word with the merit of Christ's 
sacrifice nor attempted to add to it. Nevertheless in our 
judgment a more courageous course might have been 
pursued. Apparently the very method taken to ward off 
public opposition merely served to arouse it. 

Let us not forget, however, that the Lord could have 
overruled the matter differently, had He chosen to do so. 
Let us remember that He foreknew that tribulations would 
assail the Apostle Paul, and had foretold them. Those 
who are in close relationship to the Lord have His assurance 
that all their steps are ordered of Him, and that 
all things shall work together for good to them that love 
God and that have been called according to His Purpose. 
(Psalm 37:23; Romans 8:28.) What a consolation these 
assurances are to all of the Lord's people! It is no 
wonder that such may have quiet, rest and peace, even 
in times of storm and trouble. 

Some one may inquire, "Would it not be a sin for 
the Apostle or other Christians to participate in any 
measure in sacrifice in the Temple? Were not all the 
Jewish sacrifices done away in Christ? 

We answer. Not at all. The sacrifices which pointed 
to Christ, and which He fulfilled, were no longer proper. 
But the sacrifices which the Nazarites offered in connection 
with their vows did not typify Christ's sacrifices, but 
rather the consecration and devotion of the people, the 
antitypes of which will prevail during the Millennium. It 
was therefore not a sin for the Apostle to join in this 
procedure; and yet we doubt the wisdom of his course. 
We incline to think that it was rather a temporizing acknowledgment 



of the dignity of the Jewish Temple and 

its services; whereas by this time the real Temple and 

the real service had been inaugurated. The Church itself 

is the antitypical Temple, in which God lias been present 
by His Holy Spirit ever since Pentecost. 

HIS CONDUCT MISUNDERSTOOD 

For several days the scheme to have St. Paul appear 
as partially endorsing the law seemed to be successful; 
but when the seven days were nearly expired, the Apostle 
was recognized by Jews who had come from Asia. They 
had seen him with Trophimus, a Greek from Ephesus, 
and jumped to the conclusion that the latter was one of 
the four men whose heads were shaved. From the Jewish 
standpoint this would have been a grievous offense; for 
only Jews were permitted to come within the sacred precincts 
of the Temple, outside of which were the Court of 
the Women and also the Court of the Gentiles. These 
two courts were separated by a stone fence, which constituted 
what the Apostle elsewhere alluded to as "the 
middle wall of partition."— Ephesians 2:14. 

This wall was four and one-half feet high, with small 
obelisks at regular intervals, bearing inscriptions which 
read, "No man of alien race is to enter within the balustrade 
and fence that goes around the Temple. If any 
one is taken in the act, let him know that he has himself 
to blame for the penalty of death that follows." St. Paul 
was charged with this offense, and not the Greek who 
was supposed to have been misled by the Apostle. It was 
on this score that St. Paul's life was in danger from the 
mob which speedily gathered at the cry of the Asiatic 
Jews that the Temple was being profaned. 

While the mob was beating the Apostle, seeking to 
kill him, Claudius Lysias, the chief captain, or colonel, of 
the Roman cohort which formed the garrison in the Castle 
Antonia, close by the Temple, became aware of the tumult 
and hurried to the scene with a company of soldiers. 
Immediately the beating ceased; for although the Jews 
had not learned to respect the majesty of the Roman law, 
they had become amenable to its military forces. 

The Apostle was chained by each arm to a soldier. 
The colonel endeavored to ascertain the cause of the 
tumult, but was unable to understand the conflicting testimonies. 
Therefore he remanded the prisoner to the 
castle. But the mob, disappointed because they had lost 
the opportunity of taking St. Paul's life, made a mad 
rush to get him from the soldiers or to kill him outright. 
The oncoming of the mob led the soldiers to press against 
one another in order not to lose their prisoner. As a 
result the Apostle was lifted off his feet and carried by 
the soldiers up the stairway. 

PERMISSION TO PREACH GRANTED HIM 

The courage of this ambassador of Christ and his 



readiness to take advantage of every opportunity to tell 

the Message of his Master were here wonderfully exemplified. 

We might have supposed that the beating which 

he had received from the mob, together with the more or 

less rough treatment which he had undergone in getting 

to the castle door, would have cowed him with fear and 

excitement. But on the contrary he was cool and collected. 

Calmly he asked the commandant to grant him 

the privilege of speaking to the people. Doubtless he 

intimated that they had misunderstood what he was 

doing, and that a few words from him might pacify them. 

The Roman officer was astonished; for the Apostle 
spoke Greek fluently. He had thought that St. Paul was 
"that Egyptian," mentioned by the historian Josephus, who 
had a short time before gathered a large body of discontented 
Jews, to whom he had represented himself as Messiah 
and who, as his followers, had given the Roman 
authorities considerable trouble. St. Paul answered that 
he was a Jew of an honorable city, and again asked the 
privilege of addressing the people, which was granted. 



R5943: page 251 

THE MESSIANIC REIGN 

"Lo! in the clouds of Heaven appears 

God's well-beloved Son. 
He brings a train of brighter years, 

His Kingdom is begun. 
He comes a guilty world to bless 
With mercy, truth and righteousness. 

"O Father! haste the promised hour 

When at His feet shall lie 
All rule, authority and power 

Beneath the ample sky; 
When He shall reign from pole to pole, 
The Lord of every ransomed soul; 

"When all shall heed the words He said. 

Amid their daily cares. 
And by the loving life He led. 

Shall strive to pattern theirs. 
When He who conquered death shall win 
The mightier conquest over Sin." 



R5942: page 251 

ST. PAUL A PRISONER IN THE CASTLE 
-SEPTEMBER 17.-ACTS 22:17-29.- 

PREACHING THE GOSPEL OF CHRIST-THE MOB ENRAGED AGAIN- 



COLONEL LYSIAS IN PERPLEXITY ORDERS THE ROMAN 
SOLDIERS TO BEAT ST. PAUL-THE APOSTLE THEREUPON 
DECLARES HIS CITIZENSHIP-LESSONS FROM HIS EXPERIENCES- 
SUFFERING FOR CHRIST A MARK OF DIVINE 
FAVOR-BITTERNESS AND SELFISHNESS REACT UPON 
THOSE WHO CHERISH SUCH SENTIMENTS. 

"He is my Refuge and my Fortress; my 
God, in Him will I trust. "--Psalm 91:2. 

OUR last Study left St. Paul standing before 

the mob and motioning for silence, in order 

that he might address them. Doubtless he 

considered his thrilling experiences well 

compensated for by the privilege of that 

moment— the privilege of telling a large 

concourse of his countrymen about Jesus. 

Promptly the Apostle preached Christ— that 

Jesus of Nazareth was the Messiah promised 

in the Law and the Prophets, that His 

sacrificial death constituted the Redemption Sacrifice for 

Father Adam's forfeited life and, incidentally, for all of 

Adam's children, who died under his curse. 

Surely also St. Paul declared that Messiah was calling 
a spiritual class to be His associates in His Millennial 
Kingdom, and that shortly Israel and all the nations would 
experience the privileges and blessings of that Kingdom! 
Surely he pointed out the fact that this Gospel Age is 
the acceptable time in which to make our calling and 
election sure to the chiefest part of the Abrahamic 
Covenant— the spiritual phase! Then he proceeded to 
tell his audience about his missionary tours. He declared 
that many of the Gentiles were gladly receiving this Message 
and giving their hearts to the Lord in consecration. 

THE GOSPEL MESSAGE REJECTED 

But so strong was the Jewish prejudice that the mere 
mention of the fact that this great blessing was going upon 
equal terms to the Gentiles re-kindled the flame of hatred 
and violence; and their shouts and jeers rent the air. 
Perplexed at the situation, the Roman commandant concluded 
that where there was so much opposition there 
must be some cause for it. Thereupon he gave orders 
that the Apostle be whipped until he confessed what he 
had done to create such a tumult. 

At once the command began to be carried out by the 
soldiers, who proceeded to tie St. Paul to the whipping-post. 
But the Apostle brought the proceedings to a quick 
termination by inquiring of a centurion who stood by, 
"Is it lawful for you to scourge a man that is a Roman 
and uncondemned?" When the centurion heard the question, 
he reported the matter to the colonel, who came and 
questioned the Apostle. He took St. Paul's word for it 
that he was a Roman citizen; for to have made an untruthful 
claim to citizenship would have meant sure death 



as soon as the matter had been investigated. The Apostle 
was held a prisoner for trial. 

"THE DARKNESS HATETH THE LIGHT" 

Matters are somewhat the same today, although on a 
different plane. A worldly person, on hearing some sectarian 
Christian animadvert against some one who has been 
preaching the true Gospel of Christ would be inclined to 
suppose that the Message must contain something very 
vicious, very terrible indeed; else it would not so arouse 
those who have outwardly so much "form of godliness." 
And if, as in the case of the Roman officer, an audience 
be granted, and the Truth be presented in the hearing of 
the worldly person, he cannot understand it. 

The reason for this is that "the world by wisdom 
knows not God," knows little of His Plan, understands 
little of His Word; for its language is different from 
that to which they are accustomed. When then, after a 
presentation of the Truth, the worldly find bitter opposition 
and invective against it on the part of religious 
teachers— modern Scribes, Pharisees and Doctors of Divinity— 
we must not be surprised if they are the more 
inclined to side with those who represent popular theology 
—so-called "orthodoxy"— and assume that the true Gospel 
must be something very evil, because taught by so 
few and opposed by so many of influence. 

Nevertheless, it is for God's children to take the 
Apostle for their guide, and to be faithful to use every 
opportunity to let the light shine forth, even though it 
arouse the bitter opposition, prejudice and persecution of 
darkness. Our Lord's explanation of the matter is that 
"every one that doeth evil hateth the light, neither cometh 
to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved." (John 3:19-21.) 
Nothing seemed to incite the Scribes and 
Pharisees of eighteen centuries ago so much as did the 
reasonableness of the true Gospel. The common people 
heard it gladly, unless intimidated by their religious rulers, 
and were led to doubt those who had been teaching them 
to the contrary. Hence the religious rulers were incensed 
against the Gospellers. "They were grieved because they 
[the Apostles] TAUGHT THE PEOPLE."-Acts 4:2,3,15-21. 

LESSONS FROM THE APOSTLE'S EXPERIENCES 

St. Paul was suffering as a Christian— because of 
loyalty to the Lord and to His Word. He was not suffering 
because he had followed the admonitions of the 
brethren in going into the Temple; for very evidently the 
hatred against them in the hearts of their enemies would 
sooner or later have manifested itself, and they would 
have sought the Apostle's life, as on previous occasions. 
In this incident we merely see that the attempt of the 
Apostles to create a favorable impression toward the 
Apostle Paul and his work amongst the Gentiles probably 
brought the matter of his arrest more quickly to the front 



than any other course would have done. 

The Apostle was not ashamed of his sufferings; for 
he realized that they were endured for Christ's sake. Any 
individual should feel deeply pained at a public arrest and 
imprisonment as a felon, as a violator of the law. But 
when these things are experienced because of faithfulness 
to the Lord, because of following in His footsteps, such 
may well rejoice in the ignominy, rejoice in the things 
which otherwise would be shameful and detestable. 

If therefore, in the Lord's providence, arrest or imprisonment 
or scourging should come to any who read 
this article, and they can directly or indirectly trace their 
tribulation to faithfulness to the Lord and to His Truth, 
let them not be ashamed. Let them glorify God on this 
behalf, rejoicing that they are accounted worthy to suffer 
for the name of Christ, and remembering that even thus 
also was it with our Lord Jesus Himself. He was placed 
under arrest; He was bound; He was scourged; He was 
publicly insulted; He was even crucified as a blasphemer 
against God.— 1 Peter 4: 16. 

Another lesson which we may learn from today's Study 
is that it is not wise to trust too implicitly the voice of 
the multitude. If we find the rabble shouting against any 
one, whether orally or through the press, we should not 
unquestioningly accept their verdict. We should remember 
the experiences of our Lord Jesus, the experiences of 
St. Paul and of the other Apostles, and recall that the 
multitude cried out, "Away with them!" The Christian 
whose mind is thus relieved of prejudice is the better prepared 
to judge wisely respecting whatever may properly 

R5942 : page 252 

come under his observation or criticism. Then, if he 
should have similar experiences himself, he will be the 
better prepared to endure them. 

Still another lesson for us is that when undergoing 
trials and difficulties, however much we realize that they 
could not come to us without the Lord's permission, nevertheless 
we are at liberty to use any legitimate means for 
our own deliverance— even as St. Paul took advantage of 
his Roman citizenship. God had provided him in advance 
with that measure of protection; and it would have been 
culpable negligence on his part not to use it, and to expect 
the Lord to deliver him in some miraculous manner. 

How often we find in the pages of history that violence 
and unreason have been manifested in the name of religion 
and for the defense of various sects! How utterly foreign 
to all such conduct is what St. Paul designates "the spirit 
of a sound mind"— the spirit of reason, justice— not to 
mention the spirit of generosity, loving-kindness and 
tender mercy! As the sight of the foolishness and the 
brutishness of a drunken person should act as a great 
temperance lesson in every right-minded man and woman, 
so such a scene as this depicted in today's Study, whether 
recognized by our natural eyes or mentally seen through 



the printed page, should be a lasting lesson against anything 
so brutish and unreasonable. Let every instance of 
religious bigotry and fanatical violence speak to our hearts 
a lesson in the opposite direction, and fix in us resolutions 
that by the grace of God we will never be thus foolish, 
thus wicked, but contrariwise will become the more gentle, 
the more kind, the more Christ-like, as the days go by. 



R5943 : page 252 

THE DIVINE SCROLL-WHO IS WORTHY TO LOOK THEREIN? 
"Who is worthy?"— Revelation 5:2. 

THE words of our text are a part of the proclamation 

represented as being made throughout 

Heaven: "Who is worthy to open the 

Book [the Scroll], and to loose the seals 

thereof?" The Book in this case seems 

symbolically not to represent the Bible, but 

the Divine Plan, with its times and seasons. 

The Bible is indeed a record, but God had 

the Plan before the Bible was written. He 

had this Plan from the very beginning. He 

had not disclosed it to the angels— not even to the Logos. 

Nor did He disclose its time features fully to our Lord 

Jesus while He was in the flesh. And after His resurrection 

Jesus spoke of these times and seasons as things 

"which the Father hath put in His own power."— Acts 1:7. 

The fact that God had a Plan relating to the fallen 
race had been intimated to Abraham. God had declared 
to Abraham unconditionally that He would bless the world 
of mankind. He also pointed out later in the types and 
shadows of the Law certain features of the way by which 
He would bless the world. He declared that there would 
be a Redeemer; but who the Redeemer would be was kept 
a secret. Although both angels and men desired to know 
they were not permitted the knowledge. The Prophets 
spoke by inspiration some things concerning this Redeemer, 
but they knew not the meaning thereof. 

In due time the Logos was sent forth. He was a 
loyal Son before He was sent. He undertook to do the 
Father's will, not yet knowing what it would cost to be 
the Messiah; for God had kept these things secret. He 
manifested His faith. His trust. He delighted to do the 
Father's will, even to the taking of a lower nature. And 
so He humbled Himself from the glorious condition in 
which He was and took upon Himself the human nature, 
became a man— a perfect man, not a sinful man. Our 
Lord did this in order to carry out the great Program 
which the Father had in His own mind and which He had 
not revealed to any other. 

When Jesus reached the age of thirty years, the earliest 
age at which He could present Himself to God, under 
the Law, He went to Jordan and made a consecration of 



Himself with the determination to do everything that was 

in the Father's Plan— everything that typically and prophetically 

had been written in the Holy Scriptures concerning 

Himself. "Lo, I come (in the volume of the Book 

it is written of Me) to do Thy will, O God"; "I delight 

to do Thy will, O My God; yea. Thy Law is within My 

heart," were His heart expressions, as recorded.— Hebrews 10:7,9; 

Psalm 40:6-8. 

This was our Lord's consecration. His human nature 
became His sacrifice. He laid down His life. He did not 
finish laying it down at Jordan; but so far as His will 
was concerned, it was given there. He there became the 
Priest, the great High Priest, His flesh being typed by 
the bullock of sin-offering, sacrificed on Israel's yearly 
day of Atonement. During the three and a half years 
of His ministry He carried out this sacrifice satisfactorily. 
And everything that the Father had given Him 
to do was finished at the Cross. 

THE DEEP THINGS UNFOLDED AT JORDAN 

Our Lord Jesus received the anointing of the Holy 
Spirit when He came up out of the water at His baptism. 
Then the heavens were opened unto Him. The 
higher things which He had not previously understood 
became clear. The Scriptures were unfolded to His view. 
He knew that He was going up to Jerusalem to be crucified. 
He knew that He would be betrayed by one of His 
chosen disciples, and He knew which of them would be 
the betrayer. He knew these things because He had 
been begotten of the Holy Spirit and accepted of God as 
a Son on the Divine plane. 

During these three and a half years He was the Messiah, 
the Sent of God. He was the Lion of the Tribe of 
Judah. He had sacrificed His will, but this was not sufficient. 
God wished Him to sacrifice not only His will, but 
actually to lay down His human life. And God purposed 
to prove Him by certain crucial tests. So He was 
"tempted in all points like as we are; yet without sin." 
When all His testings were completed at His death on the 
Cross, God gave Him a name to which all should bow, 
both in Heaven and in earth. 

Here the words of our text find their answer. The 
inquiry compassed the period from before Jesus came into 
the world up to His resurrection from the grave. God 
had given the most honorable One of all the host of 
Heaven the first opportunity to prove His worthiness to 
loose the Scroll of God's great Plan, and to fulfil its 
provisions. He was given this opportunity because, as the 
First-born of Jehovah, He had the right to the first privilege 
of service. And He did not allow the privilege to 
go by. He accepted it. He was faithful. He humbled 
Himself to human nature, and thus He became the Lion 
of the Tribe of Judah, of which tribe He was born as a 
man. He did not have this title in His position as Logos. 
It was as the Son of Mary that He was the Lion of the 



Tribe of Judah, the Root of David. 

PROCLAIMED WORTHY BY THE ANGELS 

Our Lord's worthiness was not then proven. It was 
not until He cried with His dying breath, "It is finished!" 
that the demonstration was complete. All the way down 

R5943 : page 253 

from Adam to Jesus no one had been found worthy to 
open the great Scroll. But Jesus was now found worthy. 
Speaking in vision of the three and a half years during 
which our Lord is represented as slain, John the Revelator 
says, "I beheld and lo, a freshly slain Lamb!" And 
the voices of myriads of angels were heard proclaiming, 
"Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive power, 
and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and 
glory, and blessing!"— Revelation 5:12. 

Jesus had not proven Himself worthy of this great 
honor when He made His consecration, but when He had 
finished His course in death He was then worthy to receive 
glory, honor and power. After His resurrection 
and ascension the Scroll was given into His hands to be 
opened. This means that the Divine Plan as a whole 
was here made known to Him— for He already had knowledge 
of much of this— but all things were given Him to 
unloose. There had been some things that our Lord did 
not know. He had said, "Of that day and hour [of His 
Second Coming] knoweth no man; no, not the angels in 
Heaven, nor the Son, but My Father only." (Mark 13:32.) 
A part of the Plan was written on the outside 
of the Scroll, and a part was written on the inside. The 
things that were sealed were not proper to be understood 
by our Redeemer until He had received the all-power, after 
His resurrection. The execution of God's Plan was then 
given into His hands. 

GRADUAL OPENING OF THE SEALS 

The opening of the seals has progressed during all the 
Gospel Age. The whole Plan of God is represented in 
this Book— the Scroll. It has required all of the present 
Age and will require all of the next Age to complete the 
Plan. The Plan of God includes the "Restitution of all 
things spoken." We are now able to see these wonderful 
things and to tell about them, because each of the seals 
as it has been opened has made the Plan a little clearer. 
We may suppose that the Lord Jesus was made aware of 
all its features after His ascension to the presence of 
Jehovah. We who are God's people are seeking to know 
these things more and more fully. The Master declared 
that as the Father revealed them unto Him, so would He 
reveal them unto us; but this revelation has been gradual, 
as the successive seals have been broken. 

Brethren, beloved in Christ, realizing that our God 



has hitherto counted us worthy to look upon the wondrous 
Scroll of His great Plan, which has been unsealed for 
us by Jesus our Lord, let us continue to prove ourselves 
worthy to look therein and to comprehend the glorious 
things of His Word, by faithfulness, obedience and loyalty 
to this Plan in everything! Let our appreciation continually 
increase for our wondrous privilege in being permitted 
to share this blessed ministry of bearing Divine 
Truth to other hungry hearts, that they also may rejoice 
in the Lord and in the power of His might! 



R5944 : page 253 

NORFOLK CONVENTION A SUCCESS 

WE HAD hoped for a thousand Bible Students at 

the Norfolk, Va., Convention, but had a splendid 

season of refreshment with the approximately 

six hundred (625) who did attend. 

After all, it is not numbers, but soul-fellowship 

which makes a Convention a success. 

And when it is remembered that this season 

twelve General Conventions have been provided, 

instead of one as formerly, it is not 

surprising that the attendance at each is considerably 

less. Besides we have had scores of 

One -Day Conventions. One effect of this scattering 

the Conventions is that many dear Bible Students have 

been privileged to attend a Bible Students' Convention for 

the first time. Their soul-satisfaction, their spiritual joy overflows 

from eyes and lips. Truly we are having times of 

refreshing— spiritual! 

Norfolk has been no exception to the rule. The Lord met 
with His people! It was good to be there! We knew this 
before our arrival— from letters and post-cards, saying, 
"The best yet," "the best ever," etc. But it is always so to 
the spiritually minded and grateful hearted children of God. 

The Program was faithfully carried out on the different 
days as follows: 

Saturday, July 22 "Enrollment Day" 

Sunday, " 23 "Our Captain" 

Monday, " 24 "Soldiers of Christ" 

Tuesday, " 25 "Our Warfare" 

Wednesday, " 26 "Our Sacrifices" 

Thursday, " 27 "Our Triumph" 

Friday, " 28 "Our Peace" 

Saturday, " 29 "Our Home" 

Sunday, " 30 "Our Government" 

Pilgrim Brothers Burgess, MacMillan, Graham, Thornton, 
Meggison, Barber, Thorn, Wright, Herr, Toole and Johnson 
gave addresses on the topics named. Brothers Baeuerlein and 
Meggison served acceptably as Chairmen. 



The Editor conducted a Question Meeting and had a children's 
Consecration Service on the 29th, and on Sunday the 
30th closed the Convention with an address, on "Jehovah's 
Government," and a Love Feast. Then came the service for 
the public at 3 p.m., topic, "The World on Fire." About 1,300 
were present. 



R5944 : page 253 

OUR VOW UNTO THE LORD 

BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

It is on my mind to write you respecting some of the 
experiences I am having with The Vow. Long ago I reported 
to you my own experiences therewith. Whatever mistake 
I once made in respect to resisting The Vow God long 
ago overruled for my good, and it seems has since blessed 
the experiences to the good of some others. For no one can 
think of an objection to The Vow which the Devil had not 
previously suggested to my mind. 

Recently an intelligent brother and sister were hesitating 
to take The Vow because, as they said, they were afraid they 
could not keep it inviolate. I pointed out that God does not 
expect anything unreasonable, though He will not accept less 
than our best efforts. They saw the point, and both took 
The Vow immediately. 

In commending The Vow, I show that the Lord had manifestly 
directed you in formulating it. I note the seven 
clauses, and call attention to the fact that seven in Scripture 
usage is a designation of completeness, perfection. I point 
out that this could not have just "happened," any more than 
you "happened" to write THE STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. 

I next show The Vow is made to the Heavenly Father, 
and not to Brother Russell in any sense, and is but a reiteration, 
an emphasis, of our original vow of consecration— "Thy 
will be done in my mortal body." It is all expressed there. 
The special designations you use are but reminders of this 
all-important thought— "Thy will be done in my mortal body," 
and any who do not want the Lord's will done in their mortal 
bodies should never have covenanted to that effect in the 
beginning. Surely every consecrated child of God desires 
that the Heavenly Father's rule should "come into his heart 
more and more," and that the Divine will should have a 
sanctifying influence upon his life constantly! 

I do not neglect to lay stress upon the fact that the Adversary 
of God does not want the Heavenly Father's will done 
in our "mortal bodies," and the reason therefor; while in 
The Vow is a condensation of many texts of Scripture given 
us for the express purpose of helping us into the Kingdom. 
I sometimes thus contrast the work of the "two Masters." 

Furthermore, I endeavor to point the attention of the dear 
friends to the solid Scriptural basis upon which the entire 
structure rests, the foundation for every thought embraced 
in The Vow. In extreme cases I present many texts to this 



intent. Sometimes their eyes open with surprise when they 
finally see how simple the whole matter is, yet how 
incontrovertible! 

Frequently I ask upon whose strength they relied when 
they made their vow of consecration; then remind them that 
while the arm of flesh will fail, The Everlasting Arm, never. 
So in the strength of the Lord is this Vow to be taken, keeping 

R5944 : page 254 

before their minds the fact of Satan's activity, his 

stealth, his wiles, his purpose to deceive. Then I further ask 

what disadvantage could possibly come to any one from a 

firm resolve to be more "on the alert to resist" every encroachment 

of sin, the influence of Satan, and suggest that 

the only "reasonable way" to combat these is the Divinely-appointed 

way. 

All must agree that they would be greatly assisted in 
developing a Christlike character by "more carefully scrutinizing 
their thoughts and words and doings," and that a firm 
resolve to do this, a vow to do so, of necessity must be assistful 
in attaining the desired end. The All-seeing Eye 
notes everything, even our very thoughts. To stand approved, 
I point out, we must have assistance. Through The 
Vow, this is pledged in a very special sense— "Ask and ye 
shall receive." In The Vow we are in the strictest sense 
asking in advance for "help in time of need." for protection 
from "the snares of the fowler," while vowing that we will 
be on the "alert" against these. 

In the final analysis, what can be found against The Vow? 
Absolutely nothing— save the objections aroused by Satan, 
who is the Adversary of God, the Opponent of Righteousness, 
the enemy of Truth, the railer against purity, the hater of 
everything good. Praise the Lord for The Vow! Surely 
none has ever taken it in the right spirit without realizing that 
increased blessings have come to his own head and heart! 

May God bless you richly for this, as well as for all other 
features of your great labor of love! Truly, God is with 
you! O how keenly do I realize this, and how deeply do I 
appreciate the fact! My heart is filled with gratitude, thrilled 
with joy, by every evidence of the Heavenly Father's loving 
provisions for our every need. Verily, I am amazed at Divine 
goodness to us-ward! 

Your humble brother, by His grace, W. M. WISDOM. 



R5944 : page 254 

INTERESTING LETTERS 

A VOICE FROM LONDON OFFICE 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

My love towards the Father, Our Lord, His blessed Truth 
and you His servant increases as time advances. (Philippians 1:3,4.) 



I am indeed grateful for the Truth, and do not 

know just how to express my thankfulness. It is the one 

thing worth living for. 

Speaking particularly of the share in the great Harvest 
work on this side of the Atlantic, which it has been my joy 
to participate in, let me remind you that when the DRAMA 
work in London closed down, it was arranged that half my 
lime would be spent on Pilgrim work: this continued for just 
a year, when the preparation of the Debenture Bonds on the 
one hand and the opening up of the conscription question on 
the other, so encroached upon my time that I have made no 
journeys since the middle of April. The Military Service 
Act, and its application, has proved to be so complex and 
difficult of comprehension that the office here has perforce become 
quite an inquiry bureau, and the work is in my hands, 
although I consult freely with my colleagues over matters 
of importance, and all correspondence is open for their inspection. 
You will find enclosed a copy of a petition which has 
just been sent to Premier Asquith with 5,500 signatures. 
This was arranged for to meet an evident call on the part of 
the brethren generally. There are probably 50 brethren in 
detention at the present time; with this you will find a list 
of those known to us who are consistently refusing to obey 
Military commands and are suffering more or less severely 
in consequence. As the Act has now been extended to include 
married men of military age (18 to 40), it will affect 
many more of our brethren in the immediate future. 

As we have no Pilgrim Brother now, this department is 
very quiet; it would be nice to know what you think about 
this, in view of the peculiar times we live in. Brother Smedley 

R5945 : page 254 

does a journey now and again as he can afford it, and 
Brother Hemery has just completed a trip in Scotland; this 
is the only trip he has taken for some months. Brother 
Crawford cannot spare the time from the Office, as he has 
many details to look after, and is short of help at times. 

The Newspaper Department is reduced to one Brother 
now— Brother Cormack; there are just over 30 papers publishing 
the Sermons at the present time. It is quite likely that 
this number will be greatly reduced shortly owing to the increasingly 
high price of paper. 

The foregoing are the Departments under my special care 
at present. Seeing, however, that Brother Hart is leaving 
us for India, the DRAMA work will be added, I presume, 
although this is only a small matter just now, only one exhibition, 
apart from Scotland, being in hand. 

The easing off of the DRAMA, and the losing of our 
Brothers on account of the Military Act, has affected the output 
of Volumes seriously. The Volunteer work progresses 
satisfactorily on the whole, but the question of paper is a 
serious difficulty. The Class Extension work is proving satisfactory 
in London, but little is moving elsewhere. We are by 
no means busy in the office apart from the Military question. 

The Tabernacle congregation continues satisfactory— I 



would think possibly 250 to 300 mornings and 450 to 550 at 
night. Many of the brethren would enjoy a wider range of 
speakers. There seems rather a tendency to form Sunday 
meetings within the area formerly reserved to the Tabernacle; 
not within one hour's journey, however. This movement probably 
arises partly on account of traveling expenses and partly 
to the dark streets at night, for no lights are allowed on our 
streets now and every window must be screened. The question 
naturally arises whether these gatherings would not better 
be separate Ecclesias, for the members thus in attendance 
range from 50 to 150. I do not know whether this question 
has been brought before you or not. There are 19 Elders 
at the Tabernacle now and nearly 60 Deacons. 

The working staff consists of six Brothers and daughter 
Bertha, who does my stenographic work again. The housekeeping 
department consists of five Sisters, including Brother 
Hemery's mother. At the present time there are 12 of us 
sleeping in the house, which includes my eldest son, who 
will be going abroad as a Cable telegraphist shortly. Sister 
Shearn with Daisy and Joe are down at Ealing, an hour's 
run, where I have taken a furnished cottage for six months. 

Am glad to hear that the work continues to progress satisfactorily 
in America. The conditions amongst the people 
here show signs of a change— not particularly by way of opposition 
of the Truth, but of affairs altogether different to the 
immediate past, which all thinking people can see. 

Bertha joins me in fond love to you and to all the beloved 
brethren with you. We pray always for you all that 
the peace of God continue to guard your hearts until we 
see His face! 

Your brother in His service, H.J. SHEARN. 



FROM A FORMER MINISTER TO A FRIEND 



DEAR BROTHER 



Your encouraging and much appreciated letter of 20th inst. 
was received today. It is gratifying to know that there are 
some scattered over the country everywhere who are witnesses 
to the TRUTH, and of course, I suppose it is natural 
to appreciate a word of sympathy and encouragement. 

In common with yourself I certainly feel that I am to be 
congratulated upon the gracious fact that God, in the abundance 
of His mercy and goodness, has permitted the light of 
TRUTH to shine in and dispel what I now clearly perceive to 
have been the grossest of ignorance on my part. The thing 
that puzzles me is the fact that I have been a fairly close 
Bible student for the past fifteen years, and have always tried 
to maintain an open attitude of mind to the Truth at all 
times, and yet failed to grasp the CENTRAL and FUNDAMENTAL 
truths of God's great Plan for blessing all the 
families of the earth, for surely this is in full accord with 
what we might most reasonably expect from "the God of all 
grace"! There are only two possible solutions to the problem 
so far as I can see, and it may be that they are not two. 



but one; viz.: That I have always read the Bible with a 
preconceived idea of what the Bible taught, and thus read 
a meaning into the Bible that was really not there; or that 
the time had not till recently come when God intended me to 
get the whole Truth; and as I have intimated, I built up the 
wall against a right understanding of the Scriptures, and 
God had His own time for removing it. 

With reference to your other congratulation upon the 
stand I have taken, I fear that I must disagree with you so 
far as to say that I do not think I could possibly claim any 
credit for taking a stand for the Truth when I have, in the 
ultimate sense, EVERYTHING to gain by so doing, and NOTHING 
of importance to lose thereby. It is true that I have lost the 
esteem and support of many whom I had considered Christian 
people, and also my position in the Baptist Church. But 
like St. Paul I consider all things well lost for Christ's sake. 

I had hoped that the reputation I have enjoyed for ordinary 
intelligence, firmness and freedom from fanaticism, together 

with the influence I have gained in , and especially in my 

own congregation after three years of association with them, 

R5945 : page 255 

would have gained me a hearing and have given me the opportunity 

of placing not only the Truth, but the Bible evidence 

of that Truth before my people and led them to investigate for 

themselves, and that I should have the privilege of leading my 

whole congregation into the glorious light of God's ONE 

PLAN, but it seems that it is not to be so, as my resignation 

has already been requested, and I shall tender the same on 

next Monday evening to take effect at any time that the church 

may choose. But I thank the Lord that in the three weeks 

that I have been permitted to present these things, I can 

even now see some of the seed germinating and rapidly taking 

root that shall in the near future produce a goodly "mustard 

stalk" in whose branches the dove of peace may find lodging. 

I find that so long as I was a "sound Baptist" I was quite 
an authority among them, but now I am just a common 
"Russellite" in their estimation, and not worthy of a hearing, 
so I am requested to resign and get out. I fully realize that 
when I am put out of this church for "heresy" the doors of 
every church in this denomination— as well as those of all 
of the others— are firmly closed against me. Well, so be it! 
I remember that Christ and His Apostles were thrust out 
of the synagogues for preaching the Truth, so I will be in 
good company, even though I shall probably, like St. Paul, be 
obliged to "make tents" for a living, and preach the GOOD 
NEWS from "Mars Hill." 

One thing I will do before I go, not through spite or ill 
feeling— for the Lord knows I pity rather than scourge— but 
rather in vindication of the Truth, I will force this congregation 
to either excommunicate me from their fellowship 
or to acknowledge that I am right in the things I have proclaimed. 
Like St. Paul, if I am beaten publicly and thrust 
into prison, I will not be taken out privately, but let them 
"come and fetch me out." I will do this, NOT for any personal 



reason, but PURELY upon the ground that I believe the time 
is ripe to take every opportunity that is legitimately offered for 
calling attention to Bible Truth so long left covered by the 
dust of Romish error and traditions. 

One thing I am determined upon, I WILL NOT preach again 
the vile slander against my Lord that the doctrine of eternal 
torture heaps upon His HOLY NAME; no, not for $600.00 a 
month, much less for the paltry $60.00 I have been getting. 
And no more will I hold my peace on the GOOD NEWS of God's 
Plan of Ransom and Restitution, though I have to preach it 
on the street corners and from public halls. This is my determination. 
May the Heavenly Father grant me the grace 
and strength to execute it. Pray for me to that end, and 
"that utterance may be given unto me, that I may open 
my mouth boldly, to make known the mystery of the Gospel; 
for which I am an ambassador in bonds; that therein I may 
speak boldly, as I ought to speak." 

I cannot properly express my gratitude to good Bro. 

for his interest on my behalf in presenting me with a set 
of the STUDIES. 

Again thanking you for your hearty words of encouragement 
and fellowship in the Truth, I trust always to remain 

Your brother in Christ, . 



OBJECTORS SING, "STAND UP, STAND UP FOR JESUS!" 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

We read with special delight this morning in June 1 
WATCH TOWER your recapitulation of those wonderful events 
in the years when the Lord graciously provided "line upon 
line" of the basis of what we now know as the Truth. It 
does our hearts good to ponder over these things and examine 
our foundations again and find they are rock-bed ones 
and immovable. As we read the details we take fresh encouragement 
in the hope that the Lord is yet going to show 
further developments through the same channel. We trust so. 

A new phase of experience has been entered into in this 
country— an experience specially trying to the younger members 
of the "Body," many of whom are undergoing terms of 
imprisonment with more or less of hard labor. Many a 
mother's heart is wrung with the severity with which her 
loved lads are treated; yet we hear from these same lads 
glowing accounts of the goodness and faithfulness of our 
Father and barely a hint of complaint, although we know 
they are sorely tried. One contingent (a day or two since, 

R5946 : page 255 

numbering about forty) were marched away from the camp 
where they had been detained pending court-martial, to prison. 
There were only four or five of our brethren among these, 
the remainder being moral objectors, and our brethren describe 
them as a splendid lot of fellows. Educated and professional 
men along with honest, hard toilers were thus 



thrown together, and on one point wholly sympathetic and 
determined. As they passed through the Camp they unitedly 
sang, "Stand up, stand up for Jesus!" It was almost dramatic, 
"And e'en the ranks of Tuscany 
Could scarce forbear to cheer." 

In fact, some of the regular soldiers did cheer them and 
numbers, we are told, confessed admiration. Many STUDIES 
have been gotten out, too, among warders, jailers, constables, 
officers and men, as a result of contact with these few "voices 
in the wilderness." To see the courage and fealty exhibited 
by these young brethren causes us a deal of heart-searching 
and magnifies intensely our own failures and constant slips. 
While they have opportunities for service thrust on them, 
we seem to have a barren existence and a diminished activity. 
We are praying that the Lord may show His hand and thus 
lead us more fully than ever into the light. We are ever 
with you in Spirit. 

Yours in the dear Lord, F. GUARD, SR.-London. 



"V.D.M." QUESTIONS FOUND PROFITABLE 

MY DEAR BROTHER AND PASTOR:- 

Please find enclosed the "V.D.M." Questions and my 
answers to the same. This is the most searching test that 
I have ever undergone; and I am truly thankful to you and 
our Heavenly Father for the "Refiner's Fire and the Fuller's 
Soap." (Malachi 3:2.) I doubt not that the Heavenly 
Father directed your mind in the compilation of these questions; 
and the great desire of my heart is, that I have been 
able to interpret correctly the thought of the questions. 

These questions, dear Brother, have surely come at an 
opportune time; for many of the friends and even some of 
the Pilgrims are becoming greatly confused upon some of 
the points. Notwithstanding all that you have written elucidating 
these subjects, many are unable to properly divide and 
express your teaching on justification and its two features- 
consecration, sanctification (our part and God's part). 
Also many are becoming confused upon the subject of the 
Mediator of the New Covenant, teaching that the Church 
will not share this office with her Lord. 

The little "truth" newspapers, booklets, periodicals, etc., 
are in great measure responsible for the confusion now in 
the minds of the friends. The matters and things therein 
set forth are uncensored, and unhappily contain many errors. 

I pray daily that I may never come under this influence, 
but that I may remain true to my "first Love," from the light 
of whose pages alone I am refined, and purified, and made 
white. My practise is to prove all your statements by the 
"Word," as far as I am able to reason; and all the rest I 
trust to your better judgment, confident that it is wiser to 
rely upon that wisdom than my own or that of any other. 

We are glad to acknowledge you (Luke 12:42), to honor 
you as our Pastor, and to follow you in your exposition of 
the Truth, believing that He who appointed you makes no 



mistakes. In grateful Christian love. 
Your Brother in the Truth, W.A. JARRETT.-Kans. 



FOOD SUPPLY CUT SHORT 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Since calling your attention to crop conditions in this 
country, there has been a further shrinkage due to rust in the 
Northwest— and it is now estimated that we will harvest but 
wheat enough for home needs— no exportable surplus. 

Present estimate of wheat, Winter and Spring combined, is 
725 million bushels, against 1,01 1 million bushels harvested last 
year; corn outlook, 2,700 million, as against 3,050 million last 
year; oats outlook, 1,200 million, as against 1,500 million last 
year. Rye and Barley shortage, brings grand total shortage 
of over a billion bushels. 

Yours in Christ, E.W.V.K. 



INFANTILE PARALYSIS REMEDY 

Mix Peruvian Bark (pulverized) with lard so as to 
make a stiff paste. Use this whilst massaging spinal column 
thoroughly. It is useful also for Asthma and for Spinal 
Meningitis. 



I.B.S.A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR MONTH OF SEPTEMBER 

QUESTIONS FROM 
MANUAL ON SERIES THIRD 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
STUDY VI.-"THE WORK OF THE HARVEST" 

Week of Sept. 3. Q. 122 to 128 Week of Sept. 17. Q. 136 to 141 
Week of Sept. 10. Q. 129 to 135 Week of Sept. 24. Q. 142 to 147 

Question Manuals on Vol. III., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
5c each; or 50c per dozen, postpaid. 



page 257 

VOL. XXXVII SEPTEMBER 1 NO. 17 
A. D. 1916-A.M.6044 



CONTENTS 

Keeping the Lord's Commandments 259 

Christians have Three Commandments 259 

The Source of Our Severest Trials 260 

"Take Heed to Yourselves" 261 

Sent Into Outer Darkness 262 

The Harvest is Not Ended 263 

Gentile Times Evidently Ended 264 

Jewish and Christian Parallels 264 

The Burning of the Tares 265 

Greater Sufferings-Greater Reward 265 

Fellowship in Christ's Sufferings 265 

Secret of His faithfulness 265 

A Plot That failed 266 

St. Paul Before Felix 268 

A Doctrine Lost Sight Of 268 

The Coming Judgment Day 269 

I.B.S.A. Conscripts in Great Britain 269 

Interesting Letters 270 

When Divorced People Are free to Marry ... 271 

Changed Attitude Toward Spiritism 271 

page 258 

NASHVILLE GENERAL CONVENTION 
AUGUST 24-27 

CORDIAL INVITATION 
Governor Tom C. Rye, of Tennessee; Mayor Robert Ewing, 
of Nashville; Chairman Robert L. Burch, of Nashville Industrial 
Bureau; and President R.B. Brannon, of the Commercial 
Club of Nashville, have each and all extended a cordial 
invitation to the I.B.S.A. to hold its Convention in their 
City, promising a hearty and generous welcome. 

FAVORABLE RAILROAD RATES 
Thirty-five Railroads in the South have joined in making 
us an attractive rate of about l-l/2c a mile to induce the 
largest possible number to attend this Convention. In every 
case, ask your Ticket Agent for the rate covered by Joint-Passenger 
Tariff No. Exc. 6747. 

GOOD LOCATIONS 
The Capitol Building, in which all of the sessions of the 
Convention will be held, is said to be located on the highest 
and coolest spot in the City. The Ryman Auditorium is the 
best in Nashville, and has been offered free by the City to the 
Association for the showing of the greatest Biblical production. 



THE PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION, and has been accepted 
for that purpose. The Princess Theater, which the City has 
provided for Brother Russell's public lecture, is the best. 

AN ATTRACTIVE PROGRAM 

FELLOWSHIP DAY: Thursday, August 24th-Brother P.S. 
L. Johnson, who will be the Chairman of the Convention, will 
give the opening address on "Christian Fellowship." In the 
afternoon short addresses on One Body, One Spirit, One 
Hope, One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism and One God will 
be given by Brothers Riemer, Thorn, Jones, Toole, Stevens, 
Thornton and Wise. 

TRANSFORMATION DAY: Friday, August 25-Pilgrim 
Brother Thornton will speak on "When He Shall Appear," 
and Pilgrim Brother Daniel Toole on "We Shall be Like 
Him." "The Quickening of the Spirit" and its bearing upon 
the Volumteer, Drama, Colporteur and Pastoral Work will 
be considered by Brothers Riemer, Jones, Thorn, Johnson. 

RANSOM DAY: Saturday, August 26— After a discourse 
by Brother Palmer on "The Sufferings of Christ," there will 
be held at 1 1 o'clock in the morning a Question Meeting on 
the great, fundamental subject of THE RANSOM, conducted 
by Brother Russell, who in the afternoon will hold a Consecration 
Service, consisting of the Consecration of Children, 
Sermon on Baptism and Symbolic Immersion in Water. 

KNOWLEDGE DAY: Sunday, August 27th-Pilgrim Brother 
M.E. Riemer will conduct the Berean Lesson for the day, 
and at 1 1 o'clock. Brother Russell will give a discourse on, 
"What, Know ye not,. ..ye are Bought with a Price?" (1 Cor. 6:19, 20.) 
In the afternoon he will speak in the 

Princess Theater to the public on "The World on Fire," and 
in the evening at 7 o'clock, in the Capitol Building, he will 
conduct the closing feature of the Convention— The Love Feast. 

We are hoping for a good attendance at this Convention 
and believe that those attending will be richly blessed. 



R5955 : page 258 

"THIS ONE THING" THE SOCIETY DOES 

Brethren write us from time to time respecting inventions, 
patents, mining claims, etc., desiring that THE WATCH 
TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY should join with them in 
the development of these— kindly offering the principal portion 
of all the profits. 

We greatly appreciate these kind offers, the generous 
hearts behind them, and the love for the Truth and its service 
thus manifested. But we are obliged to refuse all such 
offers, because the Society engages in no kind of business 
for profit. It confines its business transactions to financiering 
the Pilgrim Work, publishing the SCRIPTURE STUDIES, 
etc., and supplying them at cost or below cost; publishing 
THE WATCH TOWER, publishing the BIBLE STUDENTS 
MONTHLY, etc., and in the presentation, and formerly in the 



showing, of the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION. 

The Society engages in no kind of mining or patent business 
or speculations. The money under its control comes 
from the Lord's consecrated people, and often represents 
hard-earned funds and self-sacrificing economy; it is used 
strictly and only for the forwarding of the Truth according 
to the best judgment of the executive officers. 

This does not mean any unwillingness to counsel with any 
of the brethren in respect to their earthly affairs and interests. 
We are glad to give such advice as we may be able 
to give on every matter, temporal or spiritual, involving 
the interests of the Lord's consecrated saints. 



R5946 : page 259 

KEEPING THE LORD'S COMMANDMENTS 

THE Law given to Israel at Mount Sinai and 
summarized in the Ten Commandments was 
not given to any other nation or people. It 
is upon the Jew still, and is a bondage only 
because it was made a part of God's contract 
with that nation. If they would keep 
that Law perfectly they were to have certain 
special and exclusive blessings. If they 
failed to keep it, certain penalties were to 
result. But since that Law was the measure 
of a perfect man's ability, and since no Israelite, any 
more than others of the world of mankind, was perfect, 
therefore none of them could keep that Divine Law. 
None of them could get the blessings which it promised. 
All of them did get more or less of the curse, or punishment, 
which failure to keep the Law threatened. Thus 
Jesus said, "None of you keepeth the Law" (John 7: 19); 
and St. Paul wrote, "By the deeds of the Law shall no 
flesh be justified in His sight."— Romans 3:20. 

Nevertheless, the endeavor to keep that Law proved 
a great blessing to the people of Israel, and some of those 
Ancient Worthies who strove so faithfully and loyally, 
the Apostle assures us, will yet get a rich reward therefor. 
(Hebrews 1 1:38-40.) Messiah, after setting up His 
spiritual Kingdom, will constitute these Ancient Worthies 
princes and rulers in all the earth— under and subject to 
Himself and His Elect Church on the spirit plane. 

Jesus, although a member of our race according to 
the flesh, had an unimpaired life, transferred from the 
spirit plane to His virgin mother's womb. Thus He did 
not inherit either sin or its condemnation, but was born 
"holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners." (Hebrews 7:26.) 
Because of this perfection Jesus was able 
to do what no other member of the human family ever 
did or could do. He was able to keep the Law fully and 
completely in its every detail. And He did more than keep 
the Law. He sacrificed earthly rights and privileges 



which the Law declared He had a right to. Thus Jesus 
has a merit— a right to earthly life aside from the life 
which He now has on the spirit plane, and which was a 
reward from the Father for His obedience unto death, 
"even the death of the Cross."— Philippians 2:8. 

It is that earthly life which forms the basis for the 
New Covenant arrangement that God has promised to 
establish through the glorified Messiah. In due time He 
will appropriate the merit of His sacrifice— His right to 
human life— as the full satisfaction for Father Adam's 
disobedience and his death penalty. Thus purchasing the 

R5947 : page 259 

race, by giving a corresponding price, the great Redeemer 
will take over His purchased possession— man and his 
earthly home— and for a thousand years will exercise His 
privilege of assisting all the members of Adam's family 
who are willing to rise up out of sin, imperfection and 
death-conditions to human perfection and everlasting life. 
Those blessings could not come under the Law Covenant, 
because mankind could not keep the Law Covenant; but 
they will come to the willing and obedient under the 
gracious terms of the New Covenant, which promises 
mercy and forgiveness, and the taking away of the stony 
heart and the giving instead the heart of flesh and the renewing 
of a right spirit in all of those who will be rightly 
exercised by the corrections and glorious privileges of 
Messiah's Kingdom. 

CHRISTIANS HAVE THREE COMMANDMENTS 

Christians— disciples or followers of Jesus— from 
amongst the Gentiles never were under the Mosaic Law 
given at Mount Sinai. They are received into God's 
family as sons under a different Covenant— the one which 
reads: "Gather My saints together unto Me," saith the 

Lord, "those who have made a covenant with Me by sacrifice." (Psalm 50:5.) 
Jesus, after keeping fully all the 

conditions and requirements of the Law Covenant, under 
which He was born, was permitted to respond to this Covenant 
of Sacrifice. He was first, the Chief, the Head of 
the Household of Saints who entered into this Covenant 
of Sacrifice with God— agreeing to sacrifice His earthly 
life and all its rights in the doing of the Father's will 
even unto death. It was His faithfulness in this that 
gained for Him the better resurrection to glory, honor 
and immortality— the Divine nature. 

During this Gospel Age, some saintly ones have responded 
to the Lord's invitation to walk in Jesus' steps. 
Through the merit of His sacrifice, Jesus was privileged 
to be the Advocate with the Father on behalf of all this 
company called to be His Bride class and joint-heirs. He 
has imputed His merit to their sacrifice, thus making it 
complete and acceptable in the Father's sight. Each one 
of the followers of Jesus, energized by His spirit of devotion. 



not only makes the covenant, but fulfils it, with 
the assistance of his glorious Redeemer. Thus eventually 
they will come off through Him "more than conquerors," 
and be joint-heirs in the Kingdom. 

To these the Apostle writes, "Ye are not under the 
Law, but under grace." These are not under the Law 
Covenant, requiring of them absolute and perfect obedience 
to every item of the Jewish Law. They are under 
grace, or Divine favor, which does not require the fulfilment 
of the whole of the Law by them— a requirement 
which they could not fulfil. Instead, as the Apostle tells 
us, "the righteousness of the Law [its real requirement, 

R5947 : page 260 

the spirit of its requirement] is fulfilled in us who walk 
not after the flesh, but after the spirit." (Romans 8:4.) 
Thus, although not under the Law Covenant, the will of 
God, which was the spirit of the Jewish Law, is binding 
upon every Christian in proportion to his knowledge of it. 

THE CHRISTIAN'S FIRST AND SECOND COMMANDS 

Speaking of the spirit of the Law, applicable to angels, 
to the world of mankind and to Christians, Jesus declared 
it to be briefly comprehended in two commandments. The 
first of these is, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with 
all thy heart, mind, being and strength." The second is, 
"Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." Every Christian 
and every angel recognizes that Law and feels a responsibility 
to it to the extent of his ability; but neither 
angels nor Christians are under the Law Covenant— that 
covenant was made only with the nation of Israel. 

Every follower of Jesus should realize that if he has 
enlisted under the banner of Divine righteousness and 
truth he has pledged his very life in this service as a 
soldier of the Cross. How then could he do less than his 
very best in loving and serving his Heavenly Father with 
all his mind, being and strength? How could he decline 
the Divine requirement to love his neighbor as himself— 
to be kind, generous, not selfish? True, the New Creature 
may find difficulty in devoting all of his mind and strength 
to the Lord and in dealing in perfect fairness with all 
his fellow-creatures. But this is the New Creature's desire 
and intention, and to accomplish which he must strive 
daily, and war a good warfare against the natural inherited 
weaknesses of his old nature— his flesh. In proportion 
to his love for the Lord will be his zeal in this 
warfare; and proportionate also will be the reward that 
will be given him in the end by the Heavenly Father. 

But what an unseen warfare is being waged amongst 
the followers of the Lord wherever they are! The world 
sees not and knows not of this conflict; but it is very real, 
and the Lord takes note of the loyalty and faithfulness of 
these convenantors— these who have made a covenant 
with the Lord by sacrifice— consecrating their little all of 



time, talent, influence, prospects. Having consecrated, 
they are to maintain this attitude of consecration daily, 
hourly— presenting their bodies "living sacrifices, holy, acceptable 
to God, and their reasonable service."— Rom. 12:1. 

If weak or fallen according to the flesh, these are to 
remember that they are no longer fleshly or human beings, 
and that the weaknesses are not theirs; for they are now 
New Creatures in Christ Jesus, to whom old things have 
passed away and all things have become new. They have 
new ambitions, new ideals, and new relationship with 
God. They do not love sin, but love righteousness. They 
hate sin. They have enlisted to death to war a warfare 
against sin, especially in their own flesh. They have the 
satisfaction of knowing that while fellowmen might not 
see their battlings, might not know of the courageous 
effort they put forth in opposition to sin. yet the Lord 
looketh not at the outward man, but at the heart, and His 
judgment is not according to the flesh, but according to 
the spirit— the mind, the intention, the endeavor. Thus 
there are some great, valiant soldiers of the Cross, whom 
the world knows not; but all of these will eventually be 
crowned and have a share with Jesus in His Kingdom. 

THE CHRISTIAN'S THIRD COMMANDMENT 

At first it would appear that these two commandments 
itemized by Jesus would include everything that could be 
required by justice; and so they do. Justice requires 
nothing more than what these two commands include. 
Why then did Jesus give another command— a third one— 
a new one, over and above anything that the Divine Law 
required? We reply that this third commandment is not 
applicable to any except those who become the disciples 
of Jesus. This third commandment the Father did not 
put upon Jesus; He voluntarily put this regulation upon 
Himself, and laid down His life sacrificially— a thing 
which no law could justly demand. The Father did not 
require that Jesus should do this in the sense of commanding 
Him to do it; but He did require it in the sense 
that He promised glory, honor, immortality, the Divine nature 
and the Messianic Kingdom to the saintly One who 
would enter the Covenant of Sacrifice. 

Jesus, therefore, in entering this Covenant of Sacrifice, 
did more than what the Law given to Israel required. 
Therefore, when pointing out to His disciples the conditions 
upon which He would be their Advocate, and the 
conditions upon which He would guarantee to them a 
share with Himself in the Heavenly things. He specified 
the importance of this third commandment. "A new 
commandment I give unto you— that ye love one another 
as I have loved you." (John 15:12.) St. Paul points 
out that Christ loved us to the extent of dying for us, 
and that all of the true followers of Jesus, possessed of 
His Spirit, should likewise count it a joy to be permitted 
to lay down their lives in the service of the brethren. 
"We ought also to lay down our lives for the brethren." 



Gradually the eyes of our understanding have been 
opening wider and wider to see the lengths and breadths 
and heights and depths of the love of God; and as a 
result we have been striving more and more to love and 
to serve our God with all our heart, mind, being, strength. 
More and more, also, we have learned to appreciate the 
necessity for dealing justly and kindly with the members 
of our families, with our neighbors, with all mankind- 
loving our neighbors as ourselves. We may have congratulated 
ourselves on the progress we have been making, 
and surely we all need some encouragements while 
battling with the old nature! 

THE SOURCE OF OUR SEVEREST TRIALS 

But now, behold the New Commandment, requiring a 
still greater devotion to the will of our Father and to the 
leadership of our Savior! The rule of righteousness is 
to be observed toward our Heavenly Father and toward 
all our neighbors; but toward the brethren of the Household 
of Faith we are to do more than the right— we are 
to suffer, we are to sacrifice on their behalf, in their interests. 
"We ought also to lay down our lives for the 
brethren." Oh, what a searching proposition this Covenant 
of Sacrifice is! How strange that it should be on 
behalf of the brethren that we should be expected to 
sacrifice, to lay down our lives! 

At first some one might say, "To sacrifice will be a 
very easy matter when it is done in the interests of the 
brethren, more so than if done for the world." However, 
experience shows that many of God's dear people, 
striving to keep the first two commandments, find it more 
easy to sacrifice time, influence and strength in the service 
of the world than in the service of the brethren. Somehow 
we are inclined to expect more from the brethren 
than from others, and inclined to make less allowance for 
weaknesses in the brethren than in others. There seems 
to be no condition in which God's people are more tried 
as respects their spiritual graces than by one another, with 

R5948 : page 260 

one another. It is not merely theory; it proves itself out. 
All over the world there are Class troubles. Truly we 
read, "the Lord will judge His people," and again, "the 
Lord your God proveth you"! Testings and siftings are 
coming on and many of the dear saints of the Lord who 

R5948 : page 26 1 

have made a Covenant of Sacrifice with Him do not 
seem to realize that these Class troubles amongst the 
brethren are means which the Lord permits to test and 
to demonstrate the characters of His people— their love 
for Him, His Word, His will, their justice to all men, doing 
unto others as they would that they should do to 



them, and, finally, their spirit of self-sacrifice in respect 
to what they will do for or bear from the brethren in 
laying down their lives for them. 

EXHORTATIONS TO BROTHERLY LOVE 

We fear greatly that some of the Lord's saints, failing 
to appreciate the situation, are failing to be overcomers 
in these matters; and that their place in the Royal Priesthood 
may thus be endangered. We are not rebuking any; 
we are not finding fault with any. But we encourage all 
to remember the Covenant of Sacrifice into which we 
have entered as represented in the Third Commandment— 
that we love one another as the Master loved us— even 
to the extent of dying for us. 

If this matter could be rightly appreciated, if more loving 
sympathy could be felt one for the other, we would 
not be inclined to impute evil motives to each other's 
words and conduct. Rather we would be glad to assume 
that they were sincere, whether we could agree fully with 
all their doings and proposals or not. And being full of 
love for the brethren, our refusal to join with them in 
what we consider unwise or unscriptural arrangements 
would be presented in such kind and considerate, sympathetic 
and gentle terms as would be helpful to them. 

Therefore, let us each strive to judge himself, and 
not to condemn one another. Let us each scrutinize our 
motives in respect to every action, every word of life, and 
especially in all of our dealings with the brethren. Let us 
each assume that the others of the class are as loving 
and as loyal to the Lord as ourself. Let us each remember 
that it is a privilege to sacrifice our own preferences 
and conveniences in favor of the preferences and conveniences 
of others of the brethren, wherever positive 
principles would not thereby be infringed; and we may 
even sacrifice positive principles of justice as respects our 
own interests, if thereby the peace, fellowship and prosperity 
of the brethren will be conserved. 

And even if, despite our every endeavor to the contrary, 
it should finally seem necessary for a class to 
divide, nevertheless love for the brethren ought to be the 
blessed tie that binds, no matter how much the conveniences 
of the class or other reasons might make it necessary 
for us to subdivide. "Love as brethren" ought to 
love. "Be kind, considerate, gentle, one toward another, 
forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake hath 
forgiven you."— Ephesians 4:32. 

"HEREBY WE MAY KNOW" 

It seems remarkable that the Apostle, in pointing out 
one of the surest signs by which the Lord's people may 
know positively that they have been begotten of the Holy 
Spirit, says: "Hereby we know that we have passed 
from death unto life, because we love the brethren." (1 John 3: 14.) 
How strange that love of the brethren 



should be the crucial test, as we have already pointed 
out in the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES-and as we may 
seriously fear will be more and more manifest as we 
come down toward the consummation of our hope! 

As the Apostle has said, "My little children, let us not 
love in word, neither in tongue; but in deed and in truth." (1 John 3:18.) 
This is a personal matter. Each one of 

us is under this testing. If not yet, sooner or later, undoubtedly, 
this willingness to sacrifice in the interests of 
the brethren will prove each one of us either loyal, faithful 
to our covenant, or contrariwise— unfaithful. Let us 
make this matter of love for the brethren and laying down 
of our lives for the brethren a matter of personal study 
and of practical application to our own hearts, minds, 
thoughts, words, actions. And let us pray for one another, 
as well as exhort one another along these lines, 
striving to be filled with our Master's Spirit. 



R5948 : page 26 1 

"TAKE HEED TO YOURSELVES" 
"Remember Lot's Wife."— Luke 17:32 

IN CONNECTION with our dear Master's 
prophetic warnings respecting the trials and 
testings of the present day. He uttered the 
words of our text. The significance of 
these words should be comprehended by all 
who are walking in the light of "Present 
Truth." The lesson is that those who, under 
the special guidance of the Lord, are now 
fleeing for safety to the Mountain of the 
Lord's Kingdom, will be held to a much 
stricter account than are others. Lot's wife was not accused 
of having shared in the evil practices of the people 
of Sodom, but she had been instructed by the angel of 
the Lord to leave Sodom at once, as it was doomed. 

Her fault was that of looking back to that which she 
had been commanded to leave, and which she had left. 
She was told to flee from the condemned city, and not to 
look back as she fled, but to hasten on to the mountain 
of safety. We may reasonably suppose that her turning 
and looking back toward Sodom implied a heart not fully 
in harmony with her deliverance, but in some degree sympathetic 
with what she was leaving. She at heart clung to 
the accursed things condemned to destruction and was 
loath to give them up. Therefore the Lord brought her no 
further. She became a monument of the folly of sympathizing 
with evil, and with evil-doers, after God has 
given them up. 

We believe there are some now who need to have 
their attention called to the antitype of this typical incident 
referred to by our Lord. Quite a number are disposed 
to sympathize and fraternize with those who have 



come under Divine condemnation. We are told by St. 

Jude that the destruction of Sodom was "set forth as an 

example," or type. Those who assume to be more gracious 

and long-suffering than the Lord, make of themselves opponents, 

who instead of being students of the principles 

of righteousness, attempt to be judges and teachers of 

Jehovah. The proper attitude of heart accepts God's decision 

as not only wiser but more just than our own. 

Consequently, when we see any who have enjoyed the 

light of Present Truth abandoned by the Lord and led into 

outer darkness, we are to conclude that before being thus 

abandoned there must have been in them "an evil heart 

of unbelief in departing from the living God." "He is 

faithful who hath promised" that "if any man will do His 

[the Father's] will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether 

it be of God." (John 7:17.) Whoever, therefore, loses 

the doctrines of Christ after once having had them, has 

surely done more than get his head confused. His heart 

must have been separated from the Lord previously; for 

so long as we abide in Him, it will not be possible for 

any of the snares of this "evil day," this "hour of temptation," 

to entrap us; none shall pluck us out of the Father's 

hand; He is fully able to take care of us. 

R5948 : page 262 

FOUNDATION OF CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE 

At the very foundation of all Christian doctrine lies the 
doctrine of the Ransom, the Scriptural teaching that "we 
are bought with a price," a corresponding price for Adam's 
sin. Any teaching, therefore, which either openly denies 
or quietly ignores this foundation doctrine, "the Ransom 
for all, to be testified in due time," must be a doctrine 
at variance with God's Revelation. Whether it be old or 
new, whether it be advocated by friends or by foes, by 
the learned or by the unlearned, in the name of Evolution 
or in some other name, our attitude toward it should be 
prompt and decided opposition. If others waver, we who 
have learned that the Ransom is the test by which all doctrines 
are to be proved, need not waver, and should not. 

If our friends get into the quicksands of no-Ransom 
errors, whose name is now legion, and the numbers entrapped 
growing continually, we should lend them a helping 
hand wherever possible, "pulling them out of the fire," 
by reminding them of the Rock Christ Jesus, whereon our 
feet are firmly established, and by throwing to them the 
rope of Divine promises, throughout which is woven the 
scarlet thread of the Ransom of Christ, and exhort them to 
come back to the Rock and not to attempt to find another 
rock at the bottom of the quicksands. And we must use 
great plainness of speech in showing them their danger 
and in pointing out the way of escape. 

But we must not accept their invitation to join with 
them in exploring what men can say or write which would 
tend to make the Word of God of none effect, which would 



claim that God has all along been the sinner and man the 
dupe; or that the hope of mankind is in their own evolution, 
and not in the Ransom and Restitution of the Scriptures; 
or that there is no sin and no death, really, and 
that man therefore needs no Redeemer, but can be his own 
savior. If after kind and faithful remonstrance on your 
part they still persist in exploring and delving into and 
feeding upon such evident contradictions of God's Word, 
let them go. Remember that there must be something 
wrong at their hearts, if they have ever been God's children 

R5949 : page 262 

at all, else they would have no pleasure in the unfruitful 
works of darkness, but would reprove them, and 
their delight would be in God's great Plan of the Ages. 

SENT INTO OUTER DARKNESS 

Let us remember, too, that God has promised to keep 
and guide the minds of those whose hearts are loyal and 
true to Him. We should therefore conclude that if the 
Lord is thrusting any one out of the light as unworthy of 
it, into the outer darkness of the world, if He is permitting 
unfaithful ones to be seduced by the great enemy, it 
is not our mission to follow them into the outer darkness 
by reading, conversation, etc. We are to remain with the 
Lord and those who are walking in the light, and to seek 
others to take the places and crowns of those who now 
deny or ignore the precious blood of the Covenant wherewith 
they were once sanctified. 

Neither are we to waste sympathy upon those who depart. 
If we can neither persuade them nor pull them out 
of the fire, we must let them go, and should turn at once 
and render aid to others more worthy. When the Lord 
has put any out of the light (Matthew 22:13, 14), we 
cannot hope to bring them back. Had it been proper for 
them to remain in the light, if they had been worthy of 
it. He would not have permitted them to be put out of it. 

NO FELLOWSHIP WITH "UNFRUITFUL WORKS" 

We do not here refer to slight differences of understanding, 
which should be patiently dealt with and explained 
or overlooked, as all children in the School of 
Christ have not attained to the same "step," or degree of 
knowledge; but we do refer to those radical differences, 
all of which may be quickly proved by the test of the 
Ransom doctrine. If they agree not with this, "it is because 
there is no light in them." And such are no longer 
to be to us brothers or sisters in Christ, but should be 
considered and treated as of the world— "as a heathen 
man or a publican." These are not to be numbered among 
our friends; for the friendship of such is enmity against 
God. We are not to receive or entertain such at our 
houses, nor bid them or their work God-speed in any 



manner. (2 John 8-11.) Some who have neglected the 
plain statement of God's Word on this subject have suffered 
spiritually for their disobedience. 

Let us more and more be of one mind with the Lord. 
His friends must be our friends; His enemies our enemies. 
If we affiliate with the Lord's enemies, we shall at least 
get into a luke-warm condition towards Him and His 
friends; and the luke-warm, God declares He will spew 
out of His mouth. We should cultivate warmth of heart 
toward all who trust in the precious blood and are consecrated 
to our Redeemer as their Lord and Head. There 
must be no lukewarmness there. Whatever their peculiarities 
according to the flesh, we cannot be other than 
brethren to them in spirit, with all the helpfulness and 
sympathy which brotherhood in Christ implies. But we 
must not, cannot, have any fellowship with the ungodly, 
the sinners against light and Truth, and scorners of the 
grace of God. And although if they were destitute we 
would feed them, yet so long as they are the opponents 
and adversaries of the Lord's Cause and His Truth, they 
are our adversaries and we theirs. The Lord loves positiveness 
with harmlessness, and of us it should be true 
as it is prophetically written of our Lord and the true 
members of His Body in Psalm 139: 19-24. 

This injunction of our Lord, to "remember Lot's wife," 
also applies particularly to the Lord's people who have 
heard His call of the present time to "come out" of Babylon, 
and have left this condemned "city." Whoever, therefore, 
is being led of the Lord's angels (messengers) to a 
place of safety ere the foretold destruction overtakes the 
present Order, as were Lot and his family before the destruction 
of Sodom, let him not look back or otherwise 
manifest sympathy with that which is condemned of the 
Lord to overthrow and destruction. 

HEART LOYALTY AND OUTWARD LOYALTY IN NEXT AGE 

In the next Age, when the world shall have been 
brought to a knowledge of the Truth, the opportunity will 
be granted them to show forth what is the real attitude 
of their hearts toward God. Some after coming to see 
the goodness and loving-kindness of the Lord, will still 
prefer sin; and God's sentence upon them will again be 
the sentence of death— Second Death. A certain period 
will be granted them to learn of the great goodness of the 
Lord and of their opportunity of gaining eternal life. If 
they do not then manifest an interest in their own salvation 
and an appreciation of God's goodness in Christ, and 
a desire to be helped up out of sin and degradation, they 
will receive the final wages of sin, utter and eternal destruction 
in the Second Death. 

There will apparently be some in that time who will 
seem to desire assistance up to a better life, a righteous 
life, who will yield obedience in perhaps only an outward 
way to the laws of the Kingdom. These, we understand, 
will be permitted to live on and be gradually brought up 



to a condition of physical and mental perfection; they may 
live through to the full end of the thousand years of 
Christ's Reign. At the end of that time they, with all 
others then living, will be turned over by Christ to the 

R5949 : page 263 

Father for a final crucial testing. If these then prove 

that their wills have not been wholly given up to God, 

that they do not yet appreciate the costly provision made 

for their salvation, and the value of righteousness, they 

will be destroyed as unworthy of Divine approval and unworthy 

of everlasting life. If the demonstration which 

will then have been given them of the Wisdom, the Justice 

and the Love of God will not have changed their 

hearts to entire devotion to Him and to His glorious and 

righteous will, any further opportunity would be utterly 

useless. They will be cut off from earth as cumberers 

of the ground, that only the righteous, the holy, may live 

throughout the ages of eternity. 

Of the world God will require a full consecration to 
do His will. It must include their entire selves, their 
wills, their bodies— their whole-hearted allegiance. It will 
not be a consecration unto sacrifice, unto death, as is now 
the case with the Church; but they must become wholly 
devoted to God and must realize and recognize that they 
belong to God, that they have been bought, purchased back 
from death, and may, if obedient, live forever. We all 
see how reasonable is this requirement. Adam, who was 
created in God's likeness, should have said, "I belong to 
God. He gave me my life and all I have." But he had 
not fully learned to trust the Wisdom and Love of his 
Maker. He had a perfect brain, a perfect organism; but 
he lacked full knowledge of the character of the Lord and 
of the justice of all His requirements. His incomplete 
knowledge, therefore, rendered him to some extent excusable 
in God's sight. If he had taken the stand of opposition 
to the Lord with clear knowledge and experience, apparently 
he would not have been accounted worthy of redemption. 
The whole world will, then, when they reach 
perfection, realize that they owe everything to God, and, 
if loyal at heart, will wish to render all to Him in glad 
service— to the praise of His name. 

While it would have been eminently proper for the 
world, as with Adam, to render perfect obedience to God, 
even if man had never sinned and been redeemed, the fact 
that they have sinned, and yet have been redeemed 
through God's abounding love and mercy, and will be 
given another opportunity, a full individual opportunity, to 
gain life eternal, furnishes a double reason why they 
should devote themselves fully to God and His service 
forevermore. Those who are bought with blood— the 
precious blood of the Son of God, through whom they 
were created— who were redeemed by such a Sacrifice, 
should rejoice to bind themselves to all eternity to the 
God who so loved them, and should count it their most 



precious privilege to render homage and worship and 
praise forever to such a Creator and such a Redeemer. 

"NOT MY OWN, BUT SAVED BY JESUS" 

The Church of Christ realize, as none others can, the 
mighty significance of the words, "Ye are bought with a 
price, and ye are not your own." Our decision has been 
made that we will indeed be the glad bond-servants of 
Him who thus loved and bought us. We have no rights 
left. Our all is on the altar of sacrifice with our Lord; 
and God has ratified our decision. We are now under 
the most binding of obligations. Unless our lives are laid 
down in harmony with our contract we can never have 
eternal life on any plane. 

Of these who have assumed this obligation there are 
two classes. There is one class who will do all they have 
covenanted to do. These will "receive the full reward." (2 John 8.) 
Then there is the other class who, having 
made the same covenant, fail to fulfil their contract. But 
just as the endorser of a note is responsible, so the Lord 
Jesus will see to it that these finish the sacrifice which 
they have covenanted to make. Their lives must be yielded 
up. If they rebel against the enforced destruction of their 
flesh, they will be sinning wilfully, and will die the Second 
Death, from which there will be no recovery. 

All the Covenantors have agreed to glorify God in 
their bodies, to lay them down faithfully in His service. 
Anything less could not be acceptable; and we should not 
think of rendering anything less. Let us, then, proceed 
with the work of sacrificing these earthly bodies, which 
are the Lord's— not that we should use them up in a suicidal 
way, without regard to the strain upon the flesh, but 
in a reasonable, sane manner let us daily, hourly, glorify 
God in our bodies, continuing our sacrifice even unto the 
end, whether that end be a few weeks off or a few months 
or a few years. 



R5950 : page 263 

THE HARVEST IS NOT ENDED 

SOME of us were quite strongly convinced that 
the Harvest would be ended by now, but our 
expectations must not be allowed to weigh 
anything as against the facts. The fact is 
that the Harvest Work is going grandly on; 
it is not ended by any means. As far as our 
present judgment goes, it would appear that 
there is a considerable Harvest Work yet 
to be done. This is not discouraging, but 
encouraging to us. We are glad to know 
of the grace of God reaching other heads and hearts and 
blessing them as ours have been blessed. We are glad 



to know that others are daily coming into blessed relationship 
with the Lord under the Covenant of Sacrifice, and 
are giving evidence of having been begotten of the Holy 
Spirit. We are glad to note their zeal, and rejoice with 
them that they, as well as we, can share in this glorious 
opportunity of making our calling and election sure by 
the character development which we are daily learning 
to appreciate as the prime essential of the "more than 
conquerors." All those must be copies of God's dear Son. 
our Lord Jesus. We would have been glad to have 
entered upon our work beyond the veil; but we are better 
pleased to continue our labors on this side the veil, because 
such is the Lord's will for us. 

At first we were inclined to surmise that the Harvest 
proper had closed in October, 1914, and that the work 
since going on was a gleaning work; but the facts seem 
not to bear this out. The progress of the work and the 
numbers who are being brought to a knowledge of the 
Truth and separated to the Lord are far too great to be 
styled a gleaning. Evidently it is a part of the regular 
Harvest. Besides, we are being more and more impressed 
with the closing features of the Elijah and the Elisha 
type. More and more we are impressed that Elijah's 
smiting of the river Jordan, the waters thereof being 
thus divided, pictures a mighty work yet to be accomplished, 
and apparently in the very near future. What will 
be the antitype of the folding up of Elijah's mantle, symbolizing 
his power? and how long it may require to thus 
concentrate the forces for the smiting? we do not know. 
We must wait, watch, and do our parts. Then how long 
it will require to accomplish the smiting of the waters is 
also an uncertainty; and how quickly the people will be 
divided by the Truth is also an uncertainty. 

But admitting that even so great a work could be accomplished 
under the Lord's blessing and direction in a 
very short time, we could still not expect the results in 
less than about three years. We are not fixing the time, 
however, for we know of no time features applicable before 

R5950 : page 264 

us— even as Elijah and Elisha were not sent to any 
definite place after reaching Jordan. We are merely 
giving our surmise— that a great work is before us, and 
that we cannot see how it could be accomplished in much 
less than three years. 

It will be after the smiting of Jordan— after the division 
of the people by the Message of the Truth and the 
mantle of Elijah's power— that the separation of the 
Church into two classes will take place. Thereafter, the 
Elijah class, the Little Flock Class, will be clearly manifested, 
separate and distinct from the Great Company 
Class. The division, be it remembered, will be caused by 
the fiery chariot— some very severe, trying ordeal, which 
the Elect Class will promptly accept and enter into; the 
Elisha Class holding back from the persecution, but not 



drawing back to sin or to a repudiation of the Lord. It 
will be but a little later on that the whirlwind (probably 
anarchy) will bring about the "change" of the Elijah Class. 

GENTILE TIMES EVIDENTLY ENDED 

It still seems clear to us that the prophetic period 
known as the Times of the Gentiles ended chronologically 
in October, 1914. The fact that the Great Day of 
Wrath upon the nations began there marks a good fulfilment 
of our expectations. The Gentile nations were 
guaranteed a certain amount of possession and control 
for a certain period of time. That time having expired, 
dispossession proceedings are now in process. The winds 
of strife, winds of war, are let loose with great damage 
to the whole world, weakening the kingdoms of Europe 
in respect to their best blood and their financial strength. 

How long the war may yet last, who could say? All 
the belligerent nations are proud and self-confident. The 
humbling, which the Bible mentions, has not yet been accomplished. 
It is possible that the war may continue for 
quite a while yet, before the nations shall have been 
weakened and humbled sufficiently to desire peace. Then 
will come other troubles. Revolutions will threaten; the 
governments will associate themselves still more firmly 
with the nominal church systems, both seeking protection 
and strength. Next we may expect the great collapse of 
Spiritual Babylon, leading on to the great revolution-earthquake 
of Revelation, "So mighty an earthquake as 
was not since men were upon the earth." (Revelation 16:18.) 
This in turn, will lead on, according to our understanding 
of the Bible, to the terrible anarchy, in which 
all present institutions will succumb before the fire of 
human passion, prejudice, etc. Then, at the auspicious 
moment, the Gentile dominions having passed away, Messiah's 
Kingdom will manifest itself for the blessing of 
the whole world, and will prove to be "the desire of all 
peoples."— Haggai 2:7. 

We see no reason for doubting, therefore, that the 
Times of the Gentiles ended in October, 1914; and that 
a few more years will witness their utter collapse and the 
full establishment of God's Kingdom in the hands of Messiah. 
But by that time, the Elijah Class will have passed 
beyond the Veil; for "when He [Jesus] shall appear in His 
glory, we [the Church] also will appear with Him." 

OUR MISTAKE RESPECTING THE HARVEST 

Our readers will remember that the basis of our expectations 
respecting the Harvest time was the parallelism 
between the closing of the Jewish Age and the closing of 
this Gospel Age. We found the beginning of the Harvest 
time clearly marked by the 1335 Days of prophecy, 
and by the fulfilment amongst God's people of the declaration: 
"Oh, the blessedness of him that waiteth and cometh 
to the end of the 1335 days!" (Daniel 12:12.) Surely 



great blessedness, great enlightenment of the eyes of understanding, 

great appreciation of our God and His glorious 

purposes came to the Lord's people at that time in 

full agreement with that prophecy! Ever since then a new 

song has been in the mouths of the Lord's people, as they 

have learned of His goodness through the Divine Plan of 

the Ages. We see no reason to question the date, October, 

1874, as the beginning of the Harvest time and the parallel 

to the time when Jesus began His ministry in the Harvest 

time of the Jewish Age. 

Our mistake was along the very line that we pointed 
out. Time and again, we reminded our readers that the 
parallelism between the Jewish Age and the Gospel Age 
could not include anything belonging to the New Dispensation. 
The parallels affected merely the nominal Jewish 
House there and the nominal Christian House here. Both 
were rejected because of failure to be in the right condition 
of heart for the truths that were due to them— both 
rejected for destruction. The Jewish System was a 
Church-State affair, paralleled here by the great Church-State 
systems of Europe, whose destruction began in 1914. 

Let us remember, however, that the three and a half 
years of Jesus' ministry were more a time of preparation 
of the Apostles to be the instruments for the harvesting 
and a sharpening preparation of the Sickle of Truth for 
the later work, which began at Pentecost. There was no 
"garner" into which to gather the wheat prior to Pentecost. 

JEWISH AND CHRISTIAN PARALLELS 

JEWISH-NOMINAL CHURCH CHRISTIAN-NOMINAL CHURCH 

A.D. 29-33 A.D. 1874-1878 

"They knew not the time of their visitation." 

A.D. 33-36 A.D. 1878-1881 

The Most Holy Anointed, Divine favor prolonged 
for three and a half years to complete the 
70 weeks of favor promised to Israel, their rejection 
being deferred. 

A.D. 36-73 A.D. 1881-1918 

Because of the overspreading of abominations, He 
shall make it desolate, even until the consummation 
of utter destruction— until all that God has predetermined 
shall be accomplished.— Daniel 9:24-27. 

No parallels as between the Pentecostal Church and the 
true Church now are to be looked for. But the resurrection 
of Jesus before the Church harvesting began may 
well be considered to have its parallel here in the resurrection 
of the sleeping members of the church— 1878 A.D. 

We should not have looked for parallelisms between the 



starting of the Gospel Church and its experiences, and 
the starting in the Harvest time of the Heavenly Church 
and its experiences. These are no part to the parallel. 
The parallel belongs to the nominal Jewish System, which 
went to destruction, and to the nominal Gospel Church, 
which is now going to destruction. 

We imagined that the Harvest work of gathering the 
Church would be accomplished before the end of the Gentile 
Times; but nothing in the Bible so said. Our thought 
was purely an inference, and now we see that it was an 
unjustified one. This Harvest work belongs to the New 
Dispensation and cannot be identified with the Old. Anyway, 
the harvesting of the Jewish Age, gathering "Israelites 
indeed" into the Gospel Church, did not close with 

R595 1 : page 264 

A.D. 70, but progressed in various parts of the world 
thereafter. Quite a good many Jews, doubtless, profiting 
by their terrible experience, were all the better prepared 
to be gathered into the Gospel Garner after the destruction 
of their national polity. Similarly, we may expect 
that quite a good many will yet be gathered to the 
Heavenly Garner, and we know of no time-limit here. 
Incidentally we remark that some historians put the 

R595 1 : page 265 

end of the Jewish Time of Trouble as April A. D. 73. 
which would correspond to April 1918. 

Are we regretful that the Harvest work continues? 
Nay, verily; we rejoice and have the pleasure each day 
of showing forth the praises of Him who hath called us 
out of darkness into His most marvelous light; and we 
delight in seeing how others are being benefited and made 
to rejoice. Are we regretful of the experiences we have 
had in coming to this present point? Do we feel like 
repining that the Lord did not force upon us more careful 
attention to the parallelism? Nay, verily; the Lord's leadings 
have been good. Perhaps, indeed, we got benefit 
from the thought that the Harvest work would soon be 
ended. Perhaps it led us to deeper consecration and 
greater activity in the service of the Lord, in ourselves 
and for others. We therefore have nothing to regret. 

"Who led us first, will lead us still. 

Calmly we sink into His will." 

THE BURNING OF THE TARES 

In the parable of the "the Wheat and the Tares," the 
Master puts very prominently the gathering of the tares 
and the binding of them in bundles for burning. We assumed 
that this burning would not take place until all 
the wheat had been gathered into the Heavenly Garner; 
but apparently this was an incorrect thought. The garnering 
of the wheat continues; but apparently the consuming 



of the tares will correspond very closely with the division 
of Jordan. The tares are a class of (often) noble people 
who have risen up out of the world infused with hopes 
and aims of a benevolent character, but misled into thinking 
that they are the Church. From the tare viewpoint, 
the wheat are an abnormal growth, a peculiar people, few 
in number, and not held in high esteem. The smiting of 
the waters will reveal the truth in respect to what is the 
real Church of Christ, and what are imitations; and the 
honest-minded Tare Class will be undeceived, and cease 
to longer pretend that they are the Church of Christ— 
thus they will be burned or cease to be as tares, continuing 
however as noble-minded worldly people and will have a 
share in the general blessings of the "sweet by and by" 
under the Kingdom, for which we still pray. 

Our present attitude, dear brethren, should be one of 
great gratitude toward God, increasing appreciation of 
the beautiful Truth which He has granted us the privilege 
of seeing and being identified with, and increasing zeal 
in helping to bring that Truth to the knowledge of others. 
In the meantime, our eyes of understanding should discern 
clearly the Battle of the Great Day of God Almighty now 
in progress; and our faith, guiding our eyes of understanding 
through the Word, should enable us to see the 
glorious outcome— Messiah's Kingdom. Furthermore, we 
can be fully content not to know how long the Harvest 
Work will last— content that the great Captain, who by 
Divine appointment has the entire matter in charge, is too 
wise to err, and has promised us that all of our experiences 
shall work together for our good if we love Him and are 
of "the called ones according to His purpose," seeking to 
make our calling and election sure. 



R595 1 : page 265 

GREATER SUFFERINGS-GREATER REWARD 
-SEPTEMBER 24.-2 CORINTHIANS 4:16-18.- 

FAINT NOT IN TRIBULATION-THE NATURAL MAN PERISHES- 
THE NEW CREATURE GROWS-WHAT ARE LIGHT AFFLICTIONS? 
-WHAT IS THEIR DURATION7-WHAT IS THEIR 
OBJECT?-HOW SHALL WE ATTAIN THIS OBJECT? 

"The things which are not seen are eternal."— Verse 18. 

WHAT great Christian courage St. Paul's words 
and deeds manifest! He that endured so 
many hardships, a veritable thrashing-machine 
experience, nevertheless writes: "We 
faint not; for though our outward man perish, 
yet the inward man is renewed day by 
day." Ah, that was the secret of the matter— 
the renewing of the inward man, the 
New Creature! The tribulations of the 



outward man would have been terrible experiences 
indeed had there been no inward man to take a 
different view of matters and to learn valuable lessons 
and experiences from the outward man's tribulations. 
The inward man had God's assurance that if God were 
for him the opposition of all others would be as nothing. 
He had the assurance that God would overrule all of his 
experiences for his highest welfare. He had the assurance 
of the Lord, too, that the glories of the future would 
be proportionate to the trials faithfully endured. 

FELLOWSHIP IN CHRIST'S SUFFERINGS 

Ah, here we have the secret of the Apostle's great 
zeal for God, for the Church, for the Truth! He endured 
as seeing Him who is invisible to natural eyes. (Hebrews 1 1:27.) 
St. Paul lived a double life, in the 
sense that to man he was Saul of Tarsus, but in reality 
he was Paul, the servant of God, the New Creature in 
Christ Jesus. The world knew him not; but he knew 
himself, knew his God; and he was energized by the power 
Divine and by the Message of God's Word, which spoke 
to him peace and relationship to God through Christ, and 
also informed him of the glory, honor and immortality 
awaiting all the faithful ones at the end of the way. 

And this secret of the Apostle's own experience is an 
open one to all of God's family of spirit-begotten children 
who faithfully are continuing to walk in the footsteps of 
Jesus and to be taught of Him through the Word. We 
do not have so large a manifestation of Divine favor as 
had Jesus, the Head of the Church, and the Apostles, 
the foremost members of the Church; but still we have in 
a general way the same favors of God, the same promises 
of God, the same inspiring hopes which they had. Let us 
not forget the Apostle's endurance when we read his 
words: "Our light affliction, which is but for a moment, 
worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight 
of glory."— 2 Corinthians 4:17. 

The Apostle gives the same thought when, writing 
about the resurrection, he declares how it will be with the 
Church in the resurrection. All the faithful will be glorified, 
honored, blessed, perfected— not blessed in the 
same degree, however; but, "As star differeth from star 
in glory, so also it will be in the resurrection of the dead." 
(1 Corinthians 15:41, 42.) The same lesson is given us 
in Daniel's prophecy, where the resurrection is referred 
to and the resurrected ones are illustrated by the stars, 
whose beauty and brilliancy vary.— Daniel 12:1-3. 

The Apostle's argument was that if the sufferings of 
Christ, in the Divine arrangement, are to measure the 
coming glories of Christ, then he desired to be a participator 
with the Lord in the present sufferings in order that 
he might also be a participator with Him in the coming 
glories. Instead, therefore, of saying to himself or to 
others: "I am doing more than my share of the Gospel 
work; and some others of you should come and help me. 



and give me a rest." St. Paul took the other view. He 
declared himself willing and anxious to fill up as much as 
possible that which was behind of the afflictions of Christ 

R595 1 : page 266 

(Colossians 1:24.) He counted it all joy to have tribulation, 
knowing that tribulation would work out the fruits 
of the Holy Spirit in his character, and thus prepare him 
for the Kingdom. (Romans 5:3-5.) Incidentally, we 
remember the assurance of the Bible— that only if we 
suffer with Christ shall we reign with Him, and that only 
those who become dead with Him shall live with Him. 

THE SECRET OF HIS FAITHFULNESS 

Many find it easy to make a start in the Christian way 
when everything is favorable. Some run briskly for a 
while, and then grow weary in well-doing. But the Apostle 
seemed never to weary. He was always on the alert, 
in season and out of season, so far as his own convenience 
was concerned. He was ready to preach the Gospel anywhere, 
everywhere, to all who had the hearing ear. The 
secret of his perseverance is given us in Verse 18, in the 
words: "We look not at the things which are seen, but 
at the things which are not seen." 

What do these words mean? They mean that St. Paul 
had spiritual eyesight. He indeed saw earthly attractions, 
but they lost their drawing power upon him because of 
his spiritual sight— his perception of the things unseen. 
With the eye of faith he saw the Heavenly Father, the 
glorified Lord Jesus, the Heavenly hosts, the coming Kingdom 
of glory, honor and immortality. By faith he saw 
the great Millennial Kingdom spreading out before him, 
and heard the Divine invitation to become an heir in that 
Kingdom, to be joined in heirship with the Master and 
Redeemer. He had accepted this invitation. He had enlisted 
under the banner of the Master; and he realized 
that everything else in the world was of practically no 
value in comparison with these eternal things which God 
had promised. His confidence was in the Word of God. 

R5952 : page 266 

So it is with the Lord's people today. We may see 
the advantages of politics, social standing, wealth, business, 
etc., etc. But all these earthly aims and ambitions 
are of comparatively little value to us because we have 
seen, with the new eyesight of the New Creature, the 
Heavenly things. Our ears have heard God's Message. 
We have been able to discern the things of the Spirit— the 
things which God hath in reservation for them that love 
Him, the things which eye hath not seen nor ear heard, 
neither have entered into the heart of the natural man. 
(1 Corinthians 2:9.) We realize more and more that 
all the things of the present evil world are temporal in 



character; that they are to pass away with the New 
Dispensation which is just at the door; and that earthly 
honors and powers are all of less value every minute. 

On the contrary, we see that the things which God 
offers us are eternal things. Is it any wonder that the 
Bible sets forth the importance of doctrine? Whoever 
is well indoctrinated from the real Bible viewpoint is 
strong in the Lord. Whoever is without this knowledge 
of the Kingdom and without this spiritual sight and hearing 
will necessarily be weak, and will lack the evidence 
of being a New Creature in Christ Jesus.— 2 Cor. 5:17. 



R5952 : page 266 

A PLOT THAT FAILED 
-OCTOBER l.-ACTS 23:14-24.- 

THE WRATH OF MAN OVERRULED-ST. PAUL BEFORE THE SANHEDRIN- 

THE HIGH PRIEST REBUKED-ST. PAUL AS A GENERAL- 
THE SANHEDRIN DIVIDED IN OPINION-DISSENSION 
AMONGST THE MEMBERS-THE APOSTLE TAKEN BACK TO 

THE CASTLE-ENCOURAGED BY A VISION-THE CONSPIRACY 
AGAINST HIM-INFORMATION CONCERNING THE PLOT 

GIVEN TO COLONEL LYSIAS-ST. PAUL SENT TO CAESAREA 
FOR SAFE-KEEPING. 

"They shall fight against thee; but they shall not 
prevail against thee; for I am with thee, saith 
Jehovah, to deliver thee."— Jeremiah 1:19. 

IN THE morning after the riot and St. Paul's 
rescue by the Roman soldiers. Colonel 
Lysias in perplexity called together the Jewish 
Sanhedrin, in order that they might pass 
upon the Apostle's case; for by this time he 
had recognized that the point of dispute was 
a religious one, and that his duty was merely 
to preserve the peace. Thus St. Paul was 
afforded another opportunity to witness the 
Gospel to the Jews— to their most learned 
body of men, their most influential Court of Seventy. 
Perhaps by this time the Apostle began to realize that his 
trying experiences were furnishing him with superior opportunities 
as a herald of the Gospel. 

Looking back with the eye of faith, we can perceive 
that this is always so; that, as from the very first, the 
Lord is supervising His own work. But only in proportion 
as we know what constitutes the Lord's work can we 
have and use the eye of faith. We must see that the 
Divine Program is not to attempt the conversion of the 
world at the present time, but to leave that work for the 
future, to be accomplished by Christ's Millennial Kingdom. 
We must see that during the present Age His work is 
merely that of selecting, or electing, the Church, to be His 



Bride-Consort in His Kingdom— His Associate in the great 
work which will then be accomplished for the whole world. 

As St. Paul realized the opportunity granted him of addressing 
the leaders of his nation, he sought to make wise 
use of it. Hence the earnestness of his countenance. 
"Looking steadfastly" at his audience, he began by reminding 
them of his faithfulness as a Jew. He had ever 
been a model citizen, never lawless. He addressed the 
Council as "Brethren," thus putting himself on an equality 
with them, in respect to both religious zeal and general 
learning. Indeed, it is quite generally supposed that at 
the time of the stoning of St. Stephen Saul of Tarsus— 
afterwards St. Paul— was a member of the Sanhedrin. 

"SPEAK EVIL OF NO MAN" 

The address which St. Paul had planned to deliver was 
interrupted by the high priest, who commanded those who 
stood by the Apostle to smite him on the mouth. This 
was a special mark of indignity and a protest against the 
words uttered. It is not unfair to assume that the high 
priest felt his own course in life especially condemned by 
St. Paul's words; for, as the Master declared, "the darkness 
hateth the light." Josephus charges Ananias with 
having been a hypocritical grafter of the baser sort, but 
so crafty that the public in general esteemed him. Suddenly 
checked in his speech, the Apostle shouted, "God 
shall smite thee, thou whited wall." The prophecy came 
true. Within two years Ananias was deposed. Within 
six years he met a horrible death, his own son being associated 
with his assassins, who drew Ananias from his 
hiding place in a sewer and slew him. 

The term "whited wall" was applied to ordinary graves, 
which were covered with a stone slab bearing the inscription. 
These were frequently whitewashed, so as to be 
easily discernible, lest any traveler should tread upon them 
and, according to Jewish ritual, be defiled. (Numbers 19:1 1-16.) 
The pure, glistening white stone was beautiful; 
but beneath it was corruption. The strength of the 
symbol as representing hypocrisy is manifest. 

R5952 : page 267 

Some of the bystanders who heard the Apostle asked, 
"Revilest thou God's high priest?" St. Paul rejoined, "I 
wist not, brethren, that he was the high priest; for it is 
written, "Thou shalt not speak evil of the ruler of thy 
people." (Exodus 22:28.) It will be remembered that 
the Apostle never fully recovered his eyesight after having 
been struck blind on the way to Damascus. (Acts 9:8, 9.) 
Of his imperfect vision, his "thorn in the flesh" 
(2 Corinthians 12:7-10), the Lord refused to relieve him, 
but assured him that in compensation he should have the 
more of Divine grace. This answer to his prayer the 
Apostle gladly accepted. It is possible, therefore, that he 
did not discern the high priest, or else did not know that 



the indignity was suggested by Ananias. 

A COMMON, BUT DANGEROUS PRACTICE 

It is claimed by some that Ananias had usurped his 
office, and that hence the Apostle's words may have meant 
that he did not recognize that the true high priest was 
present. The latter view is implied by the fact that St. 
Paul did not apologize for his words, but merely showed 
that he fully recognized the Divine Law that rulers should 
not be slandered. 

This is a good rule for every one today. The tendency 
to speak evil of dignitaries, to belittle them, to caricature 
them, is a prevalent sin, which is doing much more to 
undermine good government than the fun-makers seem to 
realize. Undoubtedly there are times and ways for protesting 
against things and methods with which we do not 
fully agree. But the people of God should preeminently 
stand for law and order, with as much justice as may be 
attainable, waiting for absolute justice until the King of 
kings shall take His Millennial Throne. His command to 
us meantime is that we "be subject to the powers that 
be," and "follow peace with all men," so far as possible. 
-Romans 13:1; Hebrews 12:14. 

Incidentally we remark that some are disposed even to 
speak jestingly of the Lord and the Scriptures. This is 
a dangerous practice. "The REVERENCE of the Lord 
is the beginning of wisdom"; and it must continue in us, 
and increase as the years go by, if we would make our 
calling and election sure to the glorious things which God 
has in reservation for them that love Him and reverence 
Him.-Job 28:28; Psalm 111:10. 

ST. PAUL'S READY TACT 

This incident had interrupted in its beginning the 
hoped-for presentation of the Gospel. St. Paul perceived 
that the prejudice against him was such that no speech 
of his could affect his hearers; for they were dominated 
by the high priest, whose lack of justice had found so 
early a manifestation. Like a general who, finding his 
front attack useless, wheels his forces and, by a flank 
movement, captures the enemy, so St. Paul captured the 
sympathies of fully one-half of his auditors. At the same 
time he secured an opportunity for showing that the doctrine 
which he preached was the logical outcome of the 
faith of the large sect of Pharisees. 

The Apostle did this by shouting, "I am a Pharisee, 
the son of a Pharisee; and I am being persecuted because 
of my belief in the doctrine of the resurrection." This 
statement was strictly true. The word Pharisee signifies 
a person who professes entire sanctification to God. St. 
Paul had never ceased to maintain this attitude. His experiences 
on the way to Damascus had changed his course 
of conduct, but not his attitude of heart, which from the 
first was loyal to God— "in all good conscience." 



St. Paul well knew that the Sanhedrin was about 
equally divided between the ultra-orthodox, holiness-professing 
Pharisees and the agnostic, higher-critical Sadducees, 
who numbered amongst them many of the most 
prominent Jews, including priests. The effect of his shout 
was instantaneous. The Pharisees took his part as one who 
in some respects believed as they did, although they could 
not endorse all of his teachings. As between the infidel 
Sadducees and an out-of-the-way Pharisee, they promptly 
espoused the cause of the latter. 

R5953 : page 267 

A tumult ensued, some seeking to take the Apostle's 
life, and others endeavoring to protect him. Again Caesar's 
soldiers needed to intervene between warring factions 
of the people of God. How sad a scene! How pitiable 
that those who possessed much advantage every way, as 
did the Jews under Divine instruction, should so sadly 
neglect the lessons of the Divine Law in respect to justice 
and to one another's rights, not to mention the Divine 
instruction, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself"! 
(Leviticus 19:18.) How pitiable it is that this is sometimes 
true of Christians possessed of still higher appreciation 
of the Divine standards and under covenant vows to 
lay down their lives for the brethren, and indeed exhorted 
that they cannot win the prize which they seek unless they 
reach the point of loving their enemies! 

True, fisticuffs are not so popular today amongst civilized 
people. But cannot even greater cruelty be accomplished 
by the tongue than by the hand? Is it not true 
that even amongst those who have named the name of 
Christ and who have taken upon themselves a consecration 
vow to do His will, many bite and devour one another, 
under the influence of the spirit of the Adversary- 
anger, malice, hatred, envy, strife? As we see these 
things, shall we not learn a valuable lesson, one which will 
enable us the better to glorify our Father in Heaven? 

A CONSPIRACY EXPOSED AND FOILED 

Back in safety to the castle, the Apostle doubtless 
wondered in what manner the Lord had been glorified by 
this, his latest experience. Often it is thus with ourselves. 
But where we cannot trace the Lord's providence 
and see the outcome, we have all the better opportunity 
for cultivating the faith which "can firmly trust Him, 
come what may." 

Meanwhile, Colonel Lysias was evidently learning that 
his prisoner was no common man; for one who could 
remain calm, alert, dignified, humble and self-possessed, 
while his opponents were the reverse of all these, evidenced 
to an unprejudiced mind that he was probably in 
the right of the controversy. This change of the Roman 
officer's attitude toward St. Paul was manifested in his 
kindly treatment of the Apostle's nephew, who had brought 



word to his uncle that a band of forty men were plotting 
to take his life. 

These conspirators, forty professed religionists, forgetful 
of the Divine Law, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor 
as thyself," had bound themselves to each other by an 
oath that they would neither eat nor sleep until they had 
killed St. Paul— a man who had done them no harm, but 
who had, on the contrary, merely endeavored as wisely as 
possible to do them good. At the instance of his mother, 
who was the Apostle's sister, the lad had gained access 
to the castle and had explained the plot to his uncle, who 
sent him to the commandant. The latter took the boy by 
the hand to a private place, heard his story and dismissed 
him, telling him to keep the matter quiet. 

Perceiving that he was in conflict with at least one-half 
of the influential of Jewry, the commandant concluded 
that the wisest course for him to pursue would be 
to put his prisoner under the protection of Felix, the Roman 
Governor, at Caesarea. Accordingly, at 9 o'clock 
that very night, two hundred infantry, two hundred spearmen 

R5953 : page 268 

and seventy horsemen took the Apostle to new quarters, 
where as an ambassador in bonds he would have 
fresh opportunity for representing his great Master. 

This Study shows us that God prefers to use natural 
means rather than supernatural agencies; and that all of 
His children should be on the alert to serve His Cause at 
any and every moment. God's purposes will be accomplished. 
But happy is he who is accounted worthy of the 
privilege of any service to the Lord or to the least of His 
brethren. Let us, then, be continually on the lookout, 
in an inquiring attitude of mind, desirous of knowing the 
mind of the Lord in every matter. As for the Apostle, 
doubtless he learned a lesson which we might all profitably 
consider; namely, that while having full confidence 
in the Divine will, it is ours to protect reasonably and 
properly our lives and interests as well as those of others. 



R5953 : page 268 

ST. PAUL BEFORE FELIX 
-OCTOBER 8.-ACTS 24:1-21.— 

ST. PAUL AT CAESAREA, THE ROMAN CAPITAL OF JUDEA- 
HIS TRIAL BEFORE THE ROMAN GOVERNOR-THE CHARGES 
BROUGHT AGAINST THE APOSTLE-ST. PAUL'S DEFENSE- 

THE DOCTRINE OF THE RESURRECTION THE THEME OF 
HIS PREACHING-THIS DOCTRINE LOST SIGHT OF BY MANY 

PROFESSED CHRISTIANS OF OUR DAY-THE ROMAN 
GOVERNOR INTERESTED IN THE APOSTLE'S TEACHINGS- 
ST. PAUL A PRISONER FOR TWO YEARS. 



"Herein I also exercise myself to have a conscience void 
of offense toward God and man always."— Verse 16. 

FELIX, the Roman Governor of Judea, received 
St. Paul as a prisoner. The Apostle's 
enemies, the high priest and other Jewish 
rulers, hastened down from Jerusalem to 
Caesarea, thirsting for his blood. They 
brought with them a Roman lawyer, named 
Tertullus, whose knowledge of Roman usage 
would, they hoped, enable them to prove that 
St. Paul was a dangerous character— a sort 
of anarchist. Felix was the judge. There 
were no jurors. Tertullus, skilled as a pleader, made his 
charges and confirmed them by witnesses from Jerusalem. 

Shrewdly the Roman attorney complimented the Governor 
along the lines of his hitherto efficiency in preserving 
the peace, in putting down every form of insurrection 
and in maintaining quiet and order. This very completely 
paved the way for the lawyer's request that the Governor 
should continue this praiseworthy course and rid the land 
of an obnoxious trouble-maker— the Apostle. Witnesses 
were produced who testified respecting the first tumult in 
the Temple at Jerusalem and also respecting that of the 
following day, in which the Sanhedrin became divided 
into two parts and a general uproar ensued. The Apostle 
was charged with being a ringleader of a sect called 
Nazarenes; and the claim was made that he had caused 
trouble amongst both Jews and Greeks the world over. 

This was Tertullus' case. He charged that the prisoner 
was guilty of sacrilege— that St. Paul had defiled the 
Temple; and the inference was deducible that the Apostle 
had caused rioting within the holy sanctuary. Witnesses 
were procured to prove that these charges were true. 

Governor Felix motioned to the Apostle that he was 
at liberty to answer the charges. Then St. Paul opened 
his defense with the remark that he was gratified that his 
judge had been on the bench for some time and was well 
acquainted with Jewish customs; that he would therefore 
understand what a novice could not— why the Apostle had 
come to Jerusalem to worship after the manner of the 
Jews, to celebrate one of their religious festivals. He had 
come, not to raise an insurrection, but to worship God 
after the Jewish custom; and no witness had testified that 
he was found in the Temple either disputing or gathering 
a crowd. The charge was untrue. He did not do these 
things in the synagogues or anywhere else; and his enemies 
could not prove the tilings whereof they accused him. 

The Apostle's answer was both logical and complete. 
Still the Governor could not understand why, under the 
circumstances, there should be a commotion. Hence it was 
necessary for St. Paul to explain that the Jews had an 
antipathy against him because of his different religious 
belief, not because of any wrong-doing on his part. 

THE DOCTRINE OF THE RESURRECTION 



St. Paul avowed that he had experienced no change in 
his Jewish belief— that he still believed the teachings of 
the Law and the writings of the Prophets; that he still 
held to the fundamental Jewish doctrine of the necessity 
of a resurrection of the dead; and that he still had faith 
in the Promise that through the resurrection of the dead 
God's blessing should ultimately come to Israel, and 
through Israel to all the families of the earth. Furthermore, 
he exercised himself, trained himself, disciplined 
himself, to keep his conscience pure, free from violation 
of Divine and human laws. 

This was a grand testimony. Its force should have 
had weight, not only with the Governor, but also with 
the Jews, who murderously sought the Apostle's life because 
of a little difference of opinion on religious questions. 
What a lesson we have here! A Roman Governor 
and judge of not too savory a reputation: a prosecuting 
attorney willing to sell his talents for money, regardless of 
the principles of justice; the Jewish high priest, typical 
of the great Messiah, associating himself with those who 
were endeavoring to pervert justice and to destroy one 
of "the salt of the earth" ! 

Our Lord had foretold that some of His disciples 
would stand before kings and princes, but that they should 
not be dismayed. He would stand by them to give them 
assistance. (Matthew 10:17-22.) How literally this was 
fulfilled in St. Paul's case! How evidently the Lord stood 
by him and gave him the suitable words! 

The Apostle proceeded to explain that he had brought 
alms to his nation, the offerings of Gentiles who had heard 
his Message of the grace of God. Certain Jews from 
Asia Minor had found him purified in the Temple, but 
without cry or tumult. These Jews should have been 
brought forward as witnesses. Or those who were making 
the charges against him should have been specific; 
they should have said on the day following the attack by 
the mob— the day when he was brought before the Sanhedrin— 
what he did tumultuously in the Temple or what 
wrong-doing they had found in him. Only one charge 
could they make; namely, that while standing amongst 
them he had cried out, "Touching the resurrection of the 
dead I am called into question this day!" Surely the Governor 
could not think that in this there was anything akin 
to rioting or anarchy! The prisoner had been in the right; 
but those who were accusing him had been in the wrong. 

A DOCTRINE LOST SIGHT OF 

The Apostle's testimony shows us that in all of his 
preaching he laid special stress upon the doctrine of the 
resurrection of the dead, both of the just and of the unjust. 
Alas, that in our day this doctrine has been measurably 

page 269 



lost sight of! Few Christians ever think of the 
resurrection. Few have ever heard a sermon upon this 
subject. Why is this? 

We reply that it is because a great error has come in 
amongst Christian people in respect to the condition of 
the dead. According to both Catholics and Protestants, 
only the saintly are fit for Heaven at death. Both agree 
that only finished characters could properly be admitted 
there. Both agree to our Lord's words respecting the 
Kingdom: "Few there be that find it." (Matthew 7:13, 14.) 
Our Catholic friends tell us that nearly all mankind 
—heathens. Catholics and Protestants— go to Purgatory, 
where for centuries they will undergo terrible sufferings, 
which will purge them from sin and prepare them for 
Heaven. Many Protestant friends tell us that they do not 
see even this hope; that from their standpoint only the 
"little flock" go to Heaven; that all the great mass of mankind, 
unprepared for the presence of God, must go somewhere; 
and that the only place for them is a Hell of 
eternal torture, from which there will be no escape. 

We shall not quarrel with either party. Both views 
are too horrible to be reasonable or just, not to mention 
loving! We prefer to go back to the words of Jesus and 
the Apostles, and to note that according to their teachings 
the dead are really dead, and that their only hope is, as 
the Apostle expresses it, a resurrection hope— "the hope of 
the resurrection," the hope "that there shall be a resurrection 
of the dead, both of the just and of the unjust." 
-Acts 24:15. 

It is not the resurrection of the body that the Bible 
teaches, but the resurrection of the soul; and "God will 
give it a body" at the time of the awakening. 
(1 Corinthians 15:38.) We could wish that all Christian people 
would arouse themselves to a thorough study of the Scriptures. 
Then the doctrine of the resurrection of the dead 
would be given its proper place; and much of the fog 
of the Dark Ages would thus be gotten rid of— the fog 
which has troubled us, saddened our hearts and turned 
many away from God and the Bible into infidelity. 

THE COMING JUDGMENT DAY 

After having heard both sides of the case, the governor-judge 
set it aside until Claudius Lysias, the commandant 
of Fort Antonia, the Roman officer who had 
made the arrest, should be heard. Meantime, St. Paul 
was given great liberty, the real status of his case evidently 
being quite clearly understood by Governor Felix. 

Subsequently the governor, apparently much impressed 
by the Apostle's demeanor, called for him again, at a time 
when his wife, a Jewess, was present. He wished her to 
hear the Gospel Message, which seems to have appealed 
to him as reasonable. St. Paul doubtless reviewed much 
of his previous testimony, and then reasoned respecting a 
coming judgment, or trial— that eternal destinies are not 
fixed as a result of the present life. 



Assuredly the Apostle explained that God has appointed 
a Day of trial, or judgment, for the whole world 
of mankind— the Millennial Day, a thousand years long. 
(2 Peter 3:7, 8.) During that period all mankind shall 
have a full trial as to worthiness or unworthiness of human 
perfection and life everlasting. The obedient shall 
be blessed, uplifted, raised up, up, up to perfection. The 
wilfully disobedient shall be destroyed in the Second Death. 

"A JUST RECOMPENSE OF REWARD" 

If, then, the trial of the world is to be in the future 
Age, and if in the present Age God is merely electing, or 
selecting, the Church to be the Bride of His Son and 
Joint-heir in the Messianic Kingdom, which is to bless the 
world, how could these matters have any special influence 
upon Felix and his wife? We reply. In two ways: 

(1) It might influence them to accept Christ and to 
seek to be of the elect Church; 

(2) Knowing of their future trial, they should know 

that the words and the deeds of the present life have much 
to do with the status of the individual when he is awakened 
from the tomb. The vicious, the hypocritical, the 
self-righteous, the wanton, the profligate, degrade themselves 
and increase the number of steps which they must 
retrace during the Millennium. On the contrary, every 
good deed, every victory gained, every practice of moderation, 
will make the individual correspondingly the better 
prepared for the next life. Every generous deed of the 
present life makes its impress upon the character, and will 
bring proportionate blessings in that Millennial Judgment 
Day. On the other hand, every evil deed, every violation 
of conscience, will receive its "stripes," or just punishment. 

As Felix listened to the Apostle, he was conscience-stricken. 
According to this teaching, he would have much 
for which to give account as one of the "unjust" in the 
resurrection. We note that St. Paul said nothing about 
fiery tortures, which an intelligent mind must repudiate 
as unreasonable; but his argument was all the stronger 
without such assertions. His forceful declaration was, 
"A just recompense of reward both for the just and for 
the unjust." Finally the governor dismissed him with the 
memorable words, "Go thy way for this time. When I 
have a more convenient season I will call for thee." 

Time and again Governor Felix called for the Apostle; 
but apparently never did he find his heart in a sufficiently 
mellow and humble condition to accept the Apostle's Message 
and to surrender to the Lord. A lesson in this connection 
for us all is that we should do promptly whatever 
we realize to be our duty. For two years St. Paul 
remained a prisoner at Caesarea, comfortably provided 
for, preparing for the further services of his life, and 
writing several epistles to the various Churches. 



R5953 : page 269 

I.B.S.A. CONSCRIPTS IN GREAT BRITAIN 

THE LONDON OFFICE WRITES:- 

"Measures taken by the Government during the present 
year have drawn all men of Military age (18 to 41) into 
the Army, automatically, the only exceptions being those 
prescribed by the Act itself. Among these are Men of 
Holy Orders and regular Ministers of any Religious Denomination. 
As some 160 of the Elders of various 
Ecclesias were affected by this, we thought it wise and 
proper to see if they were not properly excepted from the 
Act, especially on account of the need of their services in 
the Ecclesias. A test case, on a friendly basis, was arranged 
with the War Office and tried at Edinburgh on Monday 
(17th inst.), when the Crown was represented by counsel. 
The decision given by the Court was entirely in our 
favor, the Sheriff ruling that this Association is a properly 
constituted Religious Institution, and that the Elders are 
Ministers within the meaning of the Act, and therefore 
properly excepted from the Act. 

"We do not know, as yet, whether the War Office will 
require further proof before acknowledging our status, but 
we are corresponding with them as to this. If this matter 
is finally settled in our favor, we are hopeful that the 
Colporteurs, etc., will be granted a special concession as Lay 
Evangelists and Agents of the Association. 

"At the present time those of our Brethren who have been 
conscripted can be described as follows: 

Doing work of a combative character 

Doing work of a non-combative character 20 

Imprisoned through failure to obey Military orders .58 

Given work of National Importance apart from 
the Military, having satisfied the Tribunals of 
the genuineness of their conscientious objection 103 

R5953 : page 270 

"Quite a number have been medically rejected and a few 
have been given exemption on account of the important religious 
work they have on hand. 

"At the Court in Edinburgh quite a good witness was 
made. Brother Shearn was chief witness and he was before 
the Court 1-1/2 hours, one -third of the time explaining 
wherein our teachings differ from those of the Denominations. 
The Court seemed really interested as well as satisfied. 
The hand of the Lord was manifestly with us." 



DEATH SENTENCES COMMUTED-ALL SERENE 
BOULOGNE, FRANCE. 
Loving Christian Greeting to all the dear ones in Christ 
Jesus! We were "read out" on Saturday last, and the verdict 
you will be anxious to hear is now public: "Sentenced 



to suffer death by being shot, but commuted to 10 years' 
Penal Servitude." We are still peaceful in the knowledge 
of our Heavenly Father's loving care, and are not too 
greatly concerned, for have we not agreed to be faithful to 
the Lord, come what may? and we came out here in full 
reliance upon the Lord's grace and prepared in the strength 
He supplies for anything He should deem good for us. 

And now for the future: I suppose we shall see the 
inside of a prison for a while; but as to whether we shall 
serve so long remains to be seen. I do not consider the 
sentence to be as big as it looks. They have to keep up 
appearances out here, you understand. I expect we shall 
leave here about Tuesday or Wednesday, so do not send 
any particular communication after this reaches you. 

We have had some nice studies; Lot as a type of Great 
Company, more of Psalm 89, and also Hebrews 7. 

The way before us is uncertain, but we have learned so 
much of the Lord's care during the past few weeks that 
we are prepared to leave all in His hands. We have this 
confidence, born of our Christian experience, particularly 
that of recent days, that He who is for us is more than 
all that can be against us. There is not the least doubt 
in our minds that if we trust Him, we shall not be confounded, 
though storm and tempest may come. Oh, what 
a joy and peace this knowledge brings to our souls! Here 
is another "mystery of the Kingdom." Those with whom we 
have come in contact cannot understand our being so quiet 
and confident, when, as they say, the situation is so serious; 
and we do not murmur at our trials, because we count it a 
privilege to suffer for righteousness' sake. 

Continue to pray for us that we may come out of the 
fire purified and made white. 

Love to all the dear brethren. (Romans 15:5-7.) 
ROWLAND JACKSON. 



R5954 : page 270 

ARMY'S CALL TO AN EDINBURGH COLPORTEUR 
BELIEFS OF THE I.B.S.A. 

"The plea that he was a regular minister of a religious 
denomination, and therefore not liable for service, was advanced 
on behalf of a young man named James Frederick 
Scott, residing at 2 Leslie Place, Stockbridge, and connected 
with the International Bible Students Association, who 
pleaded not guilty at Edinburgh Sheriff Court today before 
Sheriff-Substitute Orr to a charge of having failed to appear 
at the recruiting office when called up under the Military 
Service Act. 

"The Honorable Secretary of the I.B.S.A., Mr. H.J. 
Shearn, examined by Mr. M'Laren, counsel for the defence, 
explained some of the work of the Association. Its meetings, 
he said, were open to the public, and they never took 
collections. To disseminate the Gospel and to establish 
Christians in churches for their spiritual education was the 



purpose of the Association's centers for Bible study. There 
were about 300 of these centers in Great Britain, of which 
there were about thirty in Scotland. They believed they 
were at present near the end of a Dispensation, and so were 
not surprised that things in the world were disturbed now. 
Mr. Scott was an Elder of the Edinburgh Church, or center 
of the Association. 

"Witness, cross-examined by Mr. Wark, advocate, said 
there were in Great Britain about 160 Elders of military 
age. There was adult baptism, but not baptism of infants. 

"Replying to the Sheriff, the witness said that members 
of the Association did not believe many things believed by 
other denominations. Members of the Association did not 
believe that the conversion of the world had commenced. 
Rather did they believe that God was gathering out now 
those who would deal with the world later on as Abraham's 
true sons. They did not understand that the human family 
was to share with God a heavenly home. They understood 
that man's future home was the earth, made glorious, and 
man restored to the perfection lost through Adam's transgression. 
They did not believe in the immortality of the 
soul, but they did believe in the resurrection of the just and 
unjust. They looked upon their Elders as regular ministers 
set apart for the spiritual instruction of members. 

"When the accused entered the witness-box he told the 
Court that he was twenty-five years of age, and unmarried. 
He joined the I.B.S.A. at Dundee in 1909, and was an 
Elder of the Edinburgh Church, a post for which he received 
no payment. He made his living as a Colporteur for the 
Association, and his pay was the profits on the sale of literature. 
The duties of an Elder in the Edinburgh Church 
of the Association were to minister to the spiritual needs 
of the Church, to conduct public and private meetings, and 
to assist members to a proper understanding of the Word 
of God. They had to attend to the sacraments, baptisms, 
and the Lord's Supper, and visit the sick. 

"He himself had taken part in a baptismal service in the 
Dairy Baths. He was one of the two Elders who took part, 
and about a dozen people were baptized. He had also taken 
part in communion services, but he had not officiated at a 
marriage or a funeral. 

"Amongst other evidence put forward on behalf of the 
accused was that of a Patrick man, who was married by 
an Elder of the Association, and the latter's signature was accepted 
by the Registrar-General as that of a 'regular minister.' 

"The Sheriff held that accused came under the exception 
provided by the Act, and found him not guilty of the 
charge."— Evening Dispatch. 



R5954 : page 270 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
LEARNING THE TRUE SECRET OF TRIALS 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Joyous greetings in the name of our blessed Master. For 
many months I have desired to write to thank you for all 
the help I have received through STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
THE WATCH TOWER, etc. 

In THE WATCH TOWER of April 15th, 1915, you published 
an article on "Love," desiring to know the progress made by 
those who particularly desired the growth of the chiefest of 
spiritual graces. At that time I was on a bed of sickness and 
much pain. The message of joy and peace which that WATCH 
TOWER brought to me I can never fully express in words. 
I longed to grow more in love, and I prayed earnestly that 
the Lord would grant my desire. He has, more abundantly 
than I had thought possible. 

I have learned that trials and difficulties, under Divine 
providence, are intended to develop our characters and to 
make us copies of the Master, thus preparing us for the Kingdom 
and for the great work of blessing others. They are 
but stepping stones, helping our progress in the narrow way 
of self-sacrifice, helping us to draw closer to the Lord, recognizing 
His hand in all life's affairs toward "the called ones 
according to His Purpose." There is an advantage in every 
trial, if rightly received. I have learned that they really 
assist us to put on the whole Armor of God, assist us in 
growing in the graces of the Spirit and especially in this 
crowning grace of "Love"; and not only in Love, but in 
patient endurance. They help us to tread faithfully in the 
footsteps of our Lord until the Kingdom, for which the 
Church has prayed so long, is attained. 

I have learned, too, that sometimes matters which seem 
dark clouds and insurmountable difficulties, under His loving 
Hand are but messengers bidding me to "yet closer draw"; 
for "He would embrace my care"; and that if loving Him 
and trusting Him, I must "lean hard." 

"He loves me too well to forsake me. 
Or to give me a trial too much." 

With the knowledge of His love and care I go on my way 
rejoicing, praying Him to continue His good work begun 
in me, and to grant by His grace that I may do nothing to 
hinder it. 

I pray daily for you, that God may graciously guide and 
preserve you, and continue the blessing you have heretofore 
bestowed. With much Christian love, 

Your sister in the Master, MABEL STEWARD.-S. Africa. 

R5954: page 271 

WORDS FAIL TO EXPRESS HER GRATITUDE 

DEARLY BELOVED PASTOR AND BROTHER:- 

Having been told by a brother in the Truth that my experience 
would make your heart glad, I am writing, although 
I fear I cannot put into words my gratitude for this great joy 
which has come into my life through the I.B.S.A. I was 
always longing for more light until God sent someone about 



a year ago to open the eyes of my understanding. I had a 
severe struggle with doubts and fears, as to whether this was 
what I had craved or whether the Church of England and 
others were mistaken. 

For years I had been feeling very sick of what seemed to 
me such shallowness in our religion; but oh, I did not then 
understand the Love of God; how can I thank Him for His 
wondrous love! I now love and understand my Bible and 
am hoping this new year may bring this joy to others who 
are Truth-hungry as I was. 

I enjoy the WATCH TOWERS and pass them on to others 
who are interested. I saw the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION, 
and although I could not deny its power, sixteen years of 
Church-of -England teaching then had a hold upon me from 
which I thank God I am now free. I hope to be baptized 
very soon. 

With heart-felt love for your work in His name, I am 

Your Sister in the Truth, PRISCILLA COMPTON.-Eng. 



WHEN DIVORCED PEOPLE ARE FREE TO MARRY 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I am well aware that Volume VI., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
seems to touch every phase of the experiences, difficulties 
and proper course of action of the Lord's people of 
the New Creation; nevertheless, a question has arisen which 
is causing some perplexity in our Class and threatens a division. 
A Brother and a Sister, members of our Class, have 
always enjoyed our fellowship, until now it is learned that the 
Sister was previously married, and that her first husband is 
still living and has remarried. 

Some of our Class desire to disfellowship this Brother and 
Sister and to forbid their attendance at the meetings. The 
main contention is based upon the words of Jesus in Matthew 19:9— 
"Whosoever shall put away his wife, except it be for 
fornication, and shall marry another, committeth adultery; 
and whoso marrieth her which is put away doth commit 
adultery." In the case mentioned it is claimed that the Sister's 
first husband had been guilty of adultery; but others 
claim that this would not release her for remarriage; for 
Jesus said that whosoever marrieth a divorced woman 
(whether properly divorced or not) would be committing 
adultery. Please give us a little more light on these points. 

Very truly your Brother, — . 

[The Class is evidently making a mistake in allowing the 
matter here presented to cause any division or disturbance. 
In any event they would seem to have no ground for forbidding 
attendance at meeting. The very most they might 
vote would be to withdraw fellowship and include in this a 
refusal to visit at their home or to invite them to the homes 
of the Class— the Class declining also to appoint the Brother 
to any office, such as Deacon or Elder. As for refusing them 
the privilege of attending public meeting, that would be veiy 
inconsistent; for surely all kinds of people living in all kinds 



of sin come occasionally to meetings, and we hope that by 
coming they may be benefited and recovered. 

In this case, where it is admitted that adultery was the 
basis of divorce and that the fault was with the husband, it 
plainly comes within the exception mentioned by our Lord— 
"except for adultery." Besides, if that had not been originally 
the cause of the separation, the fact that the former husband 
had remarried signifies that he had considered the marriage 
tie broken; and therefore the first wife was released from 
its obligation. Evidently the Sister whose case you cite has 
both of these proofs on her side and had every right, therefore, 
to have married, if she thought that the wisest and 
proper thing to do. 

It is not supposable that our Lord meant merely a separation 
between husband and wife; for St. Paul counsels that 
if the unbeliever depart, let him depart— do not consider it 
a hardship, but rather take it as a blessing. He does not 
say that the departing of the husband or wife would be a 
divorce. A divorce is a full breaking of the original marriage 
contract. Jesus was criticizing the too slack observance of the 
marriage tie, and condemning it. He declared that the marriage 
contract could not be fully broken except by adultery. 

In our day these matters are regulated by courts. Very 
properly, Bible Students govern themselves additionally by 
the Word of God. The fact that a court would grant a 
divorce would not by a Bible Student be considered liberation 
from the marriage bonds, unless upon the one ground 
which the Master specified. But a court divorce is to be respected 
when it is backed by the condition of adultery— or 
backed by a second marriage of the separated one.] 



CHANGED ATTITUDE TOWARD SPIRITISM 

DEAR SIRS:- 

I am obliged for your book on Spiritism and several 
papers on this and other subjects. Since writing you, I have 
gotten in touch with your branch at Lancaster Gate, London, 
and have purchased from them twelve booklets and the first 
volume of your Series, THE DIVINE PLAN OF THE AGES, besides 
matter on other subjects of interest. Owing to delay 
in foreign money orders, I will continue to get books from 
your London branch. 

I have now carefully read your book on SPIRITISM, and 
can say that I agree with it entirely. I find your explanations 
in accord with reason and also my eight years' investigation of 
"Modern Spiritism," with which I am not now connected. 

Through your SPIRITISM book my wife and I have 
changed our attitude toward Spiritism. We were developing 
very quickly, and my wife was a clairaudient, clairvoyant and 
trance medium, while she appeared to have materialistic 
faculties. I had not developed far, but was likely to become 
a trance medium and had several experiences and was conscious 
of presences in normal times. 

I think your book not at all overdrawn, and believe Spiritism 



is demoralizing, anti-Christian and the effort and work 
of demon spirits. 

Your SPIRITISM book has enlightened me on many things 
I could not quite see through, and though an investigator 
I was not blind to everything that went on around me, as 
are most of the attendants at "circles." 

I have sent several of your books to friends whom I had 
interested in Spiritism and shall send to others in due time. 

Yours faithfully, ERNEST E. NOBLE.-England. 



page 27 1 

A GREAT CHANGE OF MIND 

MY DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

For a long time I have wanted to write you, but up to 
now have hesitated, lest I should trespass on your valuable 
time too much, knowing that you are very busy. But I 
would do violence to my conscience if I did not tell you that 
only a few years ago I despised even to look at your picture, 
and for years would not read a line written by you! Our 
Father knows them that are His, and He knows exactly how 
to deal with them to bring them into subjection to His will. 

In 1910 dear Sister Lentz, who is now with our dear 
Master, led me into the Present Truth, by leaving the Fifth 
Volume in my office, requesting me to examine it. This I 
did after telling her a lie about it. Before opening the book 
I got down on my knees and asked my Heavenly Father 
to guide me. I got up and read two chapters, with Bible in 
hand, when I received such a blessing, that when the Sister 
called the next morning I asked if she had any more books 
like that, what was the price and how soon could I have them. 
She gave the price and I handed her the money, and told her 
to bring them at once; for I had found what I had been looking 
for for years. Yet I objected to taking the Vow; but 
continuing to read, I decided that I would best take it; and 
now I do not see how I could get along without it. The most 
helpful clause in it, to me is, "I vow to further scrutinize my 
thoughts, words and doings." 

I will close by thanking you for being the instrument in 
God's hand of leading me into the absolute Truth. Pray for 
me! With Christian love, I am 

YOUR BROTHER, — M.D. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR OCTOBER 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
October follow: (1) 149; (2) 145; (3) 50; (4) 299; (5) 38; 
(6) 7; (7) 188; (8) 155; (9) 103; (10) 333; (1 1) 95; (12) 
221; (13) 273; (14) 286; (15) 313; (16) 123; (17) 102; (18) 



130; (19) 60; (20) 326; (21) 165; (22) 312; (23) 252; (24) 
105; (25) 14; (26) 65; (27) 108; (28) Vow; (29) 32; (30) 4; 
(31) 186. 



page 273 

VOL. XXXVII SEPTEMBER 15 No. 18 
A. D. 1916-A.M. 6044 



CONTENTS 

Danger in Spiritual Pride 275 

One Symptom of This Soul-Sickness 276 

Still further Symptoms 276 

Special Test Upon Elders and Deacons. . . . 277 

Great Necessity for Self-Examination. . . . 279 
God First-Self Last 279 

Application of Principles 280 

Justification-What? When? How? 281 

Cleansing of flesh Not Justification. ... 281 

The Appeal to Caesar 282 

St. Paul's Defense Before King Agrippa .... 283 
The Voyage to Rome 284 

Days of Trial and Danger 284 

Niagara and Nashville Conventions 285 

Interesting Letters 286 

The Lord has Strengthened His Heart .... 286 

The Censer— The Fire— The Incense 286 

A Preacher Who Sees Light 286 

Manna, Vow, Morning Resolve Blessings . . . 287 

Thought He Did God Service 287 

page 274 

GENERAL CONVENTIONS 

SEATTLE, WASH., SEPTEMBER 14 TO 17. 
MILWAUKEE, WIS., SEPTEMBER 16 TO 24. 
DAYTON, OHIO, OCTOBER 5 TO 8. 
DALLAS, TEXAS, OCTOBER 19 TO 22. 

SEATTLE, WASH., CONVENTION 
Excursion rates for Seattle Convention, Sept. 14-17, have 
been secured, and all those arranging to attend can secure 
these by inquiring of their local Ticket Agent. 

MILWAUKEE CONVENTION 
The Merchants' and Manufacturers' Assn., representing 
1500 of the city's leading business men, have invited the 

INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION to hold a Convention 
in the City of Milwaukee, Sept. 16 to 24. They have 
placed their splendid Auditorium at our disposal, its seating 



capacity being over 3000, with smaller halls conveniently connected 
with the main Auditorium. 

RAILROAD RATES.— The Central Passenger Association informs 
us that they grant no excursion rates in their territory, 
owing to the fact that the two-cent per mile rate prevails. 
We have learned, however, that regular summer tourists' 
excursion rates prevail from many points in this territory, 
and also in North and South Dakota, Wyoming and certain 
parts of Minnesota. Friends coming from this territory 
should inquire of their local ticket agent about regular tourists' 
rates to Milwaukee, or to Chicago via Milwaukee. 

A SPLENDID PROGRAM.-The Program contains the names 
of some of the Association's best speakers, and is a splendid 
one. Brother Russell will be present the latter part of the 
Convention. Arrangements are being made for an I.B.S.A. 
steamboat excursion on Lake Michigan Thursday afternoon, 
Sept. 21. Everything connected with the Convention arrangements 
leads us to believe that the Convention will be a profitable 
one, and we look for a large attendance. 

DAYTON, OHIO, CONVENTION 
Mayor G.W. Shroyer, of Dayton, has extended a hearty 
invitation to our Association to hold a Convention in this 
city. We have accepted the invitation and appointed the dates 
of October 5 to 8. Governor White has placed at our disposal 
the Soldiers' Home Memorial Hall, where the various 
sessions of the Convention will be held during the morning 
and afternoon, with the exhibition of the PHOTO-DRAMA OF 
CREATION in the evening. We had hoped to secure special 
concessions from the railroads running into Dayton, but have 
been unable to do so. However, those contemplating attending 
the Convention would do well to inquire of their Ticket 
Agent regarding local rates. We are preparing a very attractive 
Program. Brother Russell will be present during the 
latter part of the Convention. 

DALLAS, TEXAS, CONVENTION 
The friends at Dallas inform us that exceptionally low 
excursion rates are granted their city on account of the Dallas 
State Fair, Oct. 19-22, and we have arranged for a four-day 
Convention to be held on these dates. The various Convention 
sessions will be held in Oak Cliff Casino, cor. Crawford 
and Fifth Sts., during the morning and afternoon: the 
PHOTO-DRAMA will be shown at night. Brother Russell will 
be present during the latter part of the Convention. Those 
desiring information regarding rooms, railroad rates, etc., 
should communicate with E.G. Rust, 2517 Harrison Ave., 
Dallas, Texas. 



I.B.S.A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR MONTH OF OCTOBER 

QUESTIONS FROM 
MANUAL ON SERIES THIRD 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 



STUDY VL--THE WORK OF THE HARVEST" 
STUDY VII.-"DELIVERANCE AND EXALTATION OF CHURCH" 

Week of Oct. l.Q. 148 to 153 Week of Oct. 15. Q. 161 to 166 
Week of Oct. 8. Q. 154 to 160 Week of Oct. 22. Q. 1 to 7 
Week of Oct. 29. Q. 8 to 14 

Question Manuals on Vol. III., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
5c each: or 50c per dozen, postpaid. 



R5955 : page 275 

DANGER IN SPIRITUAL PRIDE 

PRIDE in any form and in anybody is a dangerous 
thing. In a worldly way the proverb 
is well attested, "Pride goeth before destruction 
and a haughty spirit before a fall"; and 
surely very, very few people have anything 
of which they might justly be proud! Some 
who hold their heads high with the pride of 
a haughty spirit, as though they were especially 
created out of some preferable "dust 
of the earth," have really nothing to boast 
of as to ancestry. A very few generations back are generally 
sufficient for any boaster. 

The world is learning that it is not wise to boast of 
riches, lest thereby some one ask how were the riches 
accumulated and by whom, and whether they were honestly 
obtained. Pride of education is not appropriate, 
either; for education in general signifies the learning of 
what other people have found out or have written as 
history. And in our day those who would boast of great 
education have need of humility lest it be found that the 
very thing that they are boasting about has been disproven 
by later researches. Scientific books of the year 1900 will 
not pass muster today, nor their theories stand in the light 
of present knowledge. So if it were right to boast of 
knowledge, the boaster would need to be very careful to 
keep up to date. 

Pride of one's beauty or physical perfection is scarcely 
to be excused; for the beauty of form and feature came 
by heredity, and the parent rather than the child might 
have some reason for pride. Pride as respects clothing, 
adornments is also foolish. The maker of the fabrics or 
the ornaments might have some reason for pride in the 
handiwork, but surely the wearer has not! He is merely 
appropriating to himself the skill and labor of others. 

SPIRITUAL PRIDE WORST OF ALL 

But our theme is spiritual pride! We would divide 
it into two classes: first, the spiritual pride of the merely 
nominal or professing Christian; and second, the spiritual 



pride affecting true Christians. 

The spiritual pride of the nominal church-goer is not 
all hypocrisy. He sees spiritual forms and ceremonies, 
hears spiritual songs and sermons, and in many instances 
is not aware but that he himself is a true Christian, as 
much so as any. Does he not go regularly to meeting? 
Is he not a regular contributor, not only to the expenses 
of the house of worship, but in general to the forwarding 
of the Lord's cause— charities, etc., as these are presented 
to him from time to time? 

However they have lived during the week, however they 
have dealt with the butcher and the baker, most church-goers 
take a pleasurable pride in joining some of the 
showy groups moving toward church buildings. The 
spiritually proud usually prefer the showiest and most 
aristocratic and high-toned temples of worship. At the 
conclusion of the services they feel a self-satisfaction. 
Have they not worshiped God? Ought not all people to 
worship Him? How many others have not done so! 
They feel a spiritual pride or superiority when comparing 
themselves with non-attendants. 

They went not for spiritual instruction; or even if any 
were given in the places visited, they were not themselves 
in condition to receive such— not being spirit-begotten. 
They had no real hunger for righteousness, for truth. 
They had merely satisfied a feeling of duty. They had 
in a sense done penance, and hoped that somehow, sometime 
it would inure to their advantage— perhaps saving 
them from some of the worst degrees of purgatorial sufferings— 
perhaps even making them acceptable for 
Heaven. Why should not God feel grateful to them for 
having denied themselves and wasted a few of their 
precious hours to go worship Him? 

Although they would not put it so, they feel in a 
measure that God would be very unjust if He would pass 
by such a matter and not reward it handsomely. They 
feel spiritually proud and self-satisfied, and so long as in 
that condition are not in a particle of danger of getting 
hold of the Truth. Nor need we suppose that the Great 
Adversary would especially give his attention to them, 
for they are very safely under his influence. Was he 
not the first to manifest pride and to say in his heart, 
"I will ascend above the sons of God [I will take a 
higher position than others]; I will be as the Most 
High"? Spiritual pride was evidently Satan's great mistake, 
which led to his complete downfall. 

Some who make no pretense of belief in God or in 
the Lord Jesus Christ or in the Bible have what might 
be termed a sort of spiritual pride. They pride themselves 
on living a moral life, on being able to conduct themselves 
honorably and decently in life— never getting drunk, never 
doing some of the seriously immoral and perverse things 
that many others do. In pride and boastfulness they will 
say: "I feel myself just as good as any church member, 
and I never go to church." And by this they mean. "I 
feel myself to be better than any church member." They 



are merely mixing modesty of statement with pride of 
thought in the proportion which they think will best influence 
the hearer. 

Press the inquiry a little further— as to what good 
works they especially rejoice in— and they will tell how as 
"Odd Fellows," "Masons," etc., they sat up one night with 

R5955 : page 276 

a brother of the Order who was not very sick, who did 

not need very much attention and who had a trained nurse 

anyway to take care of him; but they felt as though they 

had been doing a noble work of charity. In general, their 

pride is that they have not violated the laws; that they 

have lived decent, respectable lives. Is there really anything 

in this that is an occasion for pride, for special self-congratulation? 

What man or woman should not keep 

the laws and should not be ashamed if he failed to keep 

the laws— especially when we would remember that those 

laws were made— not for good people, but for evil-doers? 

SPIRITUAL PRIDE IN THE TRUE CHURCH 

Now we come down to the most serious thing of all! 
The pride which is merely foolish or semi-hypocritical in 
the world and in the nominal Christians becomes a very 
serious matter indeed if it invades the heart and the life 
of the child of God. But why do we make such a difference? 
Why say that spiritual pride would be so very 
dangerous in one of the Lord's saints, whereas it would 
be little more than foolishness in the world? Ah! the 
difference is that these are God's special representatives 
in the world, who must become copies of God's dear Son 
if they would ever attain to the glory, honor and immortality 
to which they have been invited by the Lord. 

When they gave themselves entirely to the Lord and 
were justified from sin through the imputation of the 
Redeemer's sacrifice, and were thus introduced into the 
family of God and begotten of the Holy Spirit, it meant 
a great change for these. Old things passed away; all 
things became new. These, and these alone, are on trial 
during this Gospel Age for eternal life or eternal death. 
And of all their temptations and beguilements, the sin of 
spiritual pride is probably one of the most dangerous of 
all. In proportion as it comes in, the Spirit of the Lord 
departs, and the spirituality of the individual ceases. This 
spiritual sickness, unless curbed, would surely lead on to 
the Second Death, for "the Lord resisteth the proud and 
showeth His favor to the humble."— James 4:6. 

The Apostle Peter evidently had this besetting danger 
of spiritual pride in mind when he wrote to the Church: 
"Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of 
God, that He may exalt you in due time." (1 Peter 5:6.) 
"Whosoever exalteth himself shall be abased; and he that 
shall humble himself shall be exalted," said the Master. 



ONE SYMPTOM OF THIS SOUL-SICKNESS 

How may we know spiritual pride? some one may 
inquire. One of the most serious things in this connection 

R5956 : page 276 

is that those who have spiritual pride very rarely 
are aware of it. They sometimes have forms of godliness 
which not only deceive others, but deceive themselves and 
hinder them from seeing the spiritual pride which is working 
and which others may more readily see. 

When you feel that your attendance at meetings, your 
reading of so many pages of SCRIPTURE STUDIES per day, 
your distribution of so many tracts, or your circulation 
or loaning of so many books, are matters to be boasted 
of— then take care! That disposition to boast is an indication 
that you would be in danger of catching spiritual 
pride if circumstances were favorable. These are all good 
and laudable things, all proper things; and you should 
feel a proper degree of self-congratulation that you find 
yourself able and willing to turn from the daily newspaper 
or novel, the reading of chitchat, or the writing of chitchat, 
to do things so reasonable, so proper, so much in 
harmony with the Divine will. But any disposition to 
boast of the matter should lead you to a careful scrutiny 
of thought— of the motives lying behind these activities 
in the Lord's service. 

We are not meaning to say that it would be improper 
to give a testimony in which all of these things might 
be brought forward as an encouragement to others or as 
a proof that we love the Lord and are anxious to serve 
Him. What we are cautioning against is a spirit, or disposition, 
to boast of anything that we might be or do as 
the Lord's children. We have nothing whereof to boast. 
If we gave all of our goods to feed the spiritually poor, 
all our time to circulating the Truth, and all of our energy 
to the honoring of the Lord's name, we should feel that, 
having done all, we had not really profited our Lord, but 
merely found an opportunity of showing Him a little of 
the devotion of our hearts in acknowledgment of the 
numberless blessings already received at His hand, and 
the still more wonderful favors which He has promised 
shall be ours, if faithful. Well did the poet write: 

"I want the first approach to feel 

Of pride or fond desire!" 

STILL FURTHER SYMPTOMS 

Another form of this disease of spiritual pride manifests 
itself in a hypercritical attitude of mind. When one 
attends a testimony meeting, or a Berean class, and hears 
no real good testimony but his own, hears no proper answer 
except his own to any of the questions, never sees an 
Elder in the chair who knows how to lead a meeting 
anyway— these should be considered dangerous symptoms 



of spiritual pride. 

Not that all these things might not possibly occur, but 
they are surely not likely to occur continually. It would 
be perfectly proper for us to give such attention, and 
to be so well informed, that we would be able to see 
quickly any unscriptural proceeding or any instance of 
very poor judgment that would be a hindrance to the 
effectiveness of the services. It would be proper, too, if 
ever we saw that the best interests of the class were not 
being served— and if, after waiting patiently for a while, 
we found that they were not likely to be corrected— it 
would be entirely proper for us, in a meek and quiet spirit, 
to call attention to the fault, either in the Class or to an 
elder, or whatever would be the most effective and least 
demonstrative way. "Let nothing be done through strife 
or vain glory," but everything for the glory of God. 

And right there we need to be careful, too, lest we 
get into the way of thinking that everything that harmonizes 
with our ideas is to the glory of God, and that whatever 
would not harmonize with our ideas could not be 
pleasing to Him. Well did the Apostle write: "See then 
that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools." (Ephesians 5: 15.) 
Well do we see the meaning of this word "circumspectly"— 
that it signifies with close scrutiny on every 
hand, especially as respects thoughts, motives, intentions. 

"BE NOT MANY OF YOU TEACHERS" 

Well did St. James write, "Be not many of you 
teachers, my brethren, knowing that a man shall receive 
the severer trial." (James 3:1.) While, as we have 
pointed out, all of the Lord's people are specially susceptible 
along the line of spiritual pride, there seems to 
be a special danger surrounding all who become in any 
manner identified with the promulgation of His Truth. 

It is a special privilege, indeed, to tell out the Message 
of God's grace to all who have a hearing ear. How 
thankful we are that it is not— as it was once supposed— 
the exclusive privilege of the clergy, but that the Lord 
declares that all who are His consecrated people and who 
receive the begetting of the holy Spirit have, through it, 
the anointing to preach the Good Tidings to the meek 
and to bind up the broken-hearted! (Isaiah 61:1.) We 
are glad of this privilege, which includes our private conversations 

R5956 : page 277 

with neighbors and friends. But what a privilege 
to be God's ambassadors, and in His name to tell of 
the coming Kingdom, of the great provision God has 
already made through the death of Jesus, of the grand 
outcome, and of how the kings and priests of that Kingdom 
are now being called out of the world, experiencing 
a change of nature in preparation for their future work! 
Old as the Message is, it is so new and wonderful, if 
rightly presented, as to awaken astonishment in the honest-hearted 



who hear. They wonder, how did this ordinary 

man (or woman) ever come to understand and be able 

so beautifully to portray these wonderful things? Perhaps 

they give a hint of their surprise. Then comes a danger-moment 

for taking the disease of spiritual pride. Just a 

little swing of the mind; and you think that it is wonderful 

that even you should know about such things when the 

great mass of mankind have not the remotest conception 

of them, and that even some of the ablest and most 

talented ministers of the Word of God are ignorant respecting 

these things in the Bible. 

If you are taking the disease of spiritual pride you 
will doubtless feel a straightening of your back. You are 
beginning to feel more important, and to look more dignified 
and to feel that, after all, you are somebody great. 
Your voice indicates this, too; and your hearer notices it. 
Then he begins to feel that it is not the Word of the 
Lord, but that, as you seem to admit, it is something that 
you made up— something that you are responsible for, and 
he thinks less of it on that account. 

The proper attitude, as all will agree, is that the Lord's 
people should feel greatly humbled instead of greatly 
exalted and heady in respect to these opportunities for 
telling the Truth to others. We should feel our unworthiness. 
We should realize that the Plan is not ours; that 
we have merely heard of it ourselves; that it is really 
God's Plan; that we are honored as His servants to tell it 
out. But if we allow any impression to go out that it 
is by any wisdom on our part, or any skill, that the beauty 
is seen in the Message, then to that extent we are taking 
glory to ourselves which belongs to the Lord, and doing 
injury to ourselves proportionately by failing to demonstrate 
our worthiness to be used by the Lord in the present 
and in the future. The wonderful privilege of speaking 
as ambassadors for the Lord, to tell of His greatness and 
Plan should humble us with the thought that He has 
privileged us, whereas He has angels, who excel in 
strength and whom He might have used in communicating 
this most wonderful Message. 

SPECIAL TEST UPON ELDERS AND DEACONS 

But the dear brethren chosen by the Classes to be 
their Elders and Deacons have a still further test to their 
humility. Apparently no one could occupy such a position 
without great danger of infection from the disease called 
spiritual pride. Sometimes the Lord's people seem entirely 
to forget the caution which St. Paul gave, saying 
that a novice, a beginner, one young in the Truth, no 
matter how bright, no matter how educated, should not 
be chosen to the service of Elder or Deacon because, as 
the Apostle remarked, he would be especially susceptible 
to this foe of the children of God— spiritual 
pride.— 1 Timothy 3:6. 

But not merely are the novices in danger. Everyone 
appointed to serve the Lord's people is thereby put into 



the place of great temptation, which might mean a spiritual 
fall and ruin in the Second Death. Perhaps the 
Lord's people have not been sufficiently considerate of 
these things as respects those whom they elect to be their 
servants. Perhaps those accepting these positions of 
service under the votes of the brethren scarcely realize 
what danger they do run in accepting. If they realized, 
doubtless that realization would make them hesitate about 
accepting at all; and humility would certainly lead them 
not to attempt to serve unless they were most explicitly 
appointed to the service. 

But what do we find? Alas! in some a tendency to 
seek the eldership or deaconship. In some, even a tendency 
to "wire-pull" and bargain that they might be 
elected; in some a tendency to feel offended if they were 
not chosen; in some a tendency to feel angry with anybody 
who would vote against them in such an election. 
Alas! alas! if the dear brethren realized what was gnawing 
in their minds and urging them on to these things— 
oh, what a different course they would take! In all meekness 
and humility they should feel a timidity even about 
taking a position where there would be such a responsibility. 
The admonition on this is that although all of 
the Church should, according to their knowledge of the 
Truth, be qualified to be teachers, nevertheless the safer 
place is not to be a teacher, knowing that such shall have 
the severer trial. Only a sense of responsibility to the 
Lord and to the brethren should make one willing to serve 
in such capacity, much as all ought to love to be the 
Lord's representatives in the Church. 

Everything in the nature of pride, fond desire to be 

R5957 : page 277 

Elders or to be great, is not only dangerous to the person 
himself, but dangerous to the entire Class with which 
he is associated. The spirit is catching, just as is 
every disease. Strife, vain-glory, ambition, all contrary 
to the spirit of the Lord, soon appear. Next come anger, 
malice, envy, hatred, evil-speaking, evil-surmising. These, 
St. Paul tells us, are "works of the flesh and of the Devil." 
All this harm, all this spirit of the Adversary, is apt to 
be introduced into the class either by one or more of its 
Elders or Leaders, or by one or more who desire to be 
Elders or Leaders. 

We are sorry that this is true, yet we know of a 
number of Classes containing many dear children of God, 
many of whom are otherwise exemplary, but who have 
gotten into this condition. Instead of the spirit of the 
Lord being fully in control, the evil spirit, or disposition, 
is frequently manifest in various ways in the meetings. 
The class fails to make progress, either numerically or 
spiritually. These are the bitter fruits of this noxious 
thing known as spiritual pride. 

If we had but the power of language to hold it up 
before the readers of THE WATCH TOWER, that they might 



see it in its true shape and terrible color, the effect would 
surely be to cause an alarm in Zion! Fain would we ring 
the alarm bell from the "Watch Tower," for be it noted 
that these dear ones who are becoming thus involved are 
often grand characters, truly spirit-begotten children of 
God. Of some of them we know that in the past they 
ran the race splendidly. How sorry we feel to see signs 
that their characters are being transformed in a wrong 
direction! Let us heed Him who said, "By their fruits 
ye shall know them."— Matthew 7:16. 

GUARDING AGAINST SPIRITUAL PRIDE 

As already indicated, one of the serious things connected 
with this malady of spiritual pride is that those 
who have it are rarely aware of it. Another difficulty 
is that it is almost impossible to correct them and to cause 
them to know that they have the disease. If spoken to 
on the subject they seem to think at once that their benefactor 
is their enemy; that he is jealous of them; that 
he would like to get their position, etc. Hence the disease 
is nearly incurable, except as either the Class may assist 
or the Lord's providence may interpose. 

If the Class notices the growth of such a disposition, 

R5957 : page 278 

it should quickly, and with love and good intention, merely 
fail to elect for any service to the Class the individual 
who seems to be getting top-heavy— spiritually proud. 
If this were resented, it should be considered all the more 
a necessity to leave the self-conscious one to cool off 
quietly and get his bearing— for his own good and that 
of the Class. Where the Class fails to help in this matter, 
apparently nothing remains except for the Lord to chasten 
the individual for his good, either with business reverses 
or losses or with physical disease, or in whatever way 
may seem best to Him. And we have confidence that the 
Lord will do this for everyone who is truly His child and 
who gets into such a condition as to need such correction 
in righteousness. Is it not written, "The Lord will judge 
[punish] His people"?— Deuteronomy 32:36. 

A BIBLE ILLUSTRATION OF THIS SIN 

The Bible gives many illustrations of this sin, but we 
choose the most conspicuous one. There was a holy man 
of old, beloved of the Lord, noble, self-sacrificing, a 
Prophet of the Lord. He served the Lord and His people 
faithfully— wonderfully— for forty years; but finally he 
was guilty of this sin of self-assurance— spiritual pride. 
And, strangest of all, this man is noted to us in the Bible 
as having been at the beginning of his career the "meekest 
man in all the earth."— Numbers 12:3. 

Yes; it was the glorious Moses, who at the beginning 
of his experience as a servant of the Lord was so very 



meek, so very humble, but who, at the conclusion of his 
career, was hindered from entering the promised land as 
a punishment for spiritual pride or self-assurance, where 
he should have given the Lord the glory. We recall 
the circumstances: Moses, as the Lord's special servant, 
had led Israel out of Egypt across the Red Sea into 
the wilderness, en route for Canaan. He performed, by 
the Lord's direction, several miracles on the journey. One 
of them was the smiting of the rock when the people 
were famished for water. God directed him to smite the 
rock; and from that rock flowed an abundant stream of 
water for the refreshment of the people. 

According to the Bible, that rock was a picture of 
Christ -the "Rock of Ages." (1 Corinthians 10:4.) It 
was by the Lord's arrangement that this "Rock of Ages" 
was smitten, that the water of life might flow from Jesus 
for all of Adam's race who would become Israelites indeed 
and come out of Egypt— out of the world— out of sin- 
out of the kingdom of the Adversary into obedience and 
fellowship with the Lord. 

Forty years after this time of the smiting of the rock, 
when Israel had been journeying to and fro, waiting for 
the time to come that they might be permitted to enter 
Canaan, their wandering led again into this district, so 
barren and devoid of water. The people cried to Moses 
and Moses cried to the Lord on their behalf as to what 
should be done. The Lord's answer was that Moses 
should speak to the rock which previously he had smitten, 
and that water would come forth. But during these forty 
years in which Moses had dealt with the Israelites as a 
father with his children, he had naturally gained a great 
deal of self-assurance. He could hardly pass through such 
experiences and still be the meekest man in all the earth. 

So now, neglecting the command of the Lord, Moses 
went to the rock and smote it a second time with his rod, 
shouting to the people: "Ye rebels, must we bring you 
water out of this rock?" (Numbers 20:1-12.) Alas, poor 
Moses! He was taking the glory to himself instead of 
ascribing it all to the Lord. Soon Moses realized the 
great mistake he had made. It might be said to have 
been his only mistake, and yet the Lord on this account 
denied him the privilege of going into the land of Canaan, 
granting him instead merely the opportunity of seeing it 
from across the River Jordan, and burying him there. 

Shall we not from this illustration esteem that spiritual 
pride and self-assurance are very displeasing in the sight 
of the Lord? Could we draw any other conclusion from 
this great lesson written for our admonition? 

A WORD OF CONSOLATION 

For the comfort of those who may feel that they have 
done much worse than Moses, or been much more self-assertive, 
been much less careful to honor the Lord, have 
manifested much more spiritual pride— for their comfort 
let us notice that the punishment here was severe because 



it was part of a type. As the first smiting of the rock 
typified the crucifixion of our Lord, so the second smiting 
of the rock typified the crucifying of the Son of God 
afresh and putting Him to an open shame; as described by 
St. Paul in Hebrews 6:6. As the smiting of the rock 
represented this public, open repudiation of Jesus and His 
teaching and His cause, so the preventing of Moses from 
crossing Jordan into Canaan typified the Second Death. 
We are not to think that Moses will never come into 
Canaan; nor that he has died the Second Death, but 
merely that this type was shown in his experiences. 

Neither are we to think that brethren who have manifested 
spiritual pride and done things in their own name, 
rather than in the name of the Lord and the name of 
the Class, have thereby committed the sin unto death. 
We are, however, to realize that a terrible danger goes 
with spiritual pride, and that, persisted in, it would surely 
result in Second Death. Realizing this, how anxious, how 
zealous we should be, not only in the eradication of every 
symptom of it we might find in ourselves, but also in being 
careful lest we should take the contagion or in any manner 
come under its influence or have any of its symptoms! 

SPIRITUAL PRIDE-PREVENTION AND CURE 

We have already intimated the difficulty in connection 
with the treatment of this disease when once it gets hold. 
The chief feature of the difficulty seems to be that the 
disease has a destroying effect upon the conscience. The 
mind becomes more or less obtuse to the simple principles 
of the Golden Rule— not to mention the still higher law 
of our Lord's New Commandment to the brethren. The 
ignoring of the Golden Rule is manifested every time an 
attempt is made to coerce the Class, either in the election 
of its servants or in the ordering of its meetings. 

The regulations of the Lord's Word are known; the 
residing of the authority in the Class is recognized, and 
when an Elder attempts to twist or turn or alter this he 
is not doing to the others as he would be done by. He 
has a right, as one of the Class, to his own opinion of 
the Lord's will on any matter. He has the right to express 
his judgment. But he has no right to hinder others 
from the expression of their judgment; and every such 
interference is a violation of the Golden Rule as well as 
a violation of the Law of Love and a violation of the First 
Commandment— to honor God; for it is setting aside the 
Divine arrangement provided for such matters. 

But where the Elder progresses along such lines, in 
defiance of the Golden Rule principle, to the ruling of the 
Class, the coercing or cajoling of them to the doing his 
way, his will, the effect is the perversion of his own mind. 
His conscience becomes obtuse. Whoever violates his 
conscience repeatedly, by ignoring the principles of righting 
a wrong which he clearly sees, that person is undermining 
his conscience. 

Conscience is the scale by which we weigh the various 



things presented to our judgment to ascertain the right 

R5958 : page 279 

or the wrong, the justice or the injustice, the truth or the 

falsity of a thing. This scale may be a very coarse one 

or a very fine one. It may be capable of very fine discriminations; 

or it may see things only in a rude, crude 

way. The Christian, especially if he has been long in 

the School of Christ, should have a very sensitive conscience; 

and from the Word of God he should be able 

to draw the weights by which he would balance all the 

questions of the affairs of life, and determine with almost 

absolute accuracy their right or their wrong— to what 

extent they would be pleasing or displeasing to the Lord. 

The impairment of that scale is the great danger in every 

sin, and it seems to us especially so in respect to the sin 

of spiritual pride. Nothing much can be done until the 

scale be rectified. 

How important all of the Lord's people should feel it 
to be to keep their consciences thoroughly just; to be 
unwilling to take advantage of a brother, or of anybody, 
either in business or in an argument or in a Church 
election! The thought of the slightest infraction of justice 
on his own part should ring the loudest bells of alarm 
in the heart and the head of every true child of God: 
"Could it be that I who have enlisted in this cause of 
justice should be found sympathetic with injustice? Could 
it be that I could close my eyes to anything in my own 
conduct in the nature of injustice? Can it be that I am 
vitiating my own conscience and shall be liable to all the 
terrible results?" 

To rectify a wrong course would therefore mean the 
reestablishment of the principles of justice in the hearts 
and the minds with a carefulness proportionate to the 
results involved— life or death everlasting. As justice 
shall begin to be reestablished in our minds, it will begin 
to regulate our words and acts. Gradually, then, the 
wrong-doer would begin to see how grossly he had violated 
the principle, how spiritual pride had almost destroyed 
his future prospects in the Kingdom. To such 
an one would surely come hearty repentance and thorough 
resolutions for the future. 

THE GREAT NECESSITY FOR SELF-EXAMINATION 

But how shall we safeguard ourselves against this 
spiritual pride, knowing as we do its insidious character 
and evil influence? How may we know that we are 
keeping ourselves in the love of God and not straying 
away toward spiritual pride? 

Our advice is the same that we have already given in 
THE WATCH TOWER; viz.-that the Lord's people not only 
go to Him at the opening of each day and ask for Divine 
wisdom and supervision, and then through the day seek 
to live in accordance with that prayer, but additionally 



at the close of the day we have recommended a special 
self-inspection as respects the things done, the things 
neglected that should have been done, and the things done 
that should not have been done, in accordance with our 
vows of consecration to the Lord. If these reckonings 
and balancings every night with the Lord continue, and 
if they are done honestly, by a conscience that is not 
perverted, but that balances truly, we may surely expect 
that such, in harmony with the Lord's Word, will be 
keeping themselves in the love of God. They will be 
growing in grace, growing in knowledge, growing in love; 
and "the Wicked One will not touch them." 

But let us not forget that while we are to exercise 
great leniency in viewing the words and deeds of others, 
ascribing only good intentions where they are professed, 
we are to scrutinize with all of our might our own hearts, 
our own intentions. We are to inquire why we did this 
thing or left undone the other thing; why we did this 
tiling this way. why we spoke in such a tone. etc. Such 
a careful examination, weighing of thoughts, words and 
deeds, would be very unsatisfactory to a person who was 
not wishing to be in accord with the Lord. But those 
who have made a covenant with the Lord and are faithful 
to that covenant will find such a course to be a great 
blessing, comforting their hearts at the time, strengthening 
them for the future, and in connection with the Lord's 
providences it will be fitting and preparing them for places 
in the Heavenly Kingdom. 



R5958 : page 279 

GOD FIRST-SELF LAST 

ALL of the Lord's true people, begotten of His 
Holy Spirit, are beautiful characters as New 
Creatures: As the Apostle expresses it, 
"Holy Brethren, partakers of the Heavenly 
calling." (Hebrews 3: 1 .) "Every one that 
Ioveth Him that begat [the Heavenly 
Father] must love also that which is begotten 
of Him." (1 John 5:1.) The fact that 
the Heavenly Father has anything to do 
with a human being and in any sense of 
the word recognizes him— especially if He recognizes 
him as a son— signifies that there is a nobility of character, 
an honesty of heart and a consecration of will, 
whether we be able to see these things in the outward conduct 
and words of the individual or not. We must assume 
that they are there— that God, who readeth the 
heart, sees them to be there. Having confidence in the 
Divine Wisdom, it is proper for all of the Lord's people 
to accept each other as New Creatures in Christ, to whom 
old things are passed away and for whom all things have 
become new. But, as the Apostle points out, "We have 



this treasure in earthen vessels"; these good hearts, these 
consecrated wills, have no perfect spirit bodies in which 
to operate yet. They can act and speak only through the 
poor, imperfect flesh, which is consecrated to death. 

And oh, how the imperfect tongue and the imperfect body 
often misrepresent the real sentiments of the New Creature 
using them! Our stammering tongues fail to express 
our real sentiments, and we are misunderstood. Our poor 
brains, which the New Creature strives to exercise in 
favor of justice and love, often get sadly twisted. The 
justice we would do, we often misunderstand and do not; 
and the love which we wish to manifest, is twisted also 
and misunderstood by others and is unsatisfactory to ourselves. 
Early in our Christian experience, we may have 
failed to see our blunders, and frequently have done injury 
where we supposed we had done good. Later, as we began 
to see our imperfect works, imperfect words, imperfect 
thoughts and reasoning, and discerned how little we 
really accomplished of the much we would like to do, we 
were in danger of being thoroughly discouraged. We 
needed the very encouragements which the Lord's Word 
holds out to us— the assurance that God looketh at the 
heart and not at the outward appearance; and that the 
pure in heart will be blessed and see God, notwithstanding 
the weaknesses of their flesh, against which they 
strive courageously. 

GOD FIRST IN OUR HEARTS 

Many are the rules and practices which will be assistful 
to the New Creature while endeavoring to prove loyal 
and to fight down and overcome the imperfections of his 
flesh. A great variety of rules might be mentioned, including 
the study of God's Word, continual watchfulness 
and endeavor to cultivate the fruits of the Holy Spirit, the 

R5958 : page 280 

remembrance of the Golden Rule, etc., etc. But we now 
wish to call attention to one general rule which seems to 
have a broad application to all of our thoughts and words 
and actions. If this rule be followed, the entire life will 
thereby be regulated. This rule is— God first, self last! 

This is a hard rule so far as the old creature is concerned, 
and he will rebel against it— especially the latter 
part— putting self last. But the old creature cannot really 
object to the rule so far as "God first" is concerned; for 
even natural men realize that there are proper obligations 
to the Creator; but the New Creature sees this obligation 
in a special light. It is this special light which led to the 
making of a full consecration to the Lord, to enlistment 
under the banner of Jesus to fight a good fight against 
sin entrenched in the flesh, and to faithfulness in this 
warfare even unto death. In making this consecration, 
the individual put God first, Jesus next, and himself as 
the servant of These and the principles which They 



represent; and his flesh as devoted, consecrated, given 
over to death in the service of these principles. 

But it is one thing to recognize the principles, and 
quite another thing to apply them in the daily life and in 
the Church. God first in the home and the personal affairs 
means that all earthly interests and pleasures will be 
subordinated, and that the will of God, the service of 
God, the honor of God's name, will have the most prominent 
part in all of our affairs every day— in all of our 
words, in all of our dealings, in our very thoughts. 

Extending this principle to the Church, which is the 
Body of Christ, we perceive that if all the brethren had 
this spirit, it would imply the very highest ideals and 
practices in the Church. As the Apostle admonishes, 
nothing would be done through strife or vain glory, but 
merely to the glory of God— God first! It would mean 
that in all the matters of our worship, praise, and Bible 
study, pride or fond desire and selfishness and partiality 
and hypocrisy would be far away; for God would be first, 
and we would know that all of these traits of evil entrenched 
in our flesh are contrary to the will of our God. 

APPLICATION OF PRINCIPLES 

In the election of servants in the Church, the rule of 
"God first" would mean that each one in voting would 
seek to vote according as he believed to be God's will, 
entirely ignoring his own will and the wills of all others 
of the brethren. "God first" would also lead him to take 
an individual stand in that kind, loving manner which 
the Bible declares to be the Holy Spirit, or disposition of 

R5959 : page 280 

meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, brotherly-kindness, 
love. Surely a blessing would follow such an 
endeavor to put God first, and to forget everything that 
might be in competition with the Lord in our affection! 

As for the latter part of this resolution— "self last," 
this would mean the very essence of the Apostle's admonition, 
"Let nothing be done through strife or vain-glory" (Philippians 2:3); 
and again, "in honor preferring 
one another." (Romans 12:10.) We look back at the 
record of the Twelve Apostles, and see how they were 
disposed to strive amongst themselves as to which should 
be greatest in the Kingdom. But this striving was before 
their begetting of the Holy Spirit, before Pentecost. 
How glad we are to see that such a spirit apparently disappeared 
after Pentecost, amongst those who received the 
spirit-begetting! "Self last" might well have been the 
rule among the Apostles— so loyally did they support the 
principles of the Lord's Word and uphold and encourage 
one another in the good work. How we rejoice with them! 

But how sad it makes us feel when some dear brethren 
of our day, who profess to have received the begetting 
of the Holy Spirit, and whose professions we do not 



doubt, seem not to have learned this lesson of "self last"! 
"Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of 
God, that He may exalt you in due time." ( 1 Peter 5:6.) 
Occasionally, we perceive some disposed to seek office as 
Elders or as Deacons of the Church, disposed to feel offended 
if they are not elected to these offices. Oh, what 
a pity that they cannot take the broader and better view 
of the matter! We do not question their hearts; we shall 
suppose that as long as they abide in the Truth, the 
Lord's Spirit is not taken from them. And yet how little 
growth in grace is implied where a spirit of self-seeking 
is manifested amongst brethren aspiring to leadership 
in the Ecclesia! 

"WHILE PLACE WE SEEK" 

Dear Brethren, let us truly humble ourselves under the 
mighty hand of God, and take whatever His providence 
metes out to us with full contentment. If for any reason 
the Class chooses us to the position of Elder or of Deacon, 
let us be thankful to the Class and to the Lord; and let 
us use our privilege as a gift, as a favor, with humility 
of spirit, remembering that an elder brother in the Class is 
a servant of the Class. Let us seek to use our opportunities 
and stewardship wisely, as those who must ultimately 
give an account. If on another occasion, the Class for 
any reason passes us by, failing to elect us to a service, 
let us remember that that is the Class' privilege- 
yea, each one of the Class is in duty bound to vote according 
as his judgment shall be respecting the Divine 
will. Should we quarrel with the Divine will? Nay. 
Should we quarrel with the brethren for exercising their 
judgment respecting the Divine will? Nay. What should 
we do? Let us accept the Divine arrangement and be 
just as thankful of heart, and be just as energetic to 
serve in the proper ways according to our opportunities. 
Let us not seek to put stumbling-blocks in the way of 
those who have been chosen for the service, but rather 
do all in our power to cooperate with them. 

Let the brother of high degree— that has a high position 
of favor in the Class— rejoice if he is debased and 
removed from the position. Let him rejoice to learn 
whatever lessons the Lord's providence may have for him. 
Let him rejoice to learn how to serve in another position. 
And let a brother of low degree rejoice in that he is 
exalted. Let us receive whatever experiences come to us 
as being under Divine supervision, remembering that 
"all things work together for good to them that love 
God, to them who are called according to His purpose." (Romans 8:28.) 
Let us be on the alert to have God 

first, the interests of His cause. His people, the Church— 
and our own interests and ourselves, last. We may be 
sure, dear Brethren, that whoever is thus found faithful, 
in harmony with the principles taught and exemplified by 
our Redeemer, will have some good place in the Redeemer's 
Kingdom by and by; and that all the present experiences 



will be overruled for his preparation for that 
Kingdom position. 

The time for our exaltation is not now. The dear 
brethren may have exalted us to some service in the Class 
for which we were not worthy, and the possession of 
which might have made us heady or otherwise have injured 
us. The proper thought is that God is at the helm, 
and is able to make our experiences work out blessings 
to us, as individuals and as Classes. It is for us to be 
rightly exercised by the Lord's Word and by the Spirit 
of our Master, putting God first; self, last. 



R5959: page 281 

JUSTIFICATION-WHAT? WHEN? HOW? 

JUSTIFICATION really means only one 
thing, viz.: a making right, making just. 
Justification may be either partial or complete. 
In Abraham's case it was partial. 
He was justified to fellowship with God because 
of his faith and obedience, but was 
not justified to life, because such a complete 
justification could not be accomplished. 
except by the redemptive work of Jesus, 
which had not been and could not be accomplished 
in Abraham's day. 

The justification of the Gospel Church is an instantaneous 
work. "It is God that justifieth." But the basis 
of this justification is the sacrifice accomplished by Jesus, 
finished at Calvary. Before the Savior will impute to us 
the merit of His sacrifice, we must know of Him and 
trust Him and accept His terms of discipleship and consecrate 
ourselves fully as His disciples, even unto death. 
The moment He imputes the merit of His sacrifice to us, 
covering our blemishes, we are acceptable to the Father, 
received into His family by the begetting of the Holy 
Spirit, and thus, thereafter, members of the Church of 
the Firstborns, whose names are written in Heaven. 

The world's justification will not be an instantaneous 
one, but will progress during the thousand years— the 
Millennium. The world might then be said to be tentatively 
justified through the Mediator and His Kingdom, but 
their justification will be accomplished only in their absolute 
perfection at the close of the Millennium, when they 
will be presented to the Father and accepted by Him. 
"It is God that justifieth," and He receives to everlasting 
life and to His family on any plane of existence 
only those who are perfect. 

CLEANSING OF FLESH NOT JUSTIFICATION 

A person desiring to turn to God during this Gospel 
Age finds Him gradually. First, he finds that God has 



made a provision whereby He can be just and yet be the 
Justifier of sinners. Next he finds that the death of Jesus 
is the way which God has provided. Next he finds his 
own weaknesses and sins— the defilements, and properly 
seeks to put these away. He may and should considerably 
cleanse himself from the filthiness of the flesh, but this 
does not justify him, does not make him perfect, because 
by heredity he is a sinner, imperfect, and can be cleansed 
only by the Divine application of the merit of the Sin 
Offering. After washing at the Laver— putting away the 
filthiness of the flesh— the believer approaches close up 
to the door of the Tabernacle and "ties" himself there- 
obligates himself by consecration vows, devoting himself 
fully to the Lord and His service, whatever that may be. 

All the foregoing steps of the person desiring fellowship 
with God are proper steps, as outlined in the Word. 
We describe the person who has taken this course as 
being tentatively justified; that is to say, he is in the 
right course, doing what he is able to do to attain justification. 
While in this course, he would have blessings of 
mind and heart and the approval of his conscience, and 
would be favored of the Lord in the sense that Divine 
providence would open up before him a knowledge of the 
proper course to take for his justification— pointing out 
to him the necessity for the steps enumerated, including 
the devotion or tying of himself at the door of the Tabernacle. 
The sinner approaching God can do no more. It 
is now God's time to act. God's mercy toward the sinner 
is wholly through Jesus, who has been appointed the 
"great High Priest." It is the part of Jesus to accept 
the devoted one (the goat) and to sacrifice him. And 
those whom Jesus, as God's High Priest, accepts are accepted 
of the Father, and such are begotten of the Father 
to the Divine nature, etc. That moment when Jesus, and 
when Divine Justice, through Jesus, accepts the sinner 
is the moment of justification. 

From the moment the sinner turned his back upon sin 
and began to seek the Lord and to walk as best he would 
be able in the ways of righteousness— putting away the 
filthiness of the flesh— from that moment this person has 
a new mind or will, different from the mind or will which 
he had when he loved and served sin. This new mind is 
a new mind of the flesh, because he has not yet been begotten 
of the Holy Spirit. At the moment that the High 
Priest accepts him, imputes His merit, and the Father 
begets him of the Holy Spirit— at that moment this one 
with the new mind is justified and begotten of the Spirit; 
he is then a New Creature. The New Creature is not to be 
justified, because the New Creature has done no sin and 
would have no sin to be justified from. It was the new-minded 
old creature that was justified, and at the moment 
of justification it dies sacrificially. The New Creature 

R5960: page 281 

might be spoken of as justified in the same sense that 



Jesus was spoken of— "justified in spirit, ...received 
up into glory." (1 Tim. 3:16.) In this use of the word 
justified, the thought is "proved right"— "proved perfect"; 
not made right. 

PEACE PROPORTIONATE TO PROGRESS 

To this class, fully consecrated, justified, accepted of 
the Father by the begetting of the Holy Spirit, the Apostle's 
words apply: "Therefore, being justified by faith 

we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ." (Romans 5:1.) 
But this Scripture would not apply to 
any who have not come to the point of consecration and 
acceptance and who are merely approaching through the 
Court. These do, however, have a measure of peace, in 
proportion as they progress. A certain measure of peace 
and joy comes from finding that there is a way back to 
God through the endeavor to put away sin and to draw 
near to Him; but the peace of the Church, mentioned by 
the Apostle in this text, can apply only to those who have 
come into the condition of Sons of God. God is not at 
peace with any others. 

It would not be possible for any one during this Gospel 
Age to have exactly the same experience given to 
Abraham, because of the difference of conditions. Abraham 
fully believed God, and so far as he understood, apparently 
was fully consecrated to do God's will, even unto 
death. In other words, if Abraham had been living during 
this Gospel Age, he would have been one of the fully 
consecrated, fully justified, spirit-begotten ones; but living 
before the Gospel Age, before Christ had died for our 
sins, his consecration could not bring him into the fulness 
of justification and its privileges. 

Some confuse themselves by thinking of justification 
as of two parts— legal and actual. We know of nothing 
in the Bible to make any such division of justification. 
It is legal and it is actual at the same instant. It could not 
be actual and illegal; it could not be illegal and yet actual. 

Our justification, represented by the "Wedding Garment," 
put on when we are accepted of the Lord, covers 
not the New Creature, but merely the flesh, which is 
legally reckoned dead, sacrificially. In other words, justification 
does not signify a process of being made right, 
but a right condition already attained. The putting on 
of the "Wedding Garment," signifies our entrance into 
the family of God as members of the Church; the putting 
of it off would mean our rejection of the grace of God, 
and would imply Second Death. 

Justification to the world, as already explained, will 
be attained differently. It might be said that the world's 

R5960 : page 282 

justification, under the Great Mediator, will be a gradual 
one— a gradual making right as each individual will come 

into harmony more and more with the Divine requirements 



and receive more and more of restitution perfection. 
Nevertheless, it must be remembered that "It is 
God that justifies," and that the world will not be in God's 
hands until the conclusion of the Millennial Age. Then 
all approved of the Father and accepted of Him to eternal 
life will be justified in the full sense. That will be an 
instantaneous act. 



R5960 : page 282 

THE APPEAL TO CAESAR 
-OCTOBER 15.-ACTS 25:1-12.- 

FESTUS THE NEW ROMAN GOVERNOR OF JUDEA-ST. PAUL'S 
ENEMIES ON THE ALERT TO INJURE HIM-A NEW PLOT 
AGAINST THE APOSTLE'S LIFE-ST. PAUL UNWILLING 

TO ACCEPT A DISCHARGE RESPECTING THE ROMAN COURT 
AND TO STAND TRIAL BEFORE THE SANHEDRIN-HIS 

APPEAL TO CAESAR'S COURT-FESTUS PUZZLED AS TO WHAT 

CHARGE HE COULD FORMULATE-ST. PAUL CALLED TO GIVE 
HIS VERSION OF HIS PEOPLE'S ENMITY AGAINST HIM. 

"It is enough for the disciple that he be as his Teacher, 
and the servant as his Lord."— Matthew 10:25. R.V. 

FELIX, the Roman governor of Judea, was 
succeeded by Festus; and, willing to carry 
favor with the Jews, he left St. Paul a 
prisoner, although confessedly he had found 
the Apostle not guilty of any infraction of 
the Roman law and was persuaded that his 
enemies were frantically jealous of him. 
The two years of St. Paul's imprisonment 
doubtless afforded excellent opportunities 
for his mature study of the Divine Plan 
set forth in the Scriptures. 

It is impossible for us at this distance even to surmise 
with any accuracy what may have been the Lord's object 
in permitting His faithful representative to be thus 
isolated and debarred from the privileges of service. On 
the one hand, it may have been to give the Apostle rest, 
quiet, opportunity for further study of the Truth. On 
the other hand, it may have been to teach him a lesson 
of patience, submission and confidence in God— that his 
services were not indispensable; that while the Lord had 
not let go of him and would ultimately deliver him, yet 
he was not indispensable to the Divine Plan. These are 
important lessons for all of God's people to learn- 
particularly all who are in any prominent way identified 
with His service. 

Or it may have been that the Lord had a work for 
the Apostle to do at Caesarea, where possibly he had 
contact with the officers of the garrison, and where they 
would have opportunities for observing the man and for 



appreciating the power of God to uphold him in his 

adversities. We may be sure that the Apostle let his 

light shine on every proper occasion; and we may be sure 

also that his labor was "not in vain in the Lord," whatever 

it was and however it was accepted or made useful 

in the interests of others. Even if he had no opportunity 

for serving others and if the work of grace were accomplished 

in his own heart, it was not in vain; and faith 

commands us to accept the matter without doubt respecting 

the wisdom of the arrangement. 

ST. PAUL'S CASE BROUGHT TO FESTUS 

Festus, the new governor, went at once to Jerusalem, 
the center of his province, there to become acquainted 
with the chief men of the people amongst whom he must 
preside as governor and judge. He was of a totally 
different character from his predecessor. St. Paul styles 
him "noble Festus," and history confirms the appellation. 

St. Paul's enemies were on the alert to accomplish 
against him through the new governor what they had 
failed to do with Felix. Taking advantage of the fact 
that a new official would naturally desire to make a favorable 
impression in respect to prompt dealings with prisoners 
charged with sedition, rioting, disloyalty, the 
Jewish rulers quickly brought St. Paul's case to the 
attention of Festus. However, after setting forth the 
arguments of Tertullus to prejudice the governor's mind, 
they feared to have a trial before him because of the 
weakness of their cause; for they had no witnesses to 
any wrong-doing on the Apostle's part which could be 
recognized as against Roman law or the privileges of a 
Roman citizen. 

Apparently their explanation was that the Apostle's 
conduct had been an assault upon their religion, along 
lines which the Roman governor, unacquainted with their 
religious customs, would not be prepared to appreciate. 
Hence they proposed to Festus that, after all, their dispute 
with St. Paul was more along religious than civil lines, 
and that therefore the desirable thing would be that the 
prisoner should be delivered to the Sanhedrin at Jerusalem 
for trial according to Jewish Law. Meantime, plans 
had been matured whereby in the name of God and 
religion, and "the good of the cause," the Apostle was 
to be assassinated on the way to Jerusalem. 

Alas, that such criminal injustice cannot be charged 
against the Jews of that Age alone; but in every 
Age, and in almost every religious system, the mental 
unbalance is such that in the heat of the moment atrocious 
crimes have been advocated and perpetrated in the name 
of God and holiness! What lessons we may learn from 
these excerpts of history! When will mankind learn 
that as Justice is the foundation of the Divine Government 
(Psalm 97:2), everything contrary thereto must be 
displeasing to God? When shall we learn that the results 
of injustice will ultimately be more injurious to 



the doer than to the injured? 

ST. PAUL APPEALS TO CAESAR 

Governor Festus acknowledged his ignorance of the 
religion of the Jews, and made no objection to the trial 
of the prisoner by the religious court of his countrymen. 
On his return to Caesarea, he placed the proposition of 
the Jews before St. Paul, asking him— because the 
Apostle was a Roman citizen— whether he was willing 
to accept a discharge as respected the Roman Court and 
to stand trial before the Jewish Sanhedrin. 

The Apostle promptly replied that he would not consent 
to this; that as a Roman citizen he had a right to 
Roman privileges, and therefore appealed his case to 
Caesar's court at Rome, the imperial capital. He well 
knew the animosity of his countrymen, and realized that 
those who were ready to assassinate him two years before 
were probably still unchanged in heart. 

St. Paul's course furnishes a good example for all 
of the Lord's people in similar circumstances. It is a 
mistake, made by some well-meaning members of the 
Lord's family, to suppose that the Master's teaching of 
non-resistance signifies that His followers should put 
forth no efforts on their own behalf. It is our privilege 
to avail ourselves of every right granted to us by the 
laws of the country in which we live. It is proper for 

page 283 

us to appeal to higher or better courts if we can, to 
obtain that justice which might not be obtainable in 
lower courts. But having exhausted all such legal resources 
and remedies, the Lord's people are to be submissive 
to the results— not grumblers, not resisters of the 
decisions of the law. 

Another matter worthy of notice is that, so far as 
the records show, the Apostle did not berate nor calumniate 
his people or the Sanhedrin or others associated 
as his prosecutors and persecutors. The lesson for the 
Lord's people today is to speak evil of no man. Take 
advantage of every legal right and privilege and opportunity, 
and accept the final results as of God. 

KING AGRIPPA ASKED TO ASSIST FESTUS 

Festus was placed in a peculiar position. In sending 
the Apostle to Rome, as he was obliged to do in the 
case of appeal of a Roman citizen, he must of necessity 
send some charges; and being a just man, he desired 
that the charges should be truthfully stated. Therefore 
he was puzzled to know what charges, if any, he could 
formulate against the Apostle. 

Shortly after this, the ceremonies of the inauguration 
of Festus took place in Caesarea. King Agrippa of 
Galilee did his respects by attending. Although an Edomite, 



the king professed the Hebrew faith; and Festus, 
who had no knowledge thereof, embraced the opportunity 
to have assistance in formulating charges against St. Paul, 
whose crime, if any, could be understood only from the 
Jewish standpoint, hence the Apostle was called to give, 
before the king, the chief captains of the military forces 
and the prominent citizens, his version of the enmity of 
his people against him. 



R5960 : page 283 

ST. PAUL'S DEFENSE BEFORE KING AGRIPPA 
-OCTOBER 22.-ACTS 26:1, 24-32.- 

PREACHING CHRIST TO THE RULERS-ST. PAUL GIVES A 
STIRRING ADDRESS ON HIS OWN EXPERIENCES-THE SALIENT 

FEATURES OF THE GOSPEL EMPHASIZED-THE HOPE OF 
ISRAEL-THE SELECTION OF ABRAHAM'S SPIRITUAL SEED 

-THE LONG-PROMISED MESSIANIC KINGDOM-ISRAEL 
TO BE FIRST BLESSED-THEN ALL MANKIND-KING AGRIPPA 
DEEPLY IMPRESSED-ST. PAUL, THE PRISONER, HAPPIER 
THAN ANY WHO HEARD HIM. 

"I was not disobedient unto the Heavenly vision."— Acts 26: 19. 

OUR last Study showed us that St. Paul's 
appeal to Caesar's Court afforded the 
Apostle an opportunity of preaching the 
Gospel before people of prominence whom 
he could otherwise never have expected to 
reach. He seems to have appreciated the 
occasion thoroughly; for he made a stirring 
address, the theme of which was the circumstances 
of his own conversion, narrated 
here for the third time. We cannot doubt 
that he was guided of the Lord in the matter. Thus 
does God mysteriously work the counsel of His own will 
and cause the wrath of men to praise Him; and thus 
does He put before His faithful servants fresh opportunities 
to serve His cause. How much every faithful 
follower of Jesus should be encouraged by this to continued 
faithfulness, to singleness of heart, to the improvement 
of every opportunity, realizing the Lord's 
supervision of His work! 

As a true gentleman, St. Paul opened his speech by 
complimenting King Agrippa, as much as he truthfully 
could, on the fact that he would be heard by one who 
was expert in all Jewish matters. He pointed to the fact 
that his course of life from youth was well known in 
Jerusalem and throughout the Jewish nation. If his 
countrymen would, many of them could witness to his 
strictness as a religionist. "And now," he declared, 
"I am standing on trial for my hope in the promise which 
God made unto our fathers— a promise which all Jews 



are hoping will have fulfilment. Nevertheless it is for 
this hope's sake that I am accused by the Jews." 

THE HOPE OF ISRAEL 

The hope of Israel centered in God's Oath-Bound 
Covenant to Abraham: "In thy Seed shall all the families 
of the earth be blessed." (Genesis 12:3; 22:15-18.) 
St. Paul was preaching that this Promise was in process 
of fulfilment; that Jesus of Nazareth, as the Son of God, 
by obedience to the Law and by His sacrifice of His 
earthly rights, had become the Head of this promised 
Seed of Abraham by His resurrection to the plane of 
spirit glory, honor and immortality. Moreover, the 
Apostle was teaching that since Pentecost the Lord was 
selecting from both Jews and Gentiles a "little flock," 
to be Messiah's Bride and Joint-heir, members of the 
Spiritual Seed of Abraham; and that when this selection 
shall have been accomplished, The Messiah, Head and 
Body, in glory will set up the long-promised Kingdom 
of God, through which blessings will come first to 
Natural Israel for their restitutional uplift, and subsequently 
will extend through Israel to all the families of 
the earth.-Galatians 3:8, 16, 29; Romans 1 1:7-15. 

Surely St. Paul pointed to the prophecies which tell 
of the sufferings of Messiah and of the glories that will 
follow! All the Jews knew of the sufferings of Jesus 
and His followers; but they disputed His resurrection to 
glory and the hope that His followers would by and by 
share His resurrection change. The whole dispute between 
himself and the Jews was in respect to whether 
or not Jesus arose from the dead. If He did not arise, 
the Jews were right. No valid hopes could be built upon 
a dead man, however good he might have been. If He 
arose, St. Paul and the followers of Jesus were right; 
for his resurrection to glory should be considered a 
demonstration of Divine approval and of the Messiahship 
which He had claimed and of His Kingdom to come at 
the time appointed. 

St. Paul explained how once he also had opposed 
Jesus and had persecuted His followers, shutting them 
up in prison and giving his vote with others for their 
death. He had even compelled them to blaspheme Jesus 
to escape sufferings; and in his madness he had extended 
his energies from Jerusalem to outside cities. He described 
the revelation of the Lord given him near 
Damascus— the light above the brightness of the sun, 
and the voice saying, "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou 
Me?...I am Jesus, whom thou persecutest." 

Then he explained the commission he had received 
from the Lord on that occasion— that he was to preach 
to the Gentiles, as well as to the Jews, the resurrection 
of Jesus, the gathering of His elect members and, in 
due time, the establishment of His Kingdom; and that 
he was to declare that all should repent and turn to 
God. It was for these things that he was in bondage 



and his life in jeopardy, until he was obliged to appeal 
to Caesar's tribunal. He pointed out that the sufferings 
of Christ had been foretold by the Prophets; and that 
Jesus acknowledged persecution of His followers as being 
persecution of Himself— His members. 

page 284 

"THOU ART BESIDE THYSELF!" 

Governor Festus heard with amazement the Apostle's 
recital. Then, interrupting the speaker, he said, "Thou 
are beside thyself! Much learning doth make thee mad." 
But St. Paul replied, "I am not mad, most noble Festus, 
but speak forth the words of truth and soberness. King 
Agrippa knoweth of these things." 

Thus it is still. From the worldly standpoint the true 
follower of our Lord Jesus is branded a fanatic, a fool, 
unbalanced. But from the Christian's standpoint the 
view is reversed— the worldly are unwise and money-mad. 
The worldly see merely the earthly things, the 
transitory. The Christian sees with the eye of faith- 
sees glory, honor, immortality and a share with the 
Redeemer in the privileges of the Millennial Kingdom, 
which is shortly to bless the world with a Reign of 
Righteousness, in fulfilment of the Lord's prayer, "Thy 
Kingdom come; Thy will be done on earth, as in Heaven." 

St. Paul appealed to Agrippa: Did the king not believe 
the prophecies cited? The king's reply is a matter 
of dispute— whether he said, "With a little more time and 
eloquence you might persuade me to be a Christian"; 
or whether he said, "Do you think that in so brief an 
argument you could make of me a Christian, with all 
of discredit which that word means?" St. Paul's reply 
favors the former interpretation: "I would to God that 
not only thou, but also all that hear me this day, were 
almost and altogether such as I am, except these bonds." 

A nobler sentiment, a broader spirit of charity, in a 
prison, falsely accused and unjustly restrained, cannot be 
imagined. Only those who have been with Jesus and 
have learned of Him could thus exemplify the sympathy 
and moderation which He taught. Oh, that all of Christ's 
disciples might learn also to be meek and lowly of heart, 
and thus find rest for their souls! For who can doubt 
that St. Paul, the prisoner, with his glorious hopes, was 
happier every way than were any of those who heard him? 

MANY WILL BE AMAZED AT OPPORTUNITIES NEGLECTED 

The time will come, and ii is not far distant now. 
when many who now are highly esteemed amongst men 
for their wisdom, will be seen to have been foolish; and 
many who are now esteemed fools for Christ's sake and 
for the Gospel's sake will be seen to have been truly 
wise in choosing the Heavenly things and in being willing 
to surrender the earthly for the attainment of the Heavenly, 



because it is impossible to serve God and Mammon. 

It is presumed upon reasonable grounds that, although 
King Agrippa did not become a Christian, this knowledge 
of the principles underlying Christianity remained with 
him and influenced him during the remainder of his life. 
History tells us that in the subsequent persecutions that 
arose in connection with the trouble coming upon the 
Jewish nation King Agrippa received and kindly entreated 
the Christians who fled to him for protection. 

How many there are in Christian lands who have 
heard the Gospel Message more or less distinctly and 
have been "almost persuaded" to lay hold of the grace 
of God, but who neglect opportunities of action and have 
lost their appreciation of the privilege! These, like King 
Agrippa, will have comparatively small conception of the 
wonderful things which they came so near grasping and 
yet missed. When they shall come forth from the grave 
and enjoy the great privileges of the Millennial Kingdom, 
it will amaze them to know what great opportunities they 
had to become members of the Little Flock, the Lord's 
associates on the Throne. 



R5960 : page 284 

THE VOYAGE TO ROME 
-OCTOBER 29.-ACTS 27:13-26.- 

ST. PAUL SENT TO THE IMPERIAL CAPITAL-A STORMY VOYAGE- 
DAYS OF TRIAL AND TESTING-THE APOSTLE ENCOURAGED 
BY A VISION-"GOD MOVES IN A MYSTERIOUS WAY"- 
THE SAILORS CHEERED BY THE HELPFUL SPIRIT OF 
THE APOSTLE-LESSONS FROM HIS EXPERIENCES. 

"Commit thy way unto Jehovah; trust also in Him, 
and He will bring it to pass."— Psalm 37:5. 

NOT LONG after St. Paul's discourse before 
Festus and King Agrippa, opportunity was 
afforded for sending the Apostle and other 
prisoners to Rome under a strong guard. 
There were no derogatory charges preferred 
against St. Paul, however. There was no 
direct intercourse between Rome and the 
little port of Caesarea; hence for a distance 
of six hundred miles the journey was made 
in a small trading vessel. 

This journey lasted from about the middle of August 
to September 1— good speed for a sailing vessel in those 
days; but the weather was fine. At Myra, St. Paul and 
two of the brethren who accompanied him— St. Luke and 
Aristarchus— were transferred, along with the other prisoners 
and the guard, to an Egyptian vessel laden with a 
cargo of wheat and en route for Rome. Besides the 
crew, this vessel bore a considerable number of passengers— 



in all, two hundred and seventy-six persons. 

For several days the pleasant weather continued, and 
then it became stormy. The vessel abandoned her intended 
route in order to get under the lee of the island 
of Crete, and tarried at the port of Fair Havens for 
better weather. Thus they were delayed until about 
October 1, the time for equinoctial storms. St. Paul drew 
attention to the dangers of continuing the journey, and 
advised that they winter there. His opinion may have 
been the result of some inspiration, but quite possibly 
was merely his own judgment of the weather, etc. He 
had already had large experience in seeing disasters, as 
we are informed in one of his Epistles written previous 
to this time. (2 Corinthians 1 1 :25.) Besides, his trade 
as a sail-maker would naturally bring him into contact 
with sailors, and interest him in all matters pertaining 
to the craft. 

But those in authority concluded to go to Phenice, a 
larger port. Before they had gone far, however, a 
typhonic northeast wind struck the vessel suddenly; and 
they were obliged to go with the wind southward and 
came under the shelter of the little island called Clauda. 
Here they undergirded the ship by placing chains and 
ropes under her keel, because the weight of the cargo 
and the severity of the storm had strained her. Then 
they lowered the gearing of the sails and continued to 
drive before the wind, guarding against sand banks. The 
ship labored heavily in the storm. Part of her cargo 
was thrown overboard; and later she was further lightened 
by casting overboard her heavier furniture, tackle, etc. 

DAYS OF TRIAL AND DANGER 

The storm continued for several days. Neither sun 
nor stars were visible; and the captain could not tell his 
whereabouts; for the compass had not yet been invented. 
Hence all on board were gradually abandoning all hope. 
They had ceased to eat, and were almost in despair. 

During those fourteen days the Apostle had abundant 
opportunity to fear, to doubt and to question the Lord's 

page 285 

providences. Apparently it was not until the night of 
the thirteenth day of the storm that the Lord sent an 
angel to St. Paul with the consoling message, "Fear not, 
Paul; thou must be brought before Caesar; and, lo, God 
hath given thee all them that sail with thee." (Verse 24.) 
We may safely assume that during those days of testing 
the Apostle remained heartily loyal in faith toward God, 
and that this Message at the close was in the nature of 
an encouragement and an expression of approval. 

We may draw a good lesson from this incident, not 
only in respect to our own affairs in life, but in a general 
way to all spiritual testings and trials. The Lord may 
lead in mysterious ways regarding our temporal matters 



and our service for Him and His Cause. While He gives 
us assurances of His love and care and of the ultimate 
outcome of the narrow way to all who faithfully follow 
in the footsteps of Jesus, nevertheless He may meantime 
permit trials and difficulties of various kinds to come as 
storms upon us, threatening our very destruction, 
threatening the overwhelming of our spiritual life, darkening 
the sky of our hopes with the thunder-clouds of 
our enemies' threats and with Satan's roarings. Our 
duty is to let the eye of faith be undimmed by these 
various terrible conditions— to let our hearts be firmly 
fixed upon Him who has promised and who will perform. 

THOUGHTS BY THE WAY 

The expression, "God hath given thee all them that 
sail with thee," is very meaningful. There is no suggestion 
in these words of "the fatherhood of God and the 
brotherhood of men," as that false teaching is now advocated 
by many who are actuated by a noble impulse. 
On the contrary, the thought is that there was only one 
man on board that ship who was in personal relationship 
to God. The others, whatever their natural traits of 
character, had never come into relationship with God. 

There is another thought which may be inferred from 
the angel's words: The Divine care going with the saints 
may prove to be a great blessing to their companions, 
even though, as in this case, these be worldly and unregenerate. 
This thought is particularly applicable in the 
earthly families of the people of God. The consecrated 
parent is the direct object of Divine care; for of the 
angels it is written, "Are they not all ministering spirits, 
sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of 
salvation?" (Hebrews 1:14.) And in the angelic ministrations 
to these, very frequently— indeed, we may suppose 
very generally— those of their families who have 
not come into full relationship with the Lord are to some 
extent included under the protecting care. 

Elsewhere the Apostle points out that in some respects 
the believing wife has a blessed influence over her husband, 
or the believing husband a favorable influence over 
the wife, in regard to their children; else the children 
would be accounted unholy. (1 Corinthians 7:14.) This 
is another illustration of the same general lesson that 
Divine care, although especially for the saints, includes 
all of their interests of every kind. This does not necessarily 
imply earthly prosperity, wealth, preservation from 
accident, shipwreck, etc., as in St. Paul's case; and yet 
it always means an advantage in some sense and in some 
degree. Let us take from this thought all the comfort 
that we can. All things shall work together for good 
to the Lord's saints (Romans 8:28); and those who are 
nearest and dearest to them will surely be participants 
to some extent in their interest and in the Divine care. 

ST. PAUL'S MESSAGE OF CHEER 



Promptly after having received the assurances of the 
safety of all on board, the Apostle made the matter 
known to the ship's company. Then he manifested his 
own faith in the message by cheerfulness and by breaking 
his fast, and by advising all the others to do likewise. 
His spirit was contagious. All were cheered; and 
doubtless all were impressed not only by the fact to 
which the Apostle called their attention— that this disaster 
had resulted from their failure to follow his advice— 
but also by the evidence of God's special favor toward 
him respecting the knowledge of their ultimate rescue. 

So should it be with the Lord's people. Whatever 
we know that is good or comforting or refreshing to 
ourselves we should dispense to others. Had the Apostle 
kept the good news to himself, it would have implied 
either that he did not have faith in its fulfilment, or 
that he was selfish. But having the Lord's spirit of 
generosity, as well as large trust in the Lord, he did not 
hesitate to make known the coming deliverance; and he 
glorified God in that he did not claim to have this 
knowledge of himself, but credited it to a revelation. 

Evidently the prisoner had produced a deep impression 
upon many of the soldiers and the sailors. Who can 
say that at some future time the Apostle's brave, noble 
conduct may have influenced some of his two hundred 
and seventy-six companions— possibly eventually drawing 
some of them to the Lord? So it should be with each 
of us. We should be prompt to tell to others the best 
tidings we have. Sympathy with the groaning creation 
in the various trials of life should lead us to point to 
the Lord's promises respecting the coming Kingdom of 
Messiah and the blessings which shall then come to all 
the families of the earth. Whoever does not thus proclaim 
daily, on every suitable opportunity, gives evidence 
either of lack of knowledge or faith in the revelation 
or else of selfishness, which the Lord cannot approve and 
which, if persisted in, will ultimately debar him from a 
share in the Kingdom. 



R5960 : page 285 

NIAGARA AND NASHVILLE CONVENTIONS 

THE Niagara Falls Convention was the most 
successful one of the year thus far— in respect 
to numbers in attendance. At the 
opening about seven hundred Bible students 
gathered and by Sunday the number had increased 
to fifteen hundred. A very cheap 
excursion rate granted on several of the 
railroads no doubt contributed greatly to 
these results. 

Spiritually we cannot say that it was 



better than others, for it would be difficult to imagine seasons 

of greater spiritual refreshment than were enjoyed at 

St. Louis, Mo.; Sioux City, Iowa; Newport, R.I.; Norfolk, Va., 

and Portland, Me. We can say, however, that 

the dear friends who were present at Niagara Falls manifested 

a beautiful spirit, and so far as we could judge 

from what we could see this Convention was rich in spiritual 

encouragement and refreshment to each one present. 

The Sunday afternoon meeting had a capacity house. 
one-half of the number being Bible students, the others 
being from the public. The Bible students, who would 
have filled the house to its capacity, gave way to the public. 
The interest was splendid in every way, and the Convention 
will long be remembered. Seventy-five symbolized 
their baptism into Christ by water immersion. The influence 
of this Convention will be far-reaching. 

The Nashville, Tennessee, Convention was a most delightful 
one, but disappointingly small as respects attendance. 

R5960 : page 286 

Some may have feared the heat; but Providence 

favored us with most delightful weather— considerably 

cooler than that experienced at Niagara Falls. The attendance 

would not be estimated above three hundred. 

They were all very happy and seemed to greatly enjoy 

the presentation of the Truth to which they listened. 

Twenty-one were immersed in water. 

The meeting for the public was addressed by Brother 
Russell, and had an attendance of two thousand; considerable 
interest was manifested. 

Nashville gave the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION a very 
hearty welcome, the average attendance at all meetings 
being about twenty-five hundred. Eight hundred cards 
were handed in requesting reading matter. 



R5960 : page 286 

INTERESTING LETTERS 

HOW THE LORD HAS STRENGTHENED HIS HEART 

MY DEARLY BELOVED BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

With just a little regret, I will ask for a moment of your 
valuable time. I noticed in the first article of THE WATCH 
TOWER of July 15, 1915, you make mention of the MORNING 
RESOLVE, the VOW and the suggestion you had to make recently 
about Love. 

I wish to tell you briefly of the great amount of good these 
have all been to me. My first waking thoughts are, to repeat 
the MORNING RESOLVE. This is my Watchword during the 
day. The VOW: I never could have kept up my spiritual 
existence without it, especially during the time I have been 
engaged in the Colporteur work. 



The consideration of the MANNA text each day has also 
been of inestimable value. And the suggestion on Love: 
I do not wish to say that I was proceeding ahead of the 
light, but I have been including this same thought each day 
in my prayer for the last two years; I now report each evening 
at the Throne of Grace; and as to the noticed results, 
I wish to say that I have increased love for the Father and 
the Son, for all the dear brethren, and for all the world of 
mankind. I have more love, more kindness, more gentleness 
toward all the animal creation; even so much that it has 
made me careful for the little insects that go before me on 
the ground. 

I feel quite sure that if all the friends would include this 
request in their morning prayer they would notice decided 
development of that one grace— Love. I am striving by the 
Lord's grace each day to make use of about all the opportunities 
that come in my way. I am waiting on the Lord, and 
am of good courage, for He has strengthened my heart. 

R596 1 : page 286 

Dear Brother, just a little question, if you will grant an 
answer to it— to me it means so much. Concerning our 
Lord's last hours in Gethsemane: He desired some evidence 
from the Father that His Covenant of Sacrifice had been 
carried out faithfully. In like manner, what is the best evidence 
we can have that our Heavenly interests are all right? 

I pray the Lord's richest blessing upon your every step of 
the way; also upon your every effort to assist and encourage 
the entire Household of Faith, as we near the closing scenes 
of the Harvest. Sister Kellar and my family all join with me 
in sending you very much Christian love. I remain 

Your Brother and fellow servant in the one hope, 
EBER A. KELLAR. 

ANSWER TO ABOVE LETTER 

Our Lord's case was peculiar. No one had ever trodden 
the pathway before— He was the first, the Forerunner, on the 
path of Life. If He had erred in any particular. He had no 
Advocate to make good for Him. The issue before Him was 
a resurrection to eternal glory on the Divine plane- 
glory, honor and immortality— or everlasting destruction as 
one who had failed to keep the Divine Law, and for whose 
recovery from sin no provision had been made. It seems, 
therefore, not unreasonable that our Lord might ask of the 
Father an evidence of His acceptability. 

In our case it would be a little different. We know that 
we are imperfect and that we cannot do all that we would— 
for we will to do perfectly. In our case we know the provision 
of the Father had already been made— namely, that if 
our hearts are loyal He will take care of the remainder, 
making good for our short-comings, through the merit of 
Jesus. We are to accept this statement fully, heartily, faithfully. 
I believe that it would not be pleasing to the Lord if 
we should ask for some special manifestation of His favor 



over and above what He has done for us, and also the 
promises that are ours. If it were possible to imagine that 
similar circumstances could arise with us to those experienced 
by our Lord, we might be sure that the Heavenly Father 
would be pleased to have us call upon Him in the hour of 
trouble, and that He would be pleased similarly to respond. 



THE CENSER-THE FIRE-THE INCENSE 

PASTOR C.T. RUSSELL. DEAR BROTHER:- 

Greetings and love in our Lord and Head! Whilst recently 
moving amongst the friends of various classes, I found 
that the question as to whether the incense was burned in the 
Most Holy on the typical day of atonement, was the cause of 
some friction and differences of opinion. Some had even 
gone to the length of hinting that TABERNACLE SHADOWS required 
to be rewritten and amended. 

For my own part the question has never seemed to me 
worth any serious consideration, as from a merely surface 
glance this new view seems to be entirely out of harmony 
with the various antitypical features of The Divine Plan as 
we now understand them. Believing, however, that it is now 
more necessary than at any time in the past to be able to give 
a reason for the hope that is in us, I made careful inquiries 
on the point and find that the whole theory rests mainly on 
two texts of Scripture— Leviticus 16:12 and Hebrews 9:3, 4. 

Turning up the DIAGLOTT at the latter text I find a footnote 
there which satisfactorily explains the evident contradiction 
here between the Old and New Testament records of 
the A.V. on this point. The real difficulty then lies with 
Leviticus 16:12. 

Apparently from the reading of this verse, the Censer, 
full of burning coals of fire, as well as the Incense, were both 
taken by the Priest beyond the second veil. There is no doubt 
that from a comparison of Scripture, the veil referred to 
here is the one between the Holy and the Most Holy. On 
closer examination, however, I find that the apparent contradiction 
of this verse rests entirely upon a poor translation of 
one word. The word "bring" in this verse is from the Hebrew 
word "bow," which, according to Profs. Young and 
Strong, literally means "to cause to come in" or "to send." 
The action implied in this word does not refer to the censer 
or the fire, but only to the incense. This is admitted even by 
the singular number of the pronoun supplied by the translators 
of the A.V. 

How then does the Priest cause the incense to come within 
the veil? Analyzing verse 12 it would mean something like 
the following: "He shall take a censer full of burning coals 
of fire from the altar (in the court) before the Lord" (and 
place it in the top of the incense altar in the Holy); then "he 
shall take his hands full of sweet incense beaten small and 
bring (cause it to enter) within the veil." The Priest standing 
at the incense altar in the Holy and crumbling the incense 
on the fire in the top of the altar would cause the sweet perfume 



of the incense to enter the presence of Jehovah beyond 
the veil.— Revelation 8:3, 4. 

Apparently two things were necessary in order to save the 
Priest's life when he entered beyond the veil. First the 
incense must have preceded him, as indicated in Leviticus 16:2. 
Second he must have had the blood with him, or otherwise 
death would have been the result.— Hebrews 9:7. 

The incense, representing the antitypical Priest's faithfulness 
in the midst of His earthly trials, must have been acceptable 
to God even before He passed beyond the veil of His 
human nature— the flesh. Additionally the blood (earthly life 
rights) must still be unforfeited in any way, as otherwise he 
would not have risen beyond the veil in resurrection life and 
therefore could not have benefited the human race.— Heb. 9:7. 

Your ever-grateful brother in His service, 

W. CRAWFORD.-Eng. 



A PREACHER WHO SEES LIGHT 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Greetings in the name of our Redeemer. Appreciating the 
fact that we are living in the close of the "Harvest," and that 
privileges of service are very precious to us all, we would use 
this opportunity to call to your attention briefly a notable witness 
for the Truth in one of the churches of this city. 

For some time past you have doubtless noticed news clippings, 
sermons of Rev. — , of the — Church, Los 
Angeles, in which his presentation was in harmony with the 
truths as presented in the SCRIPTURE STUDIES. Indeed, there 
was a reason for this. A year ago this man, evidently a conscientious 
Christian, was falling into and preaching Higher 
Criticism, though honestly. With this was mixed Socialism 

R596 1 : page 287 

and thoughts on Restitution; the latter, he had evidently 
gained by reading your sermons. Attracted by this, a certain 
lame Brother here, full of zeal, looking for ways to serve 
the Master, was used of the Lord in bringing the Volumes to 
his attention. These he commenced to read and believe, but 
could not accommodate the thoughts of a Ransom. Patiently 
the brother stayed with him until finally, grasping the thought 
that "there is one Mediator between God and men, the Man 
Christ Jesus, who gave Himself a Ransom for all," he began 
to preach it, repudiating all former no-ransom theories. This 
led him to a further study and assimilation of the Volumes. 
He realized that we are living in the closing hours of the 
Gospel Age, and that this being the Truth, he must preach it. 

Gradually leading his congregation along, they voted at 
his suggestion to have the DRAMA exhibited in their Church 
on Wednesday evenings. Greatly appreciating this opportunity 
of service, we gladly gave them the DRAMA, advertising it 
and filling their church to overflowing at each exhibition. 
General appreciation was expressed, and Brother himself 



was greatly encouraged, especially through his fellowship 
with the friends, whom he evidently recognized as Christians 
in deed and in truth. After this he was invited to hear 
Judge Rutherford at a small gathering of the friends, the 
subject being along the lines of the Ransom. This he greatly 
appreciated, and in the testimony meeting told us how he 
"got the Truth," of his love for it, and how he appreciated 
the opportunities and privileges that he now has in declaring 
it. This he proved on the following Sunday, by speaking on 
the Atonement, using the Tabernacle Chart which we had 
provided to illustrate, driving home the vital points of Truth 
—the death penalty against man, the opportunity for all to 
be released from that penalty by the fact that the Lord Jesus, 
dying as a man, a perfect man, offset the penalty against 
Father Adam and his race. The Spirit of the Truth had so 
gotten into his heart and mind that the short time allotted 
to his sermon was not half long enough to speak forth the 
Words of Life. 

This Brother's zeal, and evidences of a full heart-consecration 
to God, have surely inspired us. To see him standing 
up before his congregation, speaking forth the Words of 
Truth and Life, so earnestly and sincerely, would gladden 
the heart of any child of God who realizes that we are in 
the "Harvest" of this Gospel Age. 

The interest shown at the DRAMA exhibition was very 
good, attendance being from three to four hundred at each 
Part. Over a hundred cards were turned in, requesting the 
"Where Are the Dead" Booklet. The interest thus stirred 
up is to be followed up. 

Hoping this will prove as interesting to you at it has to 
us, and praying the Lord's blessing upon you and the dear 
colaborers at Brooklyn in the completion of His Harvest 
work. We are 

Your Brethren in the Lord, DRAMA WORKERS. 



MANNA, VOW AND MORNING RESOLVE BLESSINGS 

DEARLY BELOVED PASTOR:- 

I have been so blessed by your ministrations of love and 
good cheer that I would like to express my gratitude to you 
and to our Heavenly Father for the riches of grace which we 

R5962 : page 287 

enjoy. I receive such a blessing daily with the MORNING 

MANNA, THE VOW, and THE MORNING RESOLVE! Also, "ARE 

YE ABLE TO DRINK OF MY CUP?" Oh, the blessed Truth! It 

satisfies my longings as nothing else can do. And, dear 

Pastor, THE WATCH TOWER is such a wonderful channel of 

blessing, too! We praise God on your behalf as we see how 

He has kept you all these years; it gives us courage. The 

feast is now spread surely in the midst of our enemies! The 

Lord grant we may be enlarged daily and thus have the spiritual 

capacity for the SEVENTH VOLUME of which you also spoke. 



Our dear Pastor, I would just make one request of you, 
if I may. It is that you would pray for me; that, having 
run well thus far, I might continue faithful even unto death. 
Three months ago I had two operations in one. After seven 
weeks I came home to take up my family obligations once 
again— except sweeping, washing, and ironing. It taxed my 
strength so much that I thought it only right as a New Creature 
in Christ to speak to my husband. I told him how I 
felt. He could not understand, neither could his mother, how 
it was that I did not feel able to do the work. Well, this 
proved quite a trial to me. But as no deliverance came from 
these duties, I considered it my duty, and evidently God's 
will also, that I go on and serve just as long as God gave 
me strength. I feel that my strength is going, though I have 
not told my husband, as he speaks to me only when he must, 
since the experience mentioned. 

The pressure I feel has been hard upon me for the last 
five or six months, but I have been able to rejoice. Though 
the cup has overflowed with sorrow and suffering, nevertheless 
I have been able to realize the Lord's presence very near 
and the truth of Jesus' words, "The Father Himself Ioveth 
you." But even so as our Lord, I would continue to pray with 
strong crying and tears, realizing so much my utter helplessness 
and need of God's help through Christ Jesus. I 
ask you to pray for me, that I may in due time have the full 
assurance, as those who have gone before, that I am acceptable 
in the Beloved One, and have made my calling and 
election sure. I feel that I have need of patience also, that 
having done the will of God I might receive the promise. 

Now again I would thank God for the blessed tie that 
unites us all in Him. My prayer is that we may be enlarged 
and abound yet more and more in the love of God. This 
love has increased in me as daily I have prayed with you all 
that thus we might be able to show forth the praises of Him 
who hath called us out of darkness into His marvelous light. 

May the Lord bless thee and keep thee, and grant thee the 
"abundant entrance" through Christ Jesus our Lord! 

Your Sister in Christ, — 



LIKE SAUL, THOUGHT HE DID GOD SERVICE 

DEAR BROTHER:- 

Am happy to say that I am most surely a believer and 
an earnest one in "The Divine Plan of the Ages," and 
just as set forth by Brother Russell. More than that, I have 
been preaching it in no uncertain manner from the pulpit of 
the First Baptist Church of this place. And as might be expected 
I have also been ordered to stop such preaching or 
resign; consequently I have resigned. But then, of course, 
there are other places to preach, and preach it I will! 

Yes, I recall the circumstances to which you refer, at the 
time of the revival meeting in my church, at the time the 
PHOTO-DRAMA was shown here, and I recall the matter only 
with shame and humiliation for the part I played in it. 



While I made no speech at the band-stand that afternoon, I 
did help to arrange the meeting with the object of keeping 
people from seeing the DRAMA. The Evangelist and the 
Methodist pastor of this place did the speaking, but I approved 
of it at the time. That humiliating experience serves 
to show what an absurd and enormous blunder a man makes 
when he jumps at conclusions and forms an opinion without 
investigation, just because "everyone says so." However, like 
Saul, I verily thought I did God a service, and being honest 
and sincere, though ignorant, like him, I obtained mercy, 
and have been shown a "more excellent way." 

I am already beginning to feel the edge of the people's 
opposition, and, as you say, from those who were formerly 
my strongest supporters. However, "Tis always with the 
righteous well," and I trust that I have the imputed righteousness 
of my Master, and that through His grace and help I 
shall be able to exemplify that righteousness in my life. 

I have a full set of the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, am 
getting THE WATCH TOWER and also the BIBLE STUDENTS 
MONTHLY. No, I have not a copy of Brother Rutherford's 
"Defense of Brother Russell," nor do I need one for myself, 
as I need no further evidence than the STUDIES. But I 
might be able to use one with advantage with others that 
are not so convinced. 

Thanking you for the interest and sympathy manifested 
in your letter, and requesting that you will remember me at 
the Throne of Grace. 

I am your brother in the Truth, — 



DAILY USE OF VOW A BLESSING 

DEARLY BELOVED PASTOR:- 

Although my name was entered as taking the Vow seven 
years ago, I wish to express my appreciation of its being a 
great safeguard from the powers of darkness in this evil day. 

I have been very diligent in repeating it in the morning, 
and always received a blessing. Recently I was careless for 
a few days and did not repeat the VOW; as a result I had 
a very severe trial. 

I wish to renew my name and covenant with the Lord, and 
am sure the result will be a blessing; I know of no other 
way to correct my carelessness. How graciously we have 
been provided for, and how much we need to be on the 
alert to resist the occult powers! 

With much Christian Love, — 



page 289 

VOL. XXXVII OCTOBER 1 No. 19 
A. D. 1916-A.M. 6045 



CONTENTS 

Baptism for the Remission of Sins for Jews 

Only 291 

Object of John's Baptism . . .291 

No Sins Actually Remitted by Baptism 292 

Improper Baptism of Twelve Ephesians 293 

Was the Baptism of John Christian 

Baptism? 294 

Rest (Poem) 294 

Temptations Peculiar to the New Creation 295 

Temptations to Selfishness . . . 295 
Shipwrecked on Melita (Malta) . . . 296 
The Power of the Will-Self-Control . . 298 

Importance of Strong Will Power . . 298 
Interesting Questions Regarding Types . 299 

Type a Stronger Word Than Figure . 299 

Antitypes follow Types at Once . . 300 

The Epistle of Christ 301 

Interesting Letters 302 

Photo-Drama in Newfoundland . . . 302 

"Wars and Rumors of Wars" . . . 303 

page 290 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



GENERAL CONVENTIONS 

DAYTON, OHIO, OCTOBER 5 TO 8. 
DALLAS, TEXAS, OCTOBER 19 TO 22. 

SPECIAL RATES DAYTON, OHIO, CONVENTION-OCT. 5-8 

Just as this issue of THE WATCH TOWER was ready for 
press a letter from the Central Passenger Association advised 
us of the fact that excursion rates have been granted to Dayton, 
Ohio, on the above dates on account of the I.B.S.A. 
General Convention. The rates will apply from points in 
Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kentucky, Michigan, Missouri, New 
York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, West Virginia and Wisconsin. 
Those expecting to attend the Convention should make application 
for tickets of their local Ticket Agents at least two 
days before date of departure. Excursion rates to this Convention 
are granted in Joint Tariff C, No. 337. 

For rooms and hotel accommodations communicate with 
C.E. Kerney, Jr., 475 South Broadway. 



BRETHREN WILL KINDLY REMEMBER 

All checks and money orders for the Society should be 
made out and sent to the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT 
SOCIETY, and not to individuals. 

Write as plainly as possible— especially your name and 
full address at the head of each letter. 

Orders for books, etc., should be on a sheet of paper 
separate from your letter. 

If you have occasion to reply to one of our letters and see 
it marked "File A," or "File R," etc., please include this in 
the address on the envelope, so that your letter may reach the 
correspondent who wrote to you. 

We thank our readers for interesting clippings sent in 
from time to time during the past year— especially for those 
which gave the date and name of paper from which they 
were clipped. 



MONEY BY MAIL UNSAFE 

A money order costs little and is safe. Another safeguard 
is plain writing of your full address. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR NOVEMBER 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
November follow: (1) 14; (2) 12; (3) 165; (4) 233; (5) 125; 
(6) 235; (7) 18; (8) 280; (9) 224; (10) 78; (1 1) 104; (12) 93; 
(13) 20; (14) 7; (15) 133; (16) 149; (17) 299; (18) 179; (19) 
22; (20) 222; (21) 291; (22) 154; (23) 176; (24) 181; (25) 65; 
(26) 145; (27) 166; (28) 60; (29) 208; (30) 313. 



R5962: page 291 

BAPTISM FOR REMISSION OF SINS FOR JEWS ONLY 

"I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance; but He that 
cometh after me is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not 
worthy to bear; He will baptize you with 
the Holy Spirit and fire. "--Matt hew 3:1 1. 

WE SHOULD make quite a marked distinction 

between the Atonement Day arrangement 

for Israel with its cancellation, and any 

other arrangement for cancelation of sin. 

The sacrifices of the Day of Atonement 

typified the "better sacrifices" for the putting 

away of Original Sin. Original Sin 

was Adam's sin, which has descended to 

all of his children. The entire race is by nature 

under the dominion of that Original 

Sin and under its penalty. God purposes to do away with 

both the sin and its penalty, through the great High 

Priest, Jesus. Jesus has already died and has now nearly 

completed the offering of the "better sacrifices" than those 

offered by the typical high priest of Israel. We see that 

the time is coming when there will not be a mere imputation 

of the merit of Christ, as there has been during 

the Gospel Age for the Church; for during the incoming 

Age His merit will be applied absolutely for the sins 

of the whole world, and the sins of the world— the Adamic 

sin— will be canceled forever. The condemnation of 

Original Sin will be no more upon any one, anywhere; 

and all who will may be assisted up to all that was lost 

by Adam and redeemed by Christ Jesus. 

But there are other sins besides Original Sin, and the 
culpability of these is proportionate to the amount of 
knowledge enjoyed. Those which are unintentional are 
in our Lord's prayer called "trespasses." But prayer to 
God would not set aside Original Sin— only the death of 
Jesus as a Ransom could set this aside. There are certain 
ones who through faith in His redeeming blood and by 
consecration of heart and life to the Lord have become 
children of God. Because of inherited imperfections 
these children of God commit trespasses. When they 



recognize these trespasses, they should come to the Throne 
of Heavenly Grace "that they may obtain mercy and find 
grace to help in time of need." Others than those who 
have become children of God have no standing with 
Him and have no right to make petitions. The only ones 
who have a hearing with God are those who have become 
disciples, or followers, of Christ and who have been accepted 
by Him as His followers. For such He has become 
the surety and has inducted them into a blessed relationship 
with the Father— the relationship of sons. 

The Israelites were God's people, in covenant relationship 
with Him through typical arrangements. The time 
had not then come for Christ to die for sinners, so God 
gave them a system of types, pointing forward to the real 
Sacrifice for sins to be offered "in due time." He arranged 
that those who came into this covenant relationship 
with Him should be treated as though their sins had 
been actually forgiven and canceled. "Year by year continually, 
as the Apostle Paul says, they were to repeat 
these Atonement Day sacrifices, and thus have, typically, 
a fresh cancellation of Adamic sin for another year, for 
the sacrifice was good only for one year. Because of this 
arrangement their unwitting transgressions were typically 
set aside, and they continued to be God's Covenant people. 
During each year, however, they might through more or 
less weakness fall into errors of thought, of word and of 
conduct. These would be trespasses. 

THE OBJECT OF JOHN'S BAPTISM 

When John the Baptist began his ministry, he came 
preaching that the time was now at hand when Messiah 
would appear, and the invitation to come into the real 
Kingdom of God be given. His exhortation was that all 
the people should get ready for this, otherwise they would 
not be prepared to receive Messiah. He said in substance. 
Examine your life. Are you living to the best of your 
ability according to the Law? If not, if you are living 
according to a lower standard than the best of which you 
are capable, you are guilty. To whatever extent you are 
not living up to your highest possibilities, you are in disfavor 

R5963: page 291 

with God and untrue to your covenant. If you 
desire from now on to do your best, show this by being 
baptized in water. This will be an acknowledgment that 
you repent of sins, and you will thus wash away your sins. 

The people washed away their own sins, typically. 
John the Baptist did not wash them away. Those who 
had not been living in harmony with their Law Covenant, 
but who heard John gladly and turned from sin, were 
largely the very ones to whom the Message respecting the 
coming of Messiah appealed. Thus they became, with 
those who had kept themselves in God's favor and blessing, 
"Israelites indeed, in whom was no guile." This washing 



away of sins was not an actual cleansing from guilt; 

for only the blood of Jesus, the merit of His Ransom-sacrifice, 

could actually take away sin. 

SAUL OF TARSUS BAPTIZED WITH JOHN'S BAPTISM 

Some have asked. With what baptism was Saul of 
Tarsus baptized? with Jesus' baptism or John's baptism? 
Saul had lived "in all good conscience" before God during 
his previous life; how, then, did he have sins to wash 
away on the occasion of his conversion to Christ? We 
recall the incident of his conversion. While engaged in 
persecuting the Christians, Saul, on his way to Damascus, 

R5963 : page 292 

had been stricken down, and the Lord had manifested 
Himself to him. Then as St. Paul afterward said, he saw 
Jesus shining above the brightness of the sun at noonday 
and, as the result of this glorious manifestation, his eyes 
were blinded. His companions then led him to Damascus, 
where for three days he neither ate nor drank. Then 
Ananias, a servant of God, was sent by the Lord, to restore 
Saul's sight. After Saul recovered his sight Ananias 
said to him, "And now, why tarriest thou? Arise and 
be baptized, and wash away thy sins." 

St. Paul apparently never entirely recovered from this 
injury to his eyes. The Lord refused to fully restore 
his sight. Certain Scriptures seem to imply that his 
weakness of eyes was what he called his "thorn in the 
flesh." But the Lord declared that He would give him 
what would be more than an offset to his poor eyesight— 
the riches of His grace. (2 Corinthians 12:7-10.) Although 
He was highly honored by revelations, this affliction 
served to keep him humble, and to remind him that 
at one time he had been injurious to the Lord's people. 

The Apostle declared that what he did was done "in 
all good conscience," verily thinking that he was doing 
God service when he persecuted the followers of Jesus. 
He said that he had received mercy because he "did it 
ignorantly through unbelief." He declared, "I am the 
least of saints, not worthy to be called a saint, because I 
persecuted the Church of God." In his previous life he 
had been very careful to keep the outward forms of the 
Law, being, as he said, "a Pharisee of the Pharisees." 
But he had neglected the spirit of the Law— mercy and 
justice. In his zeal for the Law he had energetically persecuted 
those in harmony with God. He was, therefore, 
a sinner, without having been conscious that he was doing 
wrong. But his sin was declared by the Lord through 
Ananias, who reproved Saul and called on him to realize 
his sins and wash them away by baptism. 

NO SINS ACTUALLY REMITTED BY BAPTISM 

This leads us to consider in what way baptism could 



wash away sins. The Scriptures show us that there is 
no baptism that washes away sins so far as the Gentiles 
are concerned. All of us who were Gentiles have had 
our sins washed away, not by water, but by faith in the 
Lord Jesus Christ. To us baptism signifies something 
different from the washing away of sins, as was the baptism 
of John; namely, a burial into, an induction into, 
the Body of Christ, the Church. 

However, this does not signify that St. Paul and other 
Jews were not properly inducted into Christ. The Jews 
were "baptized into Moses, in the sea and in the cloud." 
Moses was the mediator for the whole nation of Israel; 
he stood between God and the people. Because this was 
so, God entered into a covenant with them; and Israel 
entered into a covenant with God, declaring that all His 
commandments they would keep. Throughout the Jewish 
Age some of them kept these commandments without 
any serious break. Amongst these were a number of 
the Apostles, we believe. They had been living good, 
honest, upright lives, in harmony with the Lord, so far 
as they were at that time able to live. 

Others of those who came to Jesus were such as realized 
that they had been sinners; but they had repented. 
We remember that this was the very object of the 
Father's plan in sending John the Baptist. John taught 
the Jews that the Messiah was about to come to them, 
and that all who desired to be found in harmony with 
the Kingdom He would proclaim, should see to it that 
they were in harmony with the Law. Some had nothing 
to repent of and nothing to wash away by baptism. Many 
of those who realized that they had been unfaithful to 
their covenant with God were baptized in water, symbolically 
washing away the sins they had committed. 
This act of repentance brought them back under the 
blessings and favor of their Law Covenant. But although 
the blood of bulls and goats shed according to 
their Law did not actually take away sin, yet properly 
received by faith these sacrifices kept the people in covenant 
relationship with God. So likewise, neither could 
water baptism remit sin; but it restored them to full harmony 
with God's arrangement for Israel. 

So the Jews who recognized that they had been living 
out of harmony with God, took the opportunity of being 
baptized by John. Washing away their sins symbolically 
in water, they publicly declared that they intended thenceforth 
to live in accordance with God's Law. Others, the 
religious leaders, were hypocritical. They were sure that 
if God purposed to bless any of His people at the coming 
of the Messiah He would bless those who had kept themselves 
in harmony with His Law— themselves. The 
Scribes, the Pharisees, and the Doctors of the Law of that 
time, as well as the Sadducees, all had a light opinion of 
John's work. Jesus said that this was because they were 
unwilling to repent and wash away their sins, unwilling 
to acknowledge that they had any sins to wash away. 
Therefore, as they received not John, they were equally 



unready to receive the One of whom John was the forerunner, 
the One who came to take away sin actually by 
making His own life the Sin-Offering. 

HOW JEWS WERE TRANSFERRED FROM MOSES TO CHRIST 

Gentiles could not by repenting get back into relationship 
with the Mosaic Law; for they had never been under 
that Law. Moses was a type of Christ. As the Jews 
were all baptized into Moses, so when Jesus took the place 
of Moses, the baptism into Moses was counted as baptism 
into Christ to all who accepted Jesus as the Messiah. As 
the Apostle pointed out (Acts 3:22), "A Prophet shall the 
Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like 
unto me. Him shall ye hear in all things." Christ was 
this Prophet like unto Moses, only far greater— like unto 
him in that He was to be the Representative of God to 
"all the people," the world of mankind, as Moses was His 
representative to all the people of Israel. 

Any Jew who was in proper relationship to God 
through Moses was brought over into Christ upon the 
exercise of faith, so that he was in Christ as soon as he 
recognized Christ as the antitype of Moses and realized 
that his baptism into Moses meant typically his baptism 
into the great Antitype of Moses. In referring to the 
typical relationship of Israel to Christ, the Apostle Paul 
declared that when they drank of the water from the 
smitten Rock, "they drank of that Spiritual Rock that 
followed them, and that Rock was Christ." They drank 
of it in type. Hence when in due time the faithful ones 
of Israel accepted the Messiah by faith, they died to that 
typical relationship, and thenceforth drank actually of the 
Spiritual Rock— Christ Jesus. They came into vital relationship 
to Messiah. 

Baptism for the remission of sins is no longer effective 
for the Jews, because their opportunity is closed, the way 
by which they might have a preference over the Gentiles. 
There is no provision now by means of which the Jews 
are privileged to come into Christ by any easier way 
than are those of any other nation or people. As a nation 
the Jews were left desolate five days before the crucifixion 
of Christ, until their "double" of disfavor should 
be fulfilled. See SCRIPTURE STUDIES, Volume 2, pp. 216-228. 
We understand that special favor even to individual 

R5963 : page 293 

Jews ended three and a half years after the Cross, 
at the close of their seventieth week, as foretold by the 
Prophet Daniel. (Daniel 9:24-27.) See SCRIPTURE 
STUDIES, Vol. 2, pp. 63-71. 

The Apostle explains (Romans 1 1) that while the 
Israelites had been the natural branches in the olive tree, 
of which the Promise to Abraham was the root and the 
Lord Jesus Christ was the Antitypical trunk, nevertheless 
the time came when many of these branches were broken 



off. A broken-off branch could not be restored by any 
different process than that by which a wild branch could 
be ingrafted. These branches had already been broken 
off when the Apostle referred to the matter in his letter 
to the Church at Rome. Hence any Jew coming into 
Christ then would have to be grafted in the same as a 
Gentile. He would have no precedence. 

IMPROPER BAPTISM OF THE TWELVE EPHESIANS 

We note the case of the Ephesians mentioned in Acts 19. 
Apollos had preached at Ephesus and had baptized 
twelve brethren. But Apollos himself had not then been 
clearly informed as to the difference between the baptism 
of the Jews and that of the Gentiles; and he performed 
on them the baptism of John, which was for the 

R5964 : page 293 

remission of the sins of the Jews against their Law 
Covenant, including later their sin of rejection and crucifixion 
of Messiah. But God would not recognize this 
baptism for a Gentile. The Gentiles had never been 
in covenant relationship with Him. 

When St. Paul came to Ephesus and perceived that 
these men had none of the gifts of the Spirit then common 
to all believers, he inquired what baptism they had 
received. They answered, "John's baptism." Then he 
required them to be baptized again, in the name of the 
Lord Jesus Christ. This brought them into full relationship 
with God, as were the remainder of the disciples. 
The Lord probably permitted this mistake in order that 
the Apostles might more clearly understand, and that 
thus the truth of the matter might come down to us. 
These things give us a clear conception of how particular 
God is in all His dealings. There is a definite way in 
which we may come into covenant relationship with the 
Lord, and He insists on the recognition of the conditions 
which must be observed to this end. 

NATURAL BRANCHES BROKEN OFF 

The Jewish people have been broken off from favor 
and fellowship with God for a long time, a period of disfavor 
equal to the former period of their favor— 1845 
years, as we have shown in SCRIPTURE STUDIES. They 
are severed from the original olive tree. But God is able 
to "graft them in again," as the Apostle declares. So 
during the Gospel Age the Jew has had the same privilege 
of coming into the Body of Christ as the Gentile. The 
fact that one is a Jew does not hinder him from entering 
into the enjoyment of all the privileges of Gentile Christians. 
The only thing that has hindered is the great gulf 
of prejudice and misconception of God. 

The Jewish nation are cast off from favor "until the 
fulness of the Gentiles be come in." We believe the "fulness" 



is now about completed. St. Paul declares that the 

Jews, Israel after the flesh, shall be restored to favor with 

God. "They shall obtain mercy through your [the Gospel 

Church's] mercy," he assures us. They shall be brought 

back through the ministration of the glorified Church. 

As a nation they failed to avail themselves of the privileges 

of this Gospel Age to have their sins put away by 

accepting Christ; but the Jews will come into favor under 

the most favorable conditions when the New Order of 

things shall be established— when by the application of 

the merit of His sacrifice Christ shall have made atonement 

for the whole world. This will include the sins of 

the Jews. Their "double" of disfavor having ended, as 

we understand, in the spring of 1878, God's favor is 

gradually being manifested to the Jews, and will continue 

to increase until their full restoration, though their chastisement 

is not yet fully completed. 

SPECIAL PRIVILEGES FOR NATURAL ISRAEL 

At the inauguration of the New Age of blessing Natural 
Israel will be granted a special place and privilege; 
"for the gifts and calling of God are not things to be repented 
of." We see how in another way, also, this special 
privilege will come to them; namely, in that the Law has 
been more or less of a restraint upon them in their daily 
lives as a people. They have had more or less of loyalty 
to God, which has kept them separate from other nations. 
This special privilege of preeminence in the Messianic 
Kingdom, however, will not be granted to all who 
are Jews by blood; but only to those who prove loyal to 
the Law and the Prophets— those who are Jews at heart, 
and not merely outwardly. All others are merely Gentiles.— 
Romans 2:28,29. 

The earthly phase of the Kingdom will be composed 
of the Ancient Worthies of the ages preceding the First 
Advent of our Lord. Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, 
Jacob, Job, and the Hebrew Prophets and other faithful 
ones will be in power as "princes in all the earth." 
(Psalm 45: 16.) The orthodox Jews will be more ready 
to receive the blessing of the New Dispensation promptly 
than will any other people. Therefore they will have the 
first blessing— not by reason of partiality on God's part 
in showing favor to these people, but by virtue of the 
fact that He made a covenant with them as the posterity 
of faithful Abraham. 

BAPTISM IN THE NEXT AGE 

We have no reason to think that baptism will be practised 
in the New Dispensation. We have no Scriptures 
that tell us it will be introduced. Yet it will not be surprising 
if it shall be reestablished; for baptism is a very 
beautiful picture of consecration to God, the full giving 
of the life to His service. It may be introduced as a 
symbol of washing away sin or as a symbol of consecration. 



What we do not know we think it best not to discuss. 

We do see that the Church was baptized into 

Christ by being baptized into His death; and that baptism 

is, therefore, to the Christian, a symbol of death. 

But it need not be a symbol of death always. This beautiful 

figure might be transmuted to signify a baptism 

into the family of Christ, a manifestation of the adoption 

of this new Father, in contradistinction to the old father, 

Adam— a rising to newness of life through the Lord 

Jesus Christ. We should not be surprised if this would 

be the case, but it is not wise to speculate in advance. It 

is better to leave those matters not yet clear, until the 

Lord shall open them up fully. 

John's Baptism was called by that name because John 
was the first one who used baptism; and he, as the forerunner 
of Christ, used it to do a preparatory work. Not 
only John and his disciples, but also Jesus and His disciples, 
practised this baptism among the Jews. (John 4:1-3.) 
This rite called to repentance of sin and the getting into 
harmony with the Messiah who was about to come. It 
was very necessary that Jesus should be recognized as the 
great Anointed One; for although His baptism was to 
bring the Jews back into accord with Moses, into harmony 
with the Law, nevertheless it was to prepare them 
to accept the Messiah. 

R5964 : page 294 

The baptism of Jews after Pentecost was the same— 
for the remission of sins; but they had charged against 
them, in addition to their other sins of unfaithfulness, 
the crucifixion of the Prince of Life. Many acknowledged 
their guilt when they realized what had been done. They 
saw that the whole nation was guilty of what the people 
had done through their rulers, the high priest, the under 
priests, the Sanhedrin, the Scribes, the Pharisees and the 
Doctors of the Law. 

Those Jews who were contrite of heart were prompted 
to ask what they should do to escape the condemnation 
which was upon the whole people. St. Peter answered, 
"Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name 
of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall 
receive the gift of the Holy Spirit." In a measure extenuating 
their sin of crucifying the Messiah, he said, 
"I wot, brethren, that in ignorance ye did it, as did also 
your rulers; for had they known, they would not have 
crucified the Lord of Glory." (Acts 2:37,38; 3:13-15,17.) 
He reminded them that they were the children of the 
promises; and that as Israelites they had a special claim 
on this arrangement which God had made through His 
Anointed Son, in that it must come to them first; and that 
their repentance would bring them forgiveness and remission 
of sins. 

The Apostle was not speaking, however, of a new 
immersion into the Body of Christ which would be applicable 
only to Gentiles; for Gentiles could not be received 



in the same way, by remission of sins and a restitution 
to God's favor under the Jewish Law arrangement 
to which they had never been subject. Gentiles had never 
sinned against the Law; therefore they could not be dealt 
with as the Jews. 

WAS JOHN'S BAPTISM CHRISTIAN BAPTISM? 

Again, it is asked. Was the baptism of John Christian 
Baptism? If not, when did Christians begin to baptize 
with the Christian baptism? We reply, John's Baptism 
was not Christian baptism, but merely a baptism for the 
washing away of sins, as we have shown. Few of those 
baptized by John knew anything about Christ. It could 
not, therefore, have been a Christian baptism. However, 
it would amount to Christian baptism to the Jews who 
observed it, because by coming back into Moses and 
recognizing Christ as the antitype of Moses, they would 
thus be transferred into Christ after Pentecost. 

But Christian baptism to the Gentiles was a new thing. 
It symbolized the grafting of wild olive branches into 
the Israelitish olive tree. It was an immersion of aliens 
into the Body of Messiah, making them fellow-members 
with the Jews of the twelve tribes of Spiritual Israel, 
whose entire number was to be 144,000— twelve thousand 
from each tribe. (Revelation 2:9; 3:9; 7:1-8; 14:1-5.) 
Those taken from among the Gentiles were the wild olive 
branches grafted into the good olive tree, making up the 
number which lacked to complete this Body of Christ. 

SHOULD WATER BAPTISM BE PRACTISED NOW? 

Some friends seem to have been in doubt as to whether 
it is proper to practise water baptism since October 1st, 
1914, and if so, as to what words should be used by the 
administrator in immersing the candidate, especially if 
he has but lately made a consecration. 

To this we reply; firstly. Just when the membership 
of the Body of Christ will be consummated is not a matter 
that we are capable of determining with positiveness. Up 
to that time we may be sure that any one presenting himself 
in the proper way was eligible. Secondly, Some of 
those who now present themselves for immersion have 
made a complete consecration previously; they may be 
symbolizing a consecration made five, ten or twenty years 
ago. Thirdly, Even if we were sure that the Body of 
Christ is now completed, we see no reason why consecration 

R5965 : page 294 

to God should not be symbolized by water baptism; 

for this rite represents the surrender and burial of the 
individual will into the will of the Lord, and this is the 
proper course for every one to take. We could not 
imagine a different course for all to take during the Millennial 
Age. The difference will be that the Lord will not 



accept them then to a change of nature, but to His favor 
under the Restitution privileges of that Dispensation— an 
uplift to perfect human nature on the earth. 

Those who will come into harmony with God's arrangements 
for the world during the Millennium, now about 
to dawn, are to be the children of Christ— He is spoken 
of as their "Everlasting Father"— their Life-giver. He 
is not the Father of the Gospel Church, but their Elder 
Brother. They are the children of God. The life that 
will be given to the world will be the earthly life, the kind 
which Jesus surrendered on their behalf. They are referred 
to in 1 Cor., chapter 15, as they that are His, who 
become His, during the thousand years of His presence. 

The Common Version rendering is obscure. Verse 23 
should read, "But every man in his own order: the 
anointed First-fruits; afterward, they that are Christ's 
in His presence"— during His Parousia, the thousand 
years of Christ's Reign. "Then cometh the end, when He 
[Christ] shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God, 
even the Father," "that God may be all in all." (Verses 24-28.) 
All of the restored world will belong to the general 
family of Christ. Jesus the Bridegroom and the 
Church His Bride will have the regenerated human family 
as their children on the earthly plane of being. Mankind 
will become Christ's children by the consecration of themselves. 
The Father's will for them will not be the spirit 
nature, but human restitution to all that was lost in Adam. 

For all these reasons we see that it is proper that we 
should make no change at this time either in the symbolic 
baptism or in the language used in connection with 
the same. We think it a fitting picture of consecration to 
God and His service on whatever plane of life one may 
spend eternity, whether spiritual or earthly. 



REST 

"For we which have believed do enter into rest. 

The rest of faith! How wondrous sweet. 
Each trial and each grief to meet. 
Upheld by that sufficient grace. 
That trusts Him where it cannot trace. 

The rest of peace! With mind so stayed. 
That as the sea-birds, unafraid. 
Upon the stormy deep do sleep, 
My soul an inmost calm doth keep. 

The rest of love! What holy bliss. 

That He is mine, and I am His! 

It sweetens every bitter cup. 

It bids my tear-dimmed eyes look up; 

It satisfies my hungry heart. 



And makes this life of Heaven a part; 
Oh! blessed rest of faith and peace. 
Oh! rest of love that ne'er shall cease. 

GERTRUDE W. SEIBERT. 



R5965 : page 295 

TEMPTATIONS PECULIAR TO THE NEW CREATION 

"We have not an High Priest who cannot be touched with 
the feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted 
like as we are, yet without sin. Let us therefore 
come boldly to the Throne of Grace, that we 
may obtain mercy, and find grace to help 
in time of need."— Hebrews 4:15,16. 

IN HIS discourse, as given in this Epistle, the 

Apostle Paul has led his readers up to the 

point of appreciation that although the Lord 

Jesus was not a priest according to the 

Jewish arrangement, not being a member of 

the tribe of Levi, nevertheless He was a 

Priest according to special Divine appointment. 

He entered upon His priestly office 

at the time of His begetting and anointing 

of the Holy Spirit, which He received at His 

baptism by John. His work as High Priest still continues, 

and will not be complete until the close of His 

Reign of a thousand years. He is now a Priest on the 

highest plane, the Divine plane. Although at His resurrection 

He became so great, so highly exalted above mankind, 

nevertheless this great High Priest, the highest of 

all the House of Sons, is One who can be touched with 

the feeling of our human infirmities. He realizes our 

imperfection, our trials, our difficulties; for in the days 

of His flesh He had similar trials, similar difficulties. 

The question arises. How could Jesus have had the 
same kind of difficulties that a mother would have? How 
could He be tried in all points as a mother? He never 
was a mother. How could He be tempted as a father? 
He never was a father. How could He be tempted as 
a drunkard, or in many ways as fallen humanity are 
tempted, when He was perfect? 

We answer. The Apostle was not referring to the 
temptations of fallen humanity. He says, "He was tempted 
in all points like as we are." He was speaking of New 
Creatures. We know of no temptation that came to our 
Lord except those which came to Him as a New Creature. 
He was tempted as we are tempted as New Creatures in 
Christ. He was not subject to every temptation which 
assails us from the fallen tastes, appetites and tendencies, 
which come to us as members of the degenerate race of 
Adam. These are not temptations to the New Creature. 



Those who have enlisted under the banner of Jehovah 
should love righteousness and hate iniquity. This was 
our Lord's mind. 

Whoever in his mind loves the wrong and approves 
the wrong gives evidence of not having the mind of 
Christ, and would not properly be one of the "we" class 
referred to here, since his temptations would not be like 
those which spirit-begotten New Creatures have, like 
those which Jesus had. Those who have formerly lived 
in sin should sufficiently know of its undesirability. Those 
who have practised sin should have had satisfactory evidence 
of its unholy nature, of its pernicious and destructive 
effects. So we who have fled from sin and come 
into God's family do not wish to return to its bondage, 
like a dog to his vomit or a sow to her wallowing in the 
mire. Those are not our temptations at all. Our temptations 
are much more subtle. 

TEMPTATIONS TO SELFISHNESS 

Looking back at our Lord's life after His baptism in 
Jordan, we see how He was tempted. One of His temptations 
was in respect to the use of His God-given power. 
He was very hungry, and was in a place where no food 
could be secured. The Adversary suggested that He 
use His miraculous power to produce food for Himself 
by commanding the stones to become bread. This He 
could have done; for we remember that on more than 
one occasion He miraculously created food to feed the 
multitudes, and at another time He turned water into 
the choicest wine. But on this occasion He refused to use 
this power to satisfy His own appetite. The spirit of 
devotion to the Father led Him into the wilderness for 
prayer, meditation and study of God's Word, preparatory 
to beginning his sacrificial service. 

We have not the power to turn stones into bread or 
water into wine. But we have certain privileges and opportunities; 
for instance, the opportunity of speaking in 
the name of the Lord and of telling of His goodness 
and of His wonderful Plan for human salvation. All 
these things are privileges to us who are following in 
the footsteps of Jesus. In these the temptation is to do 
these things for our own special advantage. For example, 
we might undertake to proclaim t lie Truth witli 
the thought of obtaining great honor or a large salary. 
This temptation frequently comes to those who are God's 
ministers— to use this power of God and the Truth of God 
for personal aggrandizement. To whatever extent any 
would do these things to that extent he would be falling 
into temptation. 

Another way in which Jesus was tempted was in the 
suggestion to cast Himself down from the pinnacle of 
the Temple, and thus call the attention of all the people 
to Himself. This act would prove Him to be possessed of 
superhuman power and would seem to imply that He 
was under the special protection of God. He could thus 



make a marvelous demonstration of Himself and He 

would be considered some great one. The Adversary, 

true to his usual methods, misapplied a Scripture, endeavoring 

to convince the Master that God had promised 

to protect Him in just such an instance, to uphold Him 

lest He should dash His foot against a stone. But 

Jesus resented this misinterpretation of Scripture, and 

answered, "It is written. Thou shalt not tempt the Lord 

thy God." He refused to tempt God, to try Him through 

a misapplication of His promise. The written Word was 

His refuge and strength in each temptation. 

So some of Christ's disciples are tempted to do things 
in a spirit of foolhardiness, hoping that God will shield 
them from the evil results of a course which would be 
contrary to the laws of nature or save them from consequences 

R5966 : page 295 

which would be the natural result of certain 

actions. This would be presumption on the part of a 

child of God. Such a course is saying by implication, 

"God will protect me. He will not allow me to come to 

harm." To presume to do what God has never authorized 

in His Word, and then expect a miracle to prevent evil 

from resulting, is entirely wrong and unjustifiable. If we 

should presume to go out in cold or stormy weather improperly 

clad, when it is not necessary to do so, and 

thus risk contracting illness thereby, we would be 

doing a wrong and unwarranted thing. Our bodies belong 

to the Lord and we have no right to do anything unnecessarily 

which would be a risk of injury or death. 

Only duty or necessity would excuse such a course. 

TEMPTATIONS TO COMPROMISE 

Another temptation which was presented to our Lord 
was that He look out over the Kingdoms of the world, 
and then be assured that all these should be given over 
to His control, without His having to submit to suffering, 
without taking the painful course marked out by God, if 
He would just fall down and worship Satan, acknowledge 
his authority instead of that of Jehovah. Satan's words 
implied that he would not require such suffering and 
sacrifice as God required; that if Jesus would only cooperate 
with him, all would work smoothly and prosperously. 
Our dear Lord replied, "Get thee hence, Satan! 

R5966 : page 296 

for it is written. Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, 
and Him only shalt thou serve." So on every point the 
wily Adversary was foiled. Jesus had as a panoply the 
Word of God, and was safe from every attack. 

So temptations may come to us. We might have suggestions 
that if we would only not be too straight-laced, 
but would cooperate to some extent with the world and its 



spirit, we might get along better and have a greater influence 
over people. This was the Adversary's argument 
with the Master: "Cooperate with me, and we will bring 
the whole world where you can give them great blessings." 
But Jesus would not swerve from the Father's 
way. Temptations and suggestions of this kind often 
come to the Lord's people. We fear that many of His 
professed followers have compromised with the world 
and the Adversary. The church systems have fallen into 
this very trap of the Devil. This has surely been a grave 
and costly mistake. Temptations and suggestions of this 
kind come often to the Lord's people. 

TEMPTATIONS TO RETURN EVIL FOR EVIL 

We also have temptations to return evil for evil and 
railing for railing. Our Lord was so tempted just before 
His crucifixion. When He was delivered to the chief 
priests and taken before the Jewish Sanhedrin, He did 
not show them up, as He might have done. Jesus might 
have delivered a very scathing criticism of the high priest 
at that time; He might truthfully have made caustic remarks 
about the high priest's character. With the power 
of eloquence which He possessed. He might have made a 
great stir. Perhaps He felt an impulse in this direction, 
but He held His peace, and allowed Himself to be led as 
a lamb to the slaughter. And so we have temptations of 
a similar kind— temptations to render evil for evil, to 
keep square with people, to give them what they deserve. 

OUR THRONE OF MERCY 

When we realize that we are not always successful 
in resisting these temptations, we are to remember that we 
have a Throne of Grace, to which we may come and find 
mercy and grace to help in time of need. We may come 
to our great High Priest. The high priest of old held 
a very high and honorable position. Our High Priest 
is far more highly exalted. In considering this, we might 
at first be inclined to think of Him as very austere, not 
easily approached. But the Apostle says that we are to 
remember that this is the One who is our Savior, the One 
who died for us; and that although He is so greatly exalted 
and seated upon the Throne of Glory, yet His 
Throne is also a Throne of Mercy. 

Coming to the Savior's Throne is not the same as 
coming directly to the Father's Throne. Jehovah's Throne 
is a Throne of Justice, but Jesus' Throne is a Throne of 
Mercy. Here we may obtain mercy if we fail to come 
up to the highest standard. We are to remember that our 
merciful High Priest knows just what kind of trials we 
have. If we have tried to do our best, and have been 
overtaken in a fault. He knows how to make allowance 
for us and to be very sympathetic. We are to remember 
that this Mercy Seat is for this very purpose— to show 
mercy to us. 



Thus as we realize that in our temptations and trials 
the Lord is for us as He sees our earnest struggles and 
endeavors, it makes us the stronger in resistance another 
time. "He knows, and loves, and cares." Therefore we 
should never grow discouraged, but come to Him again 
and again, remembering that He is never weary of our 
coming and that He will not turn us away empty. 



R5966 : page 296 

SHIPWRECKED ON MELITA-(MALTA) 

-NOVEMBER 5.-ACTS 27:38-44.- 

ST. PAUL A MAN AMONGST MEN-HIS EXAMPLE EVER WORTHY 
OF EMULATION-HIS TRANSFORMATION OF CHARACTER A 
WITNESS TO THE POWER OF GOD-HIS COURAGE DURING 
THE HURRICANE-HIS THWARTING THE SAILORS' PLAN TO 
ABANDON THE VESSEL-HIS INFLUENCE WITH THE 
CENTURION-HIS EXPERIENCES ON THE ISLAND. 

"Jehovah redeemeth the soul of His servants; and none of 
them that take refuge in Him shall be condemned."— 
Psalm 34:22. R.V. 

OUR STUDIES for the current year show us 

St. Paul from various standpoints— a bigoted 

persecutor; a humble penitent crying, "Lord, 

what wouldst Thou have me do?"; a courageous 

witness to the Truth amongst his 

own people; a self-sacrificing missionary in 

foreign lands. We have noted his conduct 

in the presence of kings and nobles. We 

have admired his courage in the presence of 

danger while on his voyage to Rome as a 

prisoner. Today we view him as a man amongst men in 

contact with the duties of life and in the midst of a 

great disaster— a shipwreck. 

From the time when he became a follower of the Lord 
Jesus Christ, St. Paul's deportment was noble, humble, 
reverential, faithful, devout, saintly, worthy of emulation 
by all the followers of the Master. The transformation 
wrought in St. Paul is possible in all who have the hearing 
ear and who receive the Gospel Message into good 
and honest hearts. Of itself such a transformation is a 
witness to the power of God— to the reality of the religion 
of the Bible. What a changed world we should be in 
if all mankind underwent such a transformation! 

But not all are in the condition of heart to be thus influenced, 
thus drawn by the Gospel. Some will need the 
strong arm of Messiah— will need the authority and the 
force of the Millennial Kingdom— to bring them into 
subjection and to show them the advantages of right over 
wrong. Thank God that with faith we may pray, "Thy 



Kingdom come; Thy will be done on earth, as it is done 
in Heaven"! expecting the realization soon. 

ENCOURAGING HIS COMPANIONS 

Scudding before the storm of fourteen days and nights, 
the vessel finally reached a place where the trained ears 
of the seamen in the night caught the sound of the surf, 
they knew not where. Then they cast four anchors out 
of the stern of the vessel, and waited for the morning. 

By this time St. Paul, the Jewish prisoner, had risen 
in the estimation of all on board the ship; for God was 
with him. Throughout the storm all but the Apostle had 
lost both courage and hope; and his cheerful attitude was 
due to his submission to God's will and partly to the fact 
that in a vision the Lord had showed him that he should 
yet preach the Gospel at Rome, and that for his sake 
Divine Providence would care for every life on board 
the ship. A heart at peace with God and instructed 
through His Word is prepared for whatever may come 
of joy or sorrow. 

The Apostle exhorted his companions to be of good 
cheer. He reminded them of his vision, and assured 
them of his absolute faith therein. Then he urged them 
to take food in order that they might be strengthened for 
the strenuous exertions of the coming day. His cheerfulness 
and his example were contagious. As the light 

R5966 : page 297 

of the Lord was his peace and joy, so he in turn was the 
light of the ship and the comfort of those thereon. He 
illustrated what he taught— that God's people should do 
good unto all men as they have opportunity, especially 
to the Household of Faith. He exemplified his own words 
to the Corinthian Church: "God comforteth us in all our 
tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them that are 
in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we ourselves 
are comforted of God."— Galatians 6:10; 2 Cor. 1:4. 

ESCAPING FROM THE WRECK 

With the morning light they discerned the shore and 
a little bay which is now known as St. Paul's Bay in the 
Island of Malta, then called Melita. The sailors cut loose 
from the anchors, hoisted sail and sought to beach the 
boat. But before reaching shore, the vessel grounded on 
a mudbank; and the forepart holding fast, the rear began 
to go to pieces with the force of the waves; for it 
was a meeting place for two sea currents. In the night 
the life boat had been cut adrift, because the sailors had 
attempted to desert the ship. St. Paul had advised this 
course. Having discerned the evident intention of the 
sailors to escape in the small boat, he communicated the 
facts to the centurion, and pointed out the necessity of 
compliance with reasonable precautions to insure the fulfilment 



of the Divine promise. 

So we all should understand that we have something 
to do in realizing the gracious promises of God to us. 
In connection with the affairs of this life He has promised 
that our bread and our water shall be sure. But this 
does not imply that we shall neglect reasonable opportunities 
for securing these. He has promised us a share in 
the coming Messianic Kingdom. But it is for us to make 
our calling and election sure. God is thoroughly capable 
and willing to perform all of His part in connection with 
every matter; but it is to our advantage that He calls upon 
us to show our faith by our works— by our cooperation 
with Him in various ways. 

Seeing that only by swimming or by floating on wreckage 
could the shore be reached, the soldiers proposed that 
the prisoners be killed; for under Roman law they were 
answerable with their lives for the security of those committed 
to their charge. But the centurion had learned to 
esteem the Apostle, and for his sake spared all the prisoners, 
doubtless remembering the vision which had inspired 
them all with the hope and the courage which had 
brought them this far toward safety. It turned out as St. 
Paul had foretold— that every human life was spared, but 
that the ship alone was lost with her cargo. 

THE APOSTLE FROM A NEW VIEWPOINT 

On the shore we get a new picture of St. Paul. He 
neither stood on any dignity nor assumed superiority to 
be served. On the contrary, he promptly assisted in 
serving the interests of the entire company. We find 
him gathering sticks for a fire, at which the company 
might be warmed and dried. The barbarians of the 
island— so-called because they spoke neither Greek nor 
Latin, but Phoenician— showed them various kindnesses. 

But when the natives saw a viper, warmed to life by 
the heat of the fire, fasten itself upon the Apostle's hand, 
they reasoned that this prisoner was doubtless a murderer 
who, having escaped the perils of shipwreck, was 
still pursued by Divine Justice and bitten in order that 
he might die. They supposed that St. Paul's arm would 
swell with the poison from the viper, and that soon the 
prisoner would be writhing in agony and die in torture. 
But when he shook off the serpent and suffered no injury, 
they concluded that he must be a god. 

Here a fresh opportunity was afforded for the honoring 
of the Gospel Message; for St. Paul soon afterwards 
found that the father of the governor was sick, and he 
miraculously healed the man and other sick people of the 
island. Thus was the knowledge of Christ and His minister 
spread abroad to a considerable extent, although 
as far as we have any information the Apostle did not 
attempt to preach the Gospel Message, either to his companions 
on shipboard or to the people of the island. 
Evidently he did not consider them to be "good ground" 
in which to sow the seed of the Kingdom— did not consider 



them to be of those whom the Lord our God has 
called to be of the Bride class now being selected and 
tested. Doubtless their experiences will prove profitable 
to them in the due time when the glorified Christ shall 
draw all men unto Himself (John 12:32), granting them 
blessed opportunities for knowledge, for blessing and for 
Restitution.-Acts 3:19-23. 

We notice that the Apostle was not bent upon exciting 
men's minds, but was practising the same Gospel methods 
which the Master had taught him; namely, of counting 
the cost of discipleship, and then, if willing to pay the 
price, of taking up the cross and following the Lord. If 
this, the Master's method for gathering His people from 
the world (Matthew 16:24; Luke 14:27-33), were still 
pursued, there would be many fewer nominal Christians; 
but we believe that there would be no smaller number of 
the genuine ones. 

The time for bringing the world in is not yet come. 
Hence the Master prayed not for the world, but for 
those whom the Father had given Him out of the world. 
His words were: "I pray not for the world, but for 
them whom Thou hast given Me; for they are Thine. 
...Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also 
that shall believe on Me through their word; that they 
all may be one; as Thou, Father, art in Me, and I in 
Thee, that they also may be one in Us; that the world 
may believe that Thou hast sent Me." (John 17:9,20,21.) 
The gathering of the Elect is under disadvantageous conditions, 
which will thoroughly test them, making their way 
so narrow that few will find it, and still fewer progress in 
it. But when God's due time for dealing with the world 
shall come, the powers of Heaven and earth will cooperate 
with the glorified Church in making the Gospel so 
plain that a wayfaring man, though a fool, need not err 
therein.-Isaiah 35:8-10. 

As far as the record shows, the Apostle and his companions 
did no mission work amongst the barbarians of 
the island on which they were wrecked, nor amongst the 
soldiers and the sailors who were their companions during 
that winter. They left no Church there. Therefore 
we may safely presume that they found no hearing ears. 
The lesson to us from this fact should be that we are not 
to expect the conversion of the world nor anything akin 
to it. But we are to expect that the Lord will find with 
the Truth a sufficient number to complete the elect Church, 
and then, with the power and authority of the Kingdom, 
will establish righteousness and cause the knowledge of 
Himself to fill the earth and to bless the whole world, 
through The Christ.-Galatians 3:8,16,29. 



"When the storms of life are raging. 
Tempests wild on sea and land, 

I will seek a place of refuge 
In the shadow of God's hand. 



"So, when here the cross I'm bearing, 
Meeting storms and billows wild, 

Jesus for my soul is caring: 

Naught can harm His Father's child." 



R5966 : page 298 

THE POWER OF THE WILL-SELF-CONTROL 

-NOVEMBER 12.-ROMANS 14:13-15:3.— 

THE EVILS OF INTEMPERANCE-RESTRAINT OF LIBERTY FOR THE 
SAKE OF OTHERS-A WORD OF WARNING IN REGARD TO 
PROPER INTERPRETATION OF SCRIPTURE-SELF-DENIAL 
FOR CHRIST'S SAKE-FAITH VS. CONDEMNATION-APPLICATION 
OF THE ROYAL LAW OF LOVE. 

"It is good not to eat flesh, nor drink wine, nor to do 
anything whereby thy brother stumbleth."— Verse 21 . 

AGAIN the International Sunday School Committee 

requests Christian people in general 

to consider the evils of intemperance and 

the importance of moderation in all things 

on the part of those professing godliness. 

Such lessons seem to be all the more important 

when we perceive that the rush, the 

push, the hurry, the consumption of nervous 

energy which characterize our day seem 

to be the cause of nervous and mental disorders 

and a lengthening of the lists of the insane. 

Certainly no one claiming benevolence of heart and 
soundness of judgment could possibly advocate or encourage 
intemperance, realizing that it is a fruitful source 
of crime, depravity, immorality, etc. We note with 
pleasure the spread of local option and total prohibition in 
these United States and elsewhere— not that such restraints 
are the highest ideals of liberty, but that those 
who love liberty are willing to share the bondage of restraint 
for the sake of their fellow-citizens to whom full 
liberty is admittedly injurious. 

Either climatic variations or else financial and social 
changes account for the fact that in the days of our Lord 
and the Apostles there was less tendency to drunkenness 
than there is now; and probably for this reason the Scriptures 
have less to say respecting this vice, which is one 
of the chiefest evils of our day. 

But no amount of interest in the temperance question 
should permit us to read into the Divine Word that 
which was not intended by its inspired writers, although 
we may properly enough draw inferences and conclusions. 
First of all, we must take the lesson provided for us as 
we find it. Today's Study is a part of the Apostle's discussion 



of law and liberty, custom and conscience, on 
questions that were prominent at the time of writing. 
With his accustomed vigor St. Paul is marking out the 
path of proper Christian conduct, in harmony with the 
second great commandment of the Divine Law— "Thou 
shalt love thy neighbor as thyself." Although the lesson 
may be applied in a measure to every intelligent being, yet 
strictly, particularly, peculiarly, it applies to every consecrated 
member of the Church of Christ. 

THE IMPORTANCE OF STRONG WILL POWER 

All men have wills; and it is important that all should 
learn to use them. As a man willeth, so is he! The willless, 
the supine, are not truly men and women. To be 
a hero in the strife one must have a strong will; and in 
proportion to its correctness will be the influence and 
value of the personality. Children should not be trained 
to have no will, but, contrariwise, to have a will submitted 
to the proper rulers and guides of life— to parents, 
to earthly teachers and, later on, to the Divine will. 

In our Study the Apostle is addressing those who submit 
their wills to the Lord— those who have accepted the 
Divine will as instead of their own. The noblest and 
best of the people of God are those who have iron wills, 
which they have fully submitted to the guidance and direction 
of the Lord— through the Bible, the Holy Spirit 
and Divine providences. "The Father seeketh such to 
worship Him as worship Him in spirit and in truth." 

Some are born with strong wills; others are naturally 
rather weak-minded. In the world the latter sink or swim, 
survive or perish, in the vicissitudes of life, often controlled 
by the law of supply and demand and the survival 
of the fittest. The inequalities of birth are frequently 
accentuated by life's experiences, and often disastrously. 
Some of the strong-willed become merchant 
princes, managers of large enterprises, etc.; others become 
thieves, desperadoes, etc.— the outcome depending 
largely upon haphazard circumstances. 

The only safe course for any mariner on the stormy 
sea of life is to take on board the great Pilot, the Lord 
Jesus Christ. While He will probably seldom guide into 
a haven of earthly riches or earthly popularity, nevertheless 
He will, if permitted, bring us safely to the desired 
haven. Under this Pilot the human will is like a strong 
vessel with mighty sails or a powerful engine. The 
greater the power, the greater the capacity and the more 
useful. The proper Pilot will guide us not only safely 
past the rocks of disaster and the shoals of sin, but into 
the haven of life, joy, peace and fellowship Divine. 

Not merely the strong-willed need this great Pilot. 
The weak-willed naturally need Him just as much; for 
although they might not run upon the rocks with the 
same degree of force, and thus make equally bad shipwreck, 
yet they are quite as likely to be caught upon the 
shoals of sin and, in a purposeless manner, fail to achieve 



in life anything worth while. 

NEW CREATURES IN CHRIST JESUS 

Those who during this Gospel Age make a full surrender 
of their wills to the Lord and receive in return 
the begetting of the Holy Spirit are Scripturally termed 
New Creatures in Christ. (2 Cor. 5:17.) Their wills 
are brought into subjection to the will of God. The lessons 
of His Word and all the experiences of life under 
Divine provision are promised to work for their good— 
to strengthen their wills if too weak, to make them properly 
pliable if too rigid, and eventually to make of them 
the most that is possible in the present life and to prepare 
them for the life to come. 

Such are addressed by St. Paul in today's Study. 
They are exhorted not to judge the brethren in the sense 
of condemning them, but rather to judge themselves, criticize 
themselves, make of themselves shining lights, 
and thus to help the brethren by setting before them and 
the world a noble example. Sooner or later all must 
give an account to the Lord. Therefore our judging of 
others is unnecessary. Hence if we have judged or criticized 
each other in the past, we should avoid so doing 
in the future and should criticize only our ownselves— 
our words, our deeds, our thoughts— that nothing in us 
shall put a stumbling-block in the way of another. 

The ceremonial cleanness or uncleanness of food is 
nothing to the Christian, who is free from all law except 
the Law of Love. But this Divine Law controls, and 
forbids us to stumble or even to grieve a brother less well-informed 
than ourselves. How could one who is controlled 
by love either eat, drink, act or speak in a manner 
that would cause injury to another? It is good to 
have liberty, but let us so use it as not to injure those 
less advanced than ourselves. 

The Call of the Gospel Age is to joint-heirship with 
Christ in His Millennial Kingdom. Those who are thus 
called are not under the bondage of the Jewish Law, 
but have greater liberty in Christ. But shall we say that 
the advantage of our relationship to the Lord as prospective 
heirs of the Kingdom consists chiefly in the liberty to 
eat and to drink what we please? Surely not! These 

R5966 : page 299 

are but the lesser advantages of our blessed relationship 
to Christ and the Kingdom. Our chief blessing consists 
in our justification and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit. 

Let us appreciate these our chief blessings and privileges 
of the present time; for in so doing we shall be 
well pleasing in the sight of God, and men also will approve 
our conduct. So, then, let us follow after the 
things which make for peace, and the things whereby 
we may build one another up. Let us not even risk injury 
to the Cause of Righteousness and the work of God's 



grace in others by using our liberties in any manner contrary 
to their welfare. Rather let us count it a privilege 
to void our rights, if thus we can glorify God and 
bless our fellow men. 

FAITH VS. CONDEMNATION 

"The faith which thou hast, have thou to thyself before 
God." That is to say, our outward conduct need not 
necessarily show all the depth of our knowledge, faith 
and liberty. God knows the heart. He sees the progress 
which we have made; and He will be the better pleased 
with us if for the brethren's sake we do not declare all 
our liberties at a time and a place where the knowledge 
might prove injurious to others of His dear family. 

The Apostle proceeds to point out that if we are 
critical in examining our own conduct and our own motives 
we may find therein something very similar in kind 
to that which we are disposed to criticize in others, although 
perhaps in relation to a different subject. (Verse 22.) 
For instance, whoever judges another allows, or 
concludes, that the other's conduct is inspired by pride, 
ambition, etc. If he were to turn his criticism upon himself, 
he might find something of the same kind in his 
own heart. Whoever concludes that his neighbor is a 
slanderer and condemns the neighbor for it should turn 
his criticism upon himself, to see that his own words are 
always above reproach— never upon the slanderer. Happy 
and blessed the person who after careful self-examination 
finds himself to be entirely free from faults he discerns 
in others. Such are exceptional characters. 

With the wrong conception before the mind, the 
Apostle's words in Verse 23 sound extremely harsh. To 
many minds laboring under the delusions of the Dark 
Ages the idea is conveyed that whoever defiles his conscience 
by eating meat which he mistakenly thinks to be 
unclean would thus be sent to an eternity of torture. 
But no such thought was in the Apostle's mind, nor could 
it be properly understood in his words. He there emphasizes 
the fact that any person eating meat, however 
clean, but thinking that in so doing he was committing a 
sin, would as a consequence be under condemnation for 
having violated his conscience, his judgment of the Lord's 
will; and that this condemnation of conscience would act 
as a barrier between himself and the Lord, who judges 
the heart and not merely the outward conduct. Such an 
alienation might ultimately lead to the loss of the great 
Prize of our High Calling, and thus lead one into the 
Great Company or possibly into the Second Death. 

PRACTICAL APPLICATION OF THE PRINCIPLE 

The Apostle explains why this condemnation would 
hold, saying, "because he eateth not of faith"— not in 
harmony with his conscience; and whatsoever is not in 
harmony with faith and conscience is a sin. 



The application of this principle to the question of 
using or not using spirituous liquors would certainly be 
profitable to all of God's people. Whoever uses these 
liquors when he believes that their use is a sin is violating 
his conscience. Whoever uses them with full knowledge 
that another will thereby be affected unfavorably is 
violating the Law of Love— "Love thy neighbor as thyself." 
In our day this matter becomes more important 
than ever before, for today the question of conscience 
in the matter of using spirituous liquors is more pronounced 
than ever before. 

In the Body of Christ the members have their various 
inherited weaknesses, against which they must wage a 
life-long warfare; and sometimes these weaknesses are 
of such a nature as to interfere to some extent with the 
rights and the comforts of others as well as those of their 
possessors. Along this line the Apostle offers a word 
of counsel, saying, "We then that are strong ought to 
bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please ourselves." 
Such patient, forbearing love is one of the most 
beautiful adornments of Christian character. 

This does not imply, however, that we should not expostulate 
with such a one, and endeavor to help him to 
get rid of his infirmity. This we should do in the spirit of 
meekness and kindness, while we cheerfully endure the 
trial of our patience, not seeking to please ourselves, but 
rather to help a weaker brother or sister. "Let every 
one of us," as the Apostle counsels, "please his neighbor 
for his good, to edification"— not by simply ignoring his 
fault as though we considered it of no consequence, but 
by humbly and patiently submitting to the discomfort, 
even while kindly urging him to strive against it. 

If this spirit prevails, there need be no division in the 
Body of Christ; for all the members will have a mutual 
care and a mutual love for one another— a care which 
seeks to encourage all that is good and to discourage all 
that is unbecoming; a love which throws its mantle over 
the deformity, and which endeavors to conceal a fault 
rather than to expose the weaker brother to the reproach 
of others. Thus in the true Body of Christ, which is 
knit together in love, if one member suffer, all the members 
suffer with him in proportion as they are more or 
less directly associated with him; or if one member be 
honored, all the members rejoice with him and to some 
degree share the honor— just as when in an earthly 
family one member rises to honorable distinction all the 
members partake of the honor and the joy. 



R5966 : page 299 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS REGARDING TYPES 
TYPE A STRONGER WORD THAN FIGURE OR PICTURE 



QUESTION.-What is the difference between 
the words "type," "figure," and "picture"? 

Answer.— There is a very strong relationship 
between these words. To some 
people they would all mean the same; to 
others there would be a slight difference of 
meaning. A type is a figure, and is also a 
picture, designed to bring out certain important 
matters and details as Divinely appointed. 
A figure is a much less exact representation 
or statement of matters than a type. Abraham 
received Isaac from the dead in a figure (Hebrews 1 1:17-19); 
that is, there is a pictorial illustration connected 
with the matter, but it is not so sharp as in a type. 

A parable is a figure; it is a word-picture, but not a 
type. It has not the exactness of a type. We would use 
the words parable and picture in the same way; for we 
see no difference. A type is an exact pattern of its antitype, 
just as a printer's type corresponds to the matter 
printed therefrom. Isaac was a type of Christ; Rebecca, 
his wife, a type of the Bride of Christ; Ishmael, Abraham's 
son by Sarah's bondmaid, was a type of the nation 

R5966 : page 300 

of Israel, developed under the Law Covenant, which was 
typified by Hagar, the bondwoman. 

A picture, a figure or a parable would have weight 
and value according to the character of the person who 
made the picture or the parable, and in proportion as it 
had intrinsic merit. A type would be beyond all this, in 
that it is very clearly defined and implies Divine foreknowledge 
and arrangement. God gives types. Men may 
give pictures, figures or parables. 



ANTITYPES FOLLOW TYPES AT ONCE 

Question.— Is the type always followed by the antitype 
at once or not? 

Answer.— Our thought is that we should expect a type 
to be followed by its antitype; and we would rather look 
for it to follow immediately. For instance, after the type 
of the eating of the Passover lamb was recognized for 
the last time by Jehovah, it was followed immediately by 
the Antitype, Jesus, the Lamb of God, who was crucified 
on the very same date as the annual Passover Supper. 
The type of the bullock and the Lord's goat, offered as 

R5967 : page 300 

sin-offerings on the Jewish Day of Atonement, was followed 
at once by its antitype, as soon as the typical sacrifices 

were repudiated by the Father, when the Jewish 
House was left "desolate," just before Jesus' death.— 



Matthew 23:37,38; Luke 13:34,35. 

Again, in thinking of Isaac as a type of Christ, we 
think of him as the typical heir to the Promise God made 
to his father Abraham. God declared to Abraham. "In 
thy Seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed." 
Isaac was the natural seed of Abraham according to this 
Promise; and Isaac continued down the Jewish Age in 
that he was represented in the children of Israel, his natural 
posterity. Thus he was the recognized seed of Abraham 
down to the time when Jesus became the Spiritual 
Seed. There the natural seed was cast off. The real 
Seed of Abraham, in whom the Promise centered, was 
not the natural seed, but the Spiritual Seed. 

Jesus was not the antitypical Seed of Abraham when 
He was born into the world— not until He had been begotten 
of the Holy Spirit. Jesus began to be the antitype 
of Isaac at that time. Ever since Christ's spiritual birth 
on the Divine plane of being, the members of His Body 
have been in process of development. So this Spiritual 
Isaac began to fulfil the type as an antitype in the person 
of Jesus when He became the Spiritual Seed, and is continuing, 
in the persons of His Body members, to take the 
place of the type. Thus the type is merged into the antitype. 



Question.— How would the above answer apply in the 
cases of Adam and of Melchizedek? 

Answer.— The Apostle Paul explains in the case of 
Melchizedek that his priesthood had no beginning and no 
ending, the order of his priesthood was to be perpetuated; 
consequently his priesthood did not pass away until the 
antitypical Priesthood came. The Apostle particularly 
points out that he was without father or mother in the 
priesthood— "he abideth a priest continually," he continued 
a priest to the conclusion of the type in its antitype. He 
was a type of the greater Melchizedek, which is The 
Christ, Head and Body. Jesus was "made a High Priest 
forever [literally for the Age] after the order of Melchizedek."— 
Hebrews 6:20. 

As for Adam, we are not sure that the Lord's Word 
speaks of him as a type. The Apostle does not contrast 
Adam and Jesus, but speaks of the first Adam and the 
Second Adam. Christ is very unlike Adam. Adam disobeyed 
God, while Christ was wholly obedient. Adam 
failed while Jesus succeeded. St. Paul says (1 Corinthians 15:47) 
that the Second Man is the Lord from Heaven. 
The first Adam continues to be the head of the human 
family. We still speak of him as Father Adam. The 
Second Adam will not begin His work until the Millennial 
Age, when He will become the second Father to the race, 
taking the place of the first Adam. He is not the Second 
Adam as yet. He is to be the Second Adam. 

The various titles that belong to our Lord Jesus include 
that of The Everlasting Father. And the Everlasting 
Father will be the successor of Adam, who was only the 



temporary father of the race and who failed to give his 
posterity life. In due time the Second Adam will be the 
regenerator of the human family. 



Question.— 1 Corinthians 10:1 1 reads, "Now all these 
things happened unto them [the Israelites] for types." 
(See marginal reading.) Please explain. 

Answer.— We understand the Apostle's thought to be 
that all these things happened to this people as typical 
Israel. They were the types, and Spiritual Israel are the 
antitypes. They, the type, had these experiences; we have 
experiences to correspond. They, the type, did not pass 
away— that is, cease to be the type— until we, the spiritual 
antitype, began our career. When our career began, 
our antitypical experiences began. The whole nation of 
Israel was this type, with their experiences, testings, etc. 



WILL GLORIFIED CHURCH HAVE LIFE-GIVING POWER? 

Question.— In the Millennium will Jesus alone be the 
Life-giver to the world, or will the Church also be associated 
with Him as members of the Life-giver, and have 
power to awaken the dead? 

Answer.— The subject of giving life may be viewed 
from different standpoints. In a certain sense the mother 
as well as the father of a child is its life-giver— in the 
sense that the child could not have attained individual 
existence without the mother. And yet, strictly speaking, 
the father alone is the life-giver; for the life-germ comes 
from him. 

So the Bible uses this natural illustration of an earthly- 
father, or life-giver, to picture a great spiritual truth. 
The world is dead in Adam— under sentence of death. 
Jesus has laid down the Ransom-price which will offset 
that sentence. By virtue of so doing He will have the 
right, as soon as the merit of His sacrifice is applied for 
the world, to become the Life-giver of Adam and his race. 
The human life-rights which He will give will be those 
which He Himself laid down in death. 

But as Jesus by the will of God has associated the 
Church with Himself, both in the sufferings of this present 
time and in the glory that is to follow, she will have 
to do with the giving of life to the world. Her work 
is illustrated in Mother Eve and in womankind in general. 
It will be the work of the Church to nourish the 
world of mankind— to nourish the spark of life which 
they will receive from the Redeemer. Under this nourishment 
and care, as many of the world as will cooperate 
will rise up out of sin and death conditions to perfection. 

Thus the Bride of Christ will have to do with the 
life-giving, but merely as the associates of the great Life-giver. 
The Ransomer, Jesus, alone is the One who can 



dispense His own life-rights. And Jesus Himself said, 
"All that are in the graves shall hear the voice of the Son 
of God and shall come forth." (John 5:25,29.) Any work 
which the glorified Church may do in connection with the 
restoration of the world will be as His assistants. 



R5967 : page 301 

THE EPISTLE OF CHRIST 

ALL are familiar with the fact that we have 

in our Bibles epistles, or letters, by various 

ones of the Apostles— St. Paul, St. Peter, 

St. John, St. James, St. Jude. But not many, 

perhaps, have heard of the Epistle of Christ. 

St. Paul tells us that it was written in his 

day. He describes the writing of it, how it 

was done, and declares that he was one of the 

instruments used by the Lord in connection 

with the writing of the Epistle. Here are 

his words: "Ye are manifestly declared to be the Epistle 

of Christ, ministered [written] by us; written not with 

ink. but with the Spirit of the living God: not in tables 

of stone, but in the fleshy tables of the heart."— 2 Cor. 3:3. 

How beautiful and poetical is the thought here expressed! 
It is a compliment to both the Apostle as the 
Lord's faithful servant, and also to the Lord's people at 
Corinth. It is in line with the Apostle's statement elsewhere, 
"We are God's workmanship." (Ephesians 2:10.) 
Wherever there is a true Christian— not merely spirit-begotten, 
but spirit-developed in the character-likeness of 
the Savior in meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, 
brotherly-kindness and love— we have the evidence 
of the power of God at work in him to will and 
to do His good-pleasure, not arbitrarily, but in cooperation 
with the will of the individual. And wherever 
there is a Church, an Ecclesia, a class of Bible students 
who show these evidences of the Lord's Holy Spirit working 
in them and developing them, we have the Epistle of 
Christ, declaring and showing forth the praises of Him 
who called them out of darkness into His marvelous light. 

In the context, the Apostle gives the same thought in 
words a little different, declaring the Lord's true people 
to be living epistles, "known and read of all men." 
(2 Corinthians 3:2.) Bibles are invaluable, indispensable. 
So are books that are really helpful in Biblical interpretation; 
so are hymn books and tracts. All of these show 
forth the Lord's praises, and assist in pointing in the 
right direction those of the world who are feeling after 
God if haply they might find Him. But the best Epistle- 
even more valuable than the Bible, as respects reaching 
the hearts of men— is the life of a true Christian, a New 
Creature in Christ Jesus, to whom old things are passed 
away, and all things are become new."— 2 Cor. 5:17. 



And yet, in a previous letter from St. Paul this same 
Church at Corinth was criticized sharply because of its 
carelessness as respects proper standards of morality. The 
Apostle assures us, however, that his words of reproof 
did much good, working in the Church a repentance toward 
God, and proved to be of lasting benefit to them. 
Thus in God's providence. He overruled for their good 
a mistake made by these followers of the Master, by 
using a faithful and courageous Apostle, who gave the 
proper rebuke in a proper, loving manner. 

THE SECRET OF ST. PAUL'S POWER 

What is by inspiration thus declared of the Church 
at Corinth, we see to be true also respecting the Lord's 
people today; and we may suppose that it has not been 
without faithful witnesses, living epistles, throughout the 
Gospel Age. We are especially interested, however, 
in conditions today. The Editor and all of the Pilgrims 
and the Elder Brethren in the Church have in St. 
Paul a noble example of faithfulness and loyalty. He 
did not preach himself; he did not preach enticing words 

R5968 : page 301 

of men's wisdom and science, falsely so called. (1 Corinthians 2:1-5; 

1 Timothy 6:20.) Giving himself up to the 

Lord's service, and seeking not his own glory, but to do 

the Lord's will, the Apostle became more and more an 

able and qualified minister, or servant, of the Lord. The 

Lord used him more and more in the presentation of the 

glorious Message of God's Love, as revealed in the great 

Divine Plan of the Ages. 

St. Paul's faithfulness is manifest to us in the words, 
"This one thing I do, forgetting those things which are 
behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are 
before [in the promises of God's Word], I press toward 
the mark for the Prize of the High Calling of God in 
Christ Jesus. (Philippians 3:13,14.) That was the 
secret of the Apostle's power. That is the reason why 
the Lord, by His Holy Spirit, has used him so much and 
so efficiently in the blessing of the Church since that time 
—through the streams of Truth which have come down 
through his Epistles. 

What a zeal the Apostle had! Hearken to his words, 
"Woe is unto me, if I preach not the Gospel!" (1 Cor. 9: 16.) 
This does not signify that the Gospel was 
preached for fear of being tormented after he would die, 
but that he felt that he could not be satisfied except when 
doing all in his power to make known to all who have 
the "hearing ear" the Message of God's grace centered in 
Christ Jesus. Thus it was when he was giving his time 
exclusively to preaching. Thus it was when he was obliged 
for a time to be a tent-maker to support himself— 
while preaching evenings, holidays, and at his work. 
Thus it was that he preached with special liberties while 



still a prisoner at Rome. Anyhow, anywhere, under 

God's providence, St. Paul was ready and glad to preach 
the "good tidings" to all who had hearing ears. 

WHY ELDERS SHOULD BE CAREFULLY CHOSEN 

This should be the spirit, not only of the Pilgrims, of 
the Elders of the Church of Christ, but the spirit of every 
member of it; for in a large sense each one of us is 
privileged to be a minister, or servant, in writing the 
Message of God's grace in the hearts of others. 

But let us not forget that we shall not know how to 
write in the hearts of others what we have not already 
had written in our own hearts. Hence the propriety of 
great caution in the choosing of Elders— to find those 
who already have the writing of the Lord in their hearts, 
and who therefore will be competent assistants, under the 
Holy Spirit's guidance, for the writing of the Lord's 
character-likeness in the hearts of the younger brethren. 

And what is the Message, what is the Epistle, that is 
written in our hearts by the Holy Spirit through various 
agencies? Is it the knowledge of chronology? Is it the 
unraveling of types and shadows? Is it the cracking of 
hard theological nuts in respect to differently understood 
passages of Scripture? Is it the knowledge of the history 
of the Jews, the history of the world, the history of 
the Church? Is it the understanding and appreciation of 
the different Covenants, past, present, and to come? No, 
it is none of these. 

All of these subjects have more or less of value, and 
are more or less used of the Lord in connection with 
this writing that is to be done in the hearts of His people. 
But writing the Epistle of Christ is different— the writing, 
the tracing of the character-likeness of the Master in the 
hearts of His people— His meekness. His gentleness. His 
patience. His long-suffering. His brotherly-kindness, His 
love. His joy, His peace. 

We might have all knowledge respecting chronology 
and history, might be able to quote every text in the Bible, 
and to cite it, too; and yet not have the Epistle of Christ 
written in our hearts. It is the Epistle of which the 
Apostle Peter says, "For if these things be in you, and 
abound, they make you that ye shall neither be barren 
[idle, inactive] nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our 
Lord Jesus Christ"; for knowledge will have its place. 

R5968 : page 302 

And thus with these characteristics of the Master deeply 
engraved upon our hearts, we shall be granted an abundant 
entrance "into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and 
Savior Jesus Christ."— 2 Peter 1:8,11. 

THREE VALUABLE LESSONS 

The three great lessons which will be required of those 



who will be heirs of the Kingdom are: (1) A proper, 
thorough appreciation of JUSTICE, and a manifestation 
of that appreciation of justice by an endeavor to comply 
with the requirements of the Golden Rule— to love our 
neighbor as ourselves. (2) A further lesson is that of 
LOVE, sympathy, compassion, mercy. However exacting 
we may be respecting ourselves, our own thoughts, words 
and deeds, we are not to exact from others, but be willing 
to take from them whatever they are pleased to give- 
as did our Savior. This will mean (3), suffering with 
Christ, having fellowship in His sufferings. It will mean 
the learning of valuable lessons to fit and qualify us for 
the work of being kings, priests and judges with our 
Lord in His coming Kingdom. 

St. Paul emphasized the importance of having the 
Christ-character engraved on our hearts when he wrote 
that God's predestination is that all who will be of the 
Church in glory must be copies of His dear Son— must 
have the Epistle of Christ written in their hearts. (Romans 8:28-30.) 
No matter how imperfect their bodies, 
how imperfect their attainment of their ideals, those 
ideals must be according to the Divine standard. And 
they must be so in sympathy with those ideals as to be 
glad to suffer for their attainment. 



R5968 : page 302 

INTERESTING LETTERS 

PHOTO-DRAMA IN NEWFOUNDLAND 

DEARLY BELOVED PASTOR:- 

The little group that was privileged to operate the 
DRAMA in this faraway corner of the Harvest field are 
very desirous that you know of their keen appreciation of 
the privilege they have enjoyed, and that you know some 
of the details of their experiences in the service. 

Under the Lord's providence circumstances favored 
our getting British Theater in St. Johns on very reasonable 
terms, but the refusal of the first newspaper man we 
approached to accept even a paid advertisement did not 
look very promising; house-to-house distribution on a limited 
scale and window cards were all the advertising we had. 
Moreover, this newspaper man told us he might, instead, 
feel called upon to warn the people. We were pleased to 
find in the morning no criticism in his journal. 

The President of the Red Cross Society had a proposition 
that interested us greatly. She wondered if it would 
be possible for us to release the Theater one evening for a 
patriotic lecture by a wounded soldier returned from the 
front. Could we have had a more marked providence 
while a suspicion of German sympathies was hanging over 
us? Two advertisements in evening newspapers were supplemented 
by a very nice acknowledgment by the Red 



Cross in all four of the evening papers, and next morning 
in the journal which had refused us. In the evening we 
turned away a lot of people— 725 present, seating capacity 
620. The third evening we turned away nearly 500. Attendance 
during the fourteen evening meetings was 7,795 
—average, 557; at the fifteen afternoon showings, 3,030— 
average, 202. A fine impression was made, and finale 
brought 240 cards. We could not have hoped for such 
results from any human standpoint. Other difficulties 
than those mentioned were overcome by the Lord. 

Following right after the close of the St. Johns service 
came an anonymous letter in the opposing journal, suggesting 
that our service was possibly paid for at Potsdam; 
this was supplemented with an editorial item. While 
it sounded foolish to those who had seen the DRAMA, 
his paper carries prestige and the German suspicion pursued 
us everywhere, especially at our next opening, in 
Carbonear; but everywhere we turned away crowds, who 
realized the malice of the charge. 

At Belle Island we showed in the Armory of the 
Church Lads' Brigade (Episcopal), the Salvation Army cooperating 
in supplying chairs. Both the Episcopal minister 
and a Salvation Army ensign attended two of the 
sessions, with keen appreciation. Pleasant interviews followed 
with both. Brother Samuel Baker who has been 
doing splendid work with picture machine, secured the 
favorable arrangement there. 

The Lord provided very efficient coworkers in the 
service, and all have worked in perfect harmony. There is 
great joy in satisfying the heart-hunger we are finding in 
these parts. 

Follow-up work, including Colporteur Service, is being 
carried on in all places served by the DRAMA. 

Because of the large number of dear friends in almost 
all sections of the American and Canadian fields who cooperated 
financially and otherwise in giving this witness in 
Newfoundland, few of whom we can reach personally, 
we are wondering if you might find it possible to get into 
THE WATCH TOWER a few fragments of this letter, that 
they may know we are carrying in our minds and hearts 
the remembrance of their labor of love, and that they 
may know a little of God's loving care over us and for 
His work. The ministry of our dear Brother MacMillan 
brought us much blessing and added much to the effectiveness 
of the DRAMA witness. 

R5969 : page 302 

And now, dear Brother, we wish unitedly to express 
our appreciation of your untiring efforts in connection 
with the witness given in Newfoundland; also our love 
for you and for all the dear ones of the Bethel family. 

Your brother by the Lord's great favor, 

W.W. BLACK.-Newfoundland. 



ALL HER CHILDHOOD AND ADULT QUERIES ANSWERED 

TO OUR BELOVED PASTOR:- 

Greetings! I feel called upon to write you at this time 
just to assure you of our continued love and gratitude, and 
this is especially brought forth by the renewed attacks on the 
Truth and its Teacher. To me these attacks always show up 
the Truth, as such, to greater advantage. 

You may be interested in reading one of the latest attacks 
by a prominent English clergyman. The Lord's Spirit is 
nowhere manifest in it; but if it has done no one else good, 
it has me; for it has done much to strengthen me in love for 
our Teacher and His teachings. "Spiritual wickedness in high 
places," indeed, is made manifest, and we are shown the need 
of a "new heavens." You no doubt have many letters telling 
you of the blessings which writers have received through 
the STUDIES, and it is my privilege to add to them. For 
eighteen months my life has flowed in a channel of unceasing 
blessing and increasing light, joy and peace. 

All my life has been a great, big Query: Why this? Why 
that? (And I am past forty years.) Now all my childhood 
and adult queries are answered. I comprehend it all now— 
the past, the future and the present. The "whys" are all explained— 
Why do men fight and kill'.' Why is sin in the 
world? If God hardened Pharaoh's heart, why do we blame 
Pharaoh? These and hundreds of others all find a complete 
answer in your books. Again, I love the Word today and it 
is the greatest blessing to me— a living Book. I am so thankful 
that the dear Father has permitted the scales to fall from 
my eyes (so unworthy as I know myself to be)— blessed are 
my eyes for they see! 

Each day seems to bring a Scripture truth with force, and 
I pass it on. I rejoice at all God sends me, and the tight 
corners only glorify Him all the more; for when I am 
weakest, God's strength is made manifest. He calls us today 
for a firm faith at all costs, and I want to trust Him in the 
face of apparent impossibilities. Please send on THE TOWER. 

I hope to greet you "in the Morning," face to face; but 
the spirit of love from all our Class goes with this. 

I am resigning my membership of the Society of Friends; 
and the only regret is that it will be a grief to my dear husband; 
but it may be a disguised blessing to him. We are all 
in God's keeping, "whose we are and whom we serve," and 
nothing happens to us by chance. We first see the Lord's 
hand in everything and therefore in everything give thanks. 
As a result there is continuous joy and peace in believing; 
and in all these persecutions (of which 1 claim a share and 
deem it a privilege so to do) I rejoice, too; for we are thus 
persecuted for Truth's sake. The Lord is all powerful and 
can use these attacks to glorify Himself and His Word, and 
this is being done. Praise Him! So, Brother, we await His 
orders; ready to go, ready to stay, ready His will to obey. 
GRACE BROWN. 

R5969 : page 303 



BURNED SET OF "DAWNS"-SORRY NOW 

BELOVED BROTHER:- 

My only apology for not writing to you before is a feeling 
of my unworthiness of being associated with the I.B.S.A. 
The Truth came to me as favor upon favor, flowing through 
and overflowing this leaky earthen vessel, made fit for the 
Master's use through His precious blood. 

I am now reading the volumes for the seventh time and 
they are precious to me, as they are truly an unfolding of 
God's Plan of Redemption, without adding to or taking from 
His Word. I always preferred to know the Bible doctrine 
rather than the commandments of men, yet to show me my 
own weakness God permitted me to burn my first set of 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, at a minister's bidding. Nevertheless, 
it was about that time that I began to see the difference 
between a Christian and a good citizen. After thirty years of 
drilling in Babylon I understood not the meaning of "the fruit 
of the Spirit"! 

Many times I re-read the back WATCH TOWERS; the re-reading 
is just as sweet as though I had never read them, 
which makes me long for the time when we shall all be 
"clothed upon." 

I here extend my whole-hearted thanks to you, dear 
Brother, for the assistance you have given me, enabling me to 
enter "the valley of blessing, so sweet." I also thank the co-laborers 
at the Tabernacle and Bethel Home through you, 
praying for you and all the "jewels" everywhere. 

I have accepted all of your proffered helps— the Vow, etc.; 
am glad to have my name among those who do not trust to 
the arm of flesh. The dear brethren in Europe are in my 
prayers more than ever. 

Relying on Jesus, hoping to see Him face to face. 

Yours in the Master's service, J.S. WATSON. -Calif. 



"WARS AND RUMORS OF WARS" 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Reading Jeremiah 5 1 :44-46 recently, it impressed me as 
possibly applying to the present, v. 46 measuring the limit 
of the present war— two years: "A rumor shall come in 
one year, and after that in another [a second] year shall 
come a rumor." 

This seems to be the same period spoken of by the Lord: 
"When ye shall hear of wars and rumors of wars, be ye 
not troubled," etc.-Mark 13:7,8; Luke 21:8,9. 

Isaiah 8:9-14 seemingly indicates a season of comparative 
quiet after the nations have assembled themselves and been 
broken in pieces and the making of the Confederacy— v. 1 2. 
Thus the ending of the war, say some time this year, might 
bring something like an armistice, during which the Federation 
would come into full life and do some of its work; when the 
"Earthquake," running quickly into the "fire," would cause 



great Babylon to be cast like a millstone into the sea.— Rev. 18. 

I send this on under St. Paul's counsel in Galatians 6:6, 
thinking this may be of some good. 

Yours in the Redeemer, W.E. PAGE.-Mo. 



NO WEAPON AGAINST US SHALL PROSPER 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Greetings in the Redeemer's name! This is to assure you 
of my continued faith in you as Pastor of the Lord's sheep 
in this Time of Trouble. 

How wonderfully your interpretation of the Scriptures is 
being proved correct! The Adversary, in his latest effort 
here in Ontario, has only strengthened our faith. Truly, we 
are still in the enemy's country! 

However, we have the Word of the Lord that no weapon 
that is formed against us shall prosper, but that even "the 
wrath of men shall praise Him." The Apostle declares that 
present sufferings are non-comparable to the future Glory of 
the Kingdom. 

I shall sit with you in the Tower and watch the outcome 
of the recent episode in Ontario. Some of the worldly, since 
this episode, are doing some reasoning as to the moral law 
and its bearing on the war. May the Lord grant you continued 
wisdom at this time! 

Your brother in Christ, ERNEST H. WALKER.-Ont. 



ALL OF ONE MIND 

DEAR FRIENDS:- 

About a year ago I wrote asking if you would consider it 
proper to buy the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES with my tithe-money. 
Receiving an affirmative answer I secured the complete 
set of STUDIES. I had read them almost through before 
I had opportunity to meet with a Class, as I have done since 
we came to this place. 

I had not read far until I began to feel like a prisoner 
set free, though I never before realized I was a prisoner. 
Whenever I study I seem to learn a new point and can feel 
another shackle loosed; but I still have some points of early 
training to overcome. 

My husband, son and daughter did not seem to get the 
Truth from reading the books as I did, but since our residence 
here they attend the Class and want the Truth as much 
as I. My husband and I have been Christians from youth 
and consecrated while in the Methodist denomination. I wish 
to symbolize my consecration at the first opportunity and am 
quite confident my entire family will wish to do so. We feel 
that you will approve of this, but would like to have your 
advice regarding the children, as they seem young for such a 
step, although manifesting interest as above described. 

Perhaps I am over-anxious, but I am so pleased that we 



are all of one mind that I cannot allow the matter to remain 
incomplete. Thanking you in advance for your advice, whatever 
it may be, I am 
Yours in Christ, MRS. AGNES A. ALLEN.-Calif. 



WONDERFUL BLESSINGS SINCE FINDING THE TRUTH 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

For a long time I have wished to write you of the wonderful 
blessings that have been mine since finding the Truth. 
Shortly after coming into the Truth my brother, who had 
just joined the Baptist church, became interested and came 
right along with me. He sent his letter of withdrawal, which 
caused quite a stir in the church above mentioned. 

We are surely hated here; the Methodist minister told 
his congregation when they saw any of us in the church to 
run us out! They are certainly closing down on us! 

A dear girl— junior in our Normal school— is coming into 
the Truth. She was offered a position as teacher, but the 
Board would not even consider her if she was one of us. 
She says she will plainly tell them that she will not submit to 
the "Beast" and accept his "mark" just to get a position; that 
her bread and water are promised her! 

May the dear Lord continue to bless you! 

Your sister in Him, NORA VOLES KEITH.-Okla. 



FRENCH BRETHREN MILITARY PRISONERS 

"Blessed are the people that know the joyful sound; they 
shall walk, O Lord, in the light of Thy countenance." (Psalm 89: 15.) 
How thankful I am to the Lord for so much goodness 
from Him! I am no more at Monheim, but at Dortmund 
since January 29th. Think of my joy! The Lord has 
permitted me to be His witness, guided by the writings of 
our dear Brother and Pastor Russell. We are now sixty-four 
Bible Students in our camp, and my heart rises to God 
in thanksgivings. 

Many loving greetings to the dear brethren and sisters. 
FRED POLLARD 



RESTITUTION APPRECIATED 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

For two years I have been working among the two hundred 
families of my home town, distributing B.S.M.— one 
number at a time, about once a month. I have also talked 
with the people. 

Of late I have used an EUREKA DRAMA in about thirty-five 
of the best homes— in some of these three times— with a 
full house. The Baptist preacher, who did his best two years 



ago to kill the work of the Truth here, seems now to feel 
kindly towards me, as I have always tried to show I feel 
towards him. 

Recently I heard some of the leading men of this place 
contending that Restitution is what God has for the world; 
these men seem satisfied with this. 

There are about twenty full sets of the STUDIES in the 
families here, and during the last two years I loaned about 
100 copies of Vol. 1 in magazine form. A brother who has 
come into the Truth within the past eighteen months has 
been a true yoke -fellow, and we have visited other towns in 
the vicinity with the EUREKA DRAMA. 

Just now the way seems closed, but we are waiting and 
watching for any and every opening. Pray for us. 

Ever yours in the Truth, W.S. BUMPUS.-IH. 



page 305 

VOL. XXXVII OCTOBER 15 No. 20 
A. D. 1916-A.M. 6045 



CONTENTS 

Prices on All Books Advanced .... 306 

What We Preach and Teach 307 

Not Higher Criticism Nor Evolution . 307 
Scriptural Terms and Ordination . . 308 
How Errors of the Past Crept In . . 308 
All Needed Bible Helps Now Available . 309 

The Ransom Not the Sin-Offering . . . 310 
Why a Ransom Was Necessary . . . 310 
The Philosophy of the Ransom . . . 310 
The Sin-Offering 311 

"Suffer the Word of Exhortation" . . . 312 

"Straight Paths for Your Feet" ... 313 
A Vow Unto the Lord 314 

From Malta to Rome 314 

Why the Gospel Is Rejected . . . 316 

A Living Sacrifice 316 

True Christian Living . . . . 317 

Los Angeles, Seattle, Milwaukee Conventions 31! 

Interesting Letters 319 

Fiery Trials in Britain Easing 



page 306 



PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 



Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



PRICES ON ALL BOOKS ADVANCED 

With the phenomenal rise in the cost of paper, ink, cloth, 
leather and labor, the advance in prices on all kinds of books 
becomes a necessity. Hoping that the advance would be only 
a temporary one, we have delayed making any change until 
we are now losing as much as 10 cents per copy on some of 
the volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. Hereafter the 
price of the first three volumes of STUDIES will be 50c each, 
including postage, and the price of volumes 4, 5, and 6 will 
be 60c each, including postage. 

CREATION DRAMA SCENARIO 

Hereafter the prices on these books will be as follows: 
Paper edition, prepaid, 25c. 
Cloth edition, prepaid, 65c. 
De Luxe Gilt Edge edition, prepaid, $1.00. 

DAILY HEAVENLY MANNA 

Cloth-bound edition, prepaid, 60c. 
Leather edition, De Luxe, prepaid, $2.00. 

BOOKLETS 

Question Booklets, 7c. per copy, postpaid. 

All other booklets, including Za, 10c. per copy, postpaid. 

Prices on the above to Colporteurs and to I.B.S.A. 
Classes in lots of 50 or more, assorted, charges collect, will 
be one-half of the above mentioned prepaid rates. 



BLUE PRINT CHARTS, ETC. 

Chart of the Ages (8 ft.), $2.50 each, postpaid. 
Chart of the Ages (5 ft.), $1.85 each, postpaid. 
Chronology Charts (7 1/2 ft.), $2.00 each, postpaid. 
Tabernacle Charts (7 1/2 ft.), $2.00 each, postpaid. 
WATCH TOWER Binders (spring-back), 60c. each, postpaid. 
WATCH TOWER Bibles are not advanced, as we have a 
good supply at old cost. 



I.B.S.A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR MONTH OF NOVEMBER 

QUESTIONS FROM 
MANUAL ON SERIES THIRD 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
STUDY VII.-"DELIVERANCE AND EXALTATION OF CHURCH" 
STUDY VIII.-"RESTORATION OF ISRAEL" 

Week of Nov. 5. Q. 15 to 20 Week of Nov. 19. Q. 27 to 33 
Week of Nov. 12. Q. 21 to 26 Week of Nov. 26. Q. 1 to 7 

Question Manuals on Vol. III., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
7c each. 



R5970 : page 307 

WHAT WE PREACH AND TEACH 

"For I determined not to know anything 
among you, save Jesus Christ, and Him 
crucified."— 1 Corinthians 2:2. 

AT NO time in the Church's history has our 
great Adversary been so active in multiplying 
false doctrines and in diverting attention 
from the Truth by introducing unprofitable 
and irrelevant questions as at present. Just 
when the exaltation and glory of the Church 
are soon to be accomplished, and when the 
faithful are about to be received into the 
joy of their Lord, every device is resorted 
to to beguile them of their reward and to 
frustrate this feature of the Divine Plan. To really frustrate 
any part of the Divine Plan is impossible: God has 
purposed to take out from among men a Little Flock, "a 
people for His name," a Royal Priesthood; and such a 
company is assuredly being gathered; but whether all of 
those now in the race for the Prize will surely be of that 
number, is still an open question. Take heed, beloved, 
that no man take thy Crown. (Revelation 3:11.) If any 
come short of their privileges and prove unworthy of the 
inheritance, there are others who will fill their places. 
We beseech you, brethren, as you value the glorious 



hope set before you in the Gospel, that you give no heed 
to seducing spirits and doctrines of devils, as the Apostle 
terms them (1 Timothy 4:1); but that, with fixedness of 
purpose, you apply yourselves to the one thing to which 
you are called and are privileged to do as prospective 
members of that Royal Priesthood. Let us never forget 
that we are a "peculiar people," separate from the great 
body of nominal Christians, as well as from the world, 
having higher hopes, aims and ambitions and favored 
with a clearer insight into the deep things of God, having 
been called out of our former darkness into His marvelous 
light. And if thus separate from the world and 
from Christians who partake largely of the spirit of the 
world, what wonder if we find them all out of harmony 
with us, and either ignoring or opposing us! 

OPPOSITION TO BE EXPECTED 

Such opposition is to be expected and will, doubtless, 
continue until we finish our course in death. To submit 
patiently to this opposition is to sacrifice our own natural 
preferences for the friendship and the pleasures of the 
present life, and to endure hardness as good soldiers for 
the Truth's sake, in whatever shape that hardness may 
come, in our effort to do the Lord's will and work of advancing 
the interests of His Kingdom. This is what is 
meant by the presenting of our bodies living sacrifices in 
the Divine service. To be really in this service involves, 
First, the careful and continual study of God's Plan; Second, 
the imbibing of its spirit; leading. Thirdly, to an enthusiastic 
zeal for its accomplishment, and to activity to 
the extent of ability in its service, at whatever cost or 
sacrifice it may require. 

If we are faithful in this service we have no time, nor 
have we the disposition, to give heed either to false doctrines 
or to other themes which have no bearing on the 
one thing to which we have solemnly dedicated our lives. 
Our time is not our own if we have dedicated all to God; 
and consequently, we have none to spare for the investigation 
of fanciful false theories, built upon other foundations 
than that laid down in the Scriptures. Neither have 
we time to devote to the ideas and pursuits which engross 
the world's attention, many of which are harmless in themselves, 
but would be harmful to us if we were to allow 
them to occupy consecrated time and divert our attention 
from the one thing we ought to be doing. The Apostle 
warns us to "shun profane babblings, for they will 
increase unto more ungodliness"; but adds, "Study to 
show thyself approved unto God, a workman that needeth 
not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of 
Truth." "Teach no other doctrine; neither give heed to 
fables and endless genealogies, which minister questions 
rather than godly edifying which is in faith."— 2 Timothy 2:15,16; 
1 Timothy 1:3,4. 

NOT HIGHER CRITICISM NOR EVOLUTION 



Ours is not the gospel of the Higher Critics and Evolutionists. 
We cheerfully accord these friends of a modern 
gospel their liberty to believe as they think proper, reminding 
them, however, of the warning words of the 
Apostle Paul in Galatians 1:6-9. Our own faith is firmly 
planted on the Bible as the only Divine Revelation of the 
will and Plan of our Creator. But this does not mean that 
we believe the Bible to teach all that our well-meaning 
forefathers of the Dark Ages supposed were its doctrines. 
We find that they burned one another at the stake for disbelieving 
things that the Bible does not teach. 

The growing scepticism of today regarding God and 
the Bible, we find, is generally the outgrowth of a misunderstanding 
of the Bible's teaching respecting Hell. 
No sane man can be blamed for rejecting the old theory 
that God first made a roasting Hell, and then made a 
race, knowing that all would spend an awful eternity 
there, except the few who would hear of Christ and become 
saints. This blasphemy against our Creator's holy 
name needs to be rebuked. The people need to be taught 
what the educated clergy and laity already know— that 
the only Hebrew word translated "hell" is SHEOL, and that 

R5970 : page 308 

its Greek equivalent is HADES, and that neither word signifies 

a place of torment, but the tomb, the grave, the state 

of unconsciousness, in which both good and bad must remain 

after death until the resurrection, which is to follow 

the Second Coming of the Redeemer. 

The literature of the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT 
SOCIETY has helped thousands along this line, as we go 
into details of explanation of the parables, dark sayings 
and symbolisms of the Bible, which other Bible teachers do 
not find time for, with their many and varied cares connected 
with modern church activity. In a word, the work 
of our Society is conducted on the belief that the Bible is 
Divinely inspired, and that we are now living in the 
wonderful Day, mentioned by the Prophets, when "the 
wise shall understand," when they shall receive "meat 
in due season" from God's wonderful Book. By the 
"wise" we mean, of course, those who are wise toward 
God, not the worldly-wise. 

OUR VIEWS OF THE MILLENNIUM 

If our understanding of the Bible's teaching is correct, 
we are on the threshold of the Millennium. And this 
fact explains not only the progress of invention and natural 
science, but also the finishing of the Mystery respecting 
God's gracious purposes for our race, foretold in the 
Bible in symbols and types. However, our expectations of 
the Millennium are along different lines than some might 
suppose. We find no Scriptures to teach that the world 
will be converted by our commendable missionary efforts 



or any other efforts. To us the Bible teaches that the 
conversion of the world will follow the Second Advent of 
our Redeemer to gather His Elect Church (the saints out 
of all denominations), that they, changed to the spirit 
nature, may be, under their Lord and Head, the teachers, 
guides and helpers of the remainder of the race— those 
now dead as well as the living nations— to uplift all the 
willing and obedient from sin and death to perfection and 
everlasting life on earth, which will then, during those 
Times of Restitution, become Paradise restored. 

Statistics agree that the Millennium is not coming by 
the conversion of the heathen; for there are twice as many 
today as there were a century ago, notwithstanding all our 
missionary efforts. On the contrary, we must agree that 
the signs of the times presage the near approach of the 
culmination of the great "Time of Trouble such as never 
was since there was a nation," by which, the Scriptures 
assure us, Messiah's Kingdom will be ushered in, to 
"bless all the families of the earth." 

SCRIPTURAL TERMS AND SCRIPTURAL ORDINATION 

Perhaps we should explain that we do not recognize 
as Biblical the terms "clergy" and "laity," nor the titles 
"Reverend," "Doctor of Divinity," and other similar appellations 
now in vogue. This, however, does not lead us 
to disfellowship those who differ from us. We use the 
Scriptural terms "Pastor," "Evangelist," "Teacher," "Elder," 
"Deacon," etc., and recognize that all of God's consecrated 
people are ministers— that is, servants— each authorized 
to serve his brethren as his talent may permit and 
as the brethren may desire. As for ordination, we cannot 
accept as Scriptural the theory of the "Apostolic Succession," 
and that the specific power or authority comes from 
men to men. We hold that the anointing of the Holy 
Spirit alone gives the power and the authority to understand 
and explain the Scriptures. 

HOW ERRORS OF THE PAST CREPT IN 

The Editor is being attacked at present by about one -fourth 
of all the ministers of the world, simply because 
we preach the Bible Message voiced by the angel at the 
birth of Jesus: "Behold, I bring you good tidings of 
great joy, which shall be unto ALL PEOPLE!" (Luke 2:10,1 1.) 
That good Message of God's Love and of His merciful 
provision in Jesus' death for the sins of the whole world 
began to be lost sight of in the close of the second century. 
The doctrine of "Apostolic Succession" led the people 
of that time to respect the bishops as successors to 
the Divinely-ordained Twelve— St. Paul, and not Matthias, 
taking the place of Judas. 

It is not to be wondered at, that at a time when ability 
to read was not general, when Bibles were few and 
expensive, and when this doctrine of Apostolic Succession 



R597 1 : page 308 

had gotten a foothold in the Church, the people hearkened 
to the so-called Apostolic Bishops. It is not wonderful 
that those bishops liked to be considered authorities. 
For fourteen centuries there was no Bible Study— merely 
a study and worship of creeds. Bibles were publicly 
burned, and those who dared to study the Bible and accept 
its statements were hunted like the wild beasts of 
the forest— even in Scotland. 

The Reformation Movement brought the Bible forward, 
but its friends had much of the smoke of the Dark 
Ages still in the eyes of their understanding. As one 
leader after another prayed, "Lead, kindly light, amidst 
the encircling gloom," and rubbed his eyes, new sects were 
started, all endeavoring to reach the light, yet all acknowledging 
that the creeds, for which many of them died, were 
not satisfactory to either their hearts or their heads. 

PRESENT ERRORS AND OPPOSITION TO LIGHT 

Now we have come to a time when the various divisions 
of God's people have too much enlightenment to 
burn each other at the stake, and when they are disposed 
to federate, and to ignore their differences. Meantime, 
Higher Criticism has come in and has turned a majority 
of Christian preachers away from the Bible entirely. But 
they are still tied to their sects and to the creeds which 
they no longer believe. 

Meantime, in God's providence, the Bible has come 
into the hands of the people. Education is now general, 
and Bible helps are abundant. This seems to be, according 
to the Bible and facts, a favored time for God's people 
to obtain proper knowledge of His Word. With others, 
the Editor has been greatly blessed in studying the Bible 
and in making clear to others its true meaning. We have 
been doing this for the past forty years without serious 
objection, until recent years. The objection now is that 
the teaching of ourself and our associates of the INTERNATIONAL 
BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION is beginning to 
exercise a world-wide influence. We have Bible Study 
Helps printed in thirty-two different languages. We have 
Bible Study Classes in all parts of the earth. This leads 
some of the ministers to consider our work a menace- 
just as the Episcopalians once thought the Presbyterians 
and the Methodists a menace, as the Jews thought the 
early Christians a menace to their institutions, and just 
as the Baptists thought others a menace to them, etc. 

As we make clear the meaning of our Lord's parables 
and dark sayings, and show the harmony of the Bible's 
teaching from Genesis to Revelation, the creeds of the 
Dark Ages become unpalatable, nauseating. As some of 
the best people renounce these creeds, the class of preachers 
alluded to become bitter. Unable to meet our Scriptural 
arguments, they indulge in personal abuse and invective, 
with a view to hindering people from hearing us and 



from reading our publications. But nevertheless the work 
goes grandly on, with increasing momentum. Those who 
get their eyes of understanding open are prompt to help 
others. As the people learn the real motives of the attacks 
which are being made upon us, they have less sympathy 

R597 1 : page 309 

for those making the attacks, and are more disposed 
to investigate our teachings. 

ALL NEEDED BIBLE HELPS NOW AVAILABLE 

We have never claimed to be a finished scholar in 
either Greek or Hebrew. More than this, we claim that 
not one minister in a thousand, of any denomination, is 
a scholar in these languages. The ability to read the 
Greek and Hebrew alphabets, and to spell out the words 
in these languages, is not scholarship; nor does it follow 
that the person able to do so has thereby any knowledge 
of these languages. By scholarship we mean thorough understanding 
of the grammatical construction of a language. 

Furthermore, we claim that in God's providence such 
knowledge is not necessary to the right understanding 
of the Word of God. Bible students today have access 
to numerous translations of the Bible made by the scholarly 
few. More than this, the Presbyterians have Young's 
Greek, Hebrew and English Lexicon-Concordance; the 
Methodists have Strong's Analytical Greek, Hebrew, Chaldaic 
and English Lexicon-Concordance. Besides these, 
there is the Englishman's unsectarian work, covering the 
same ground; Liddell and Scott's Greek-English Lexicon, 
McClintock and Strong's Criticisms, the Emphatic Diaglott, 
which has the original Greek text with interlineary 
word for word English translation, and parallel emphatic 
version in English, etc. 

The value of such concordances as an aid to the 
correct understanding of the Scriptures cannot be over-estimated. 
In the preface to "Young's Analytical Concordance," 
the author says of his work: "Its great object, 
as Tyndale says of his New Testament, is to enable 
every 'PLOUGH-BOY' to know more of the Scriptures than 
the 'ancients,' by enabling him at a glance to find out 
THREE DISTINCT POINTS-First, What is the original Hebrew 
or Greek of any ordinary word in his English Bible; 
Second, What is the Literal and primitive meaning of 
every original word: and Third, What are thoroughly 
true and reliable parallel passages." 

Whoever has these works in his possession, and knows 
how to use them, and does use them, has a better working 
knowledge of the Hebrew, Greek and Chaldaic of the 
original Bible than could be gained by four years' study 
of these languages. We possess these books and many 
others, and have learned how to use them effectively. As 
a result, we have better knowledge of the Bible in its 
original languages than have nine-tenths of the ministers 



who have taken merely a four-year theological course. 
We advise all Bible students to use these wonderful helps 
of our day, which represent the highest scholarship, rather 
than to waste their time spelling out the words in the 
original languages, the meaning and the grammatical 
value of which are appreciated by only about one in a 
thousand. We are glad to say that thousands of Bible 
Students habitually use Young's and Strong's Concordances, 
besides numerous versions of the Scriptures, such 
as Young's Translation, The Variorium, Leeser's (Jewish) 
translation, and of the New Testament, Tischendorf, 
the Syriac, Rotherham, Emphatic Diaglott, etc., etc. 

BIBLE ORDINATION 

As for ordination: However ignorant the public may 
be in regard to this matter, we can but suppose that ministers 
and editors of religious papers are well-informed. 
These all know that the word "ordination" simply signifies 
authorization. Thus the Baptists authorize, or ordain, 
their ministers; the Methodists authorize, or ordain, theirs, 
etc. There is no such thing amongst Christian people as 
a general ordination. On the contrary. Catholics dispute 
all ordinations except their own and denounce all Protestant 
ministers as unordained. The Anglican Church 
similarly refuses to recognize the ordination of those 
whom they term non-conformists. 

As God has but one Church, so He has but one ordination 
for all who are His ministers. The one Church of 
God includes the saintly Christians of all denominations, 
and the God-ordained ministry consists of those only who 
have received the Divine benediction— the begetting of the 
Holy Spirit. Jesus is the Head, or Chief, of this Church. 
He is its Chief Minister. His ordination took place at the 
time of His consecration and baptism in Jordan, when He 
was thirty years of age, under the limitations of the 
Mosaic Law. All coming into membership in Him and 
receiving the begetting of the Holy Spirit share in His 
ordination. The Master declared, "As the Father hath 
sent Me, even so have I sent you."— John 20:21. 

This commission is referred to in prophecy. The Christ, 
Head and Body, being the Speaker: "The Spirit of the 
Lord GOD is upon Me; because the LORD hath anointed Me 
to preach good tidings unto the meek; He hath sent Me 
to bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty to the 
captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are 
bound; to proclaim the acceptable Year of the Lord, and 
the Day of Vengeance of our God; to comfort all that 
mourn; to appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give 
unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning; 
the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness; that 
they might be called trees of righteousness, the planting 
of the Lord, that He might be glorified."— Isaiah 61:1-3. 

The Holy Spirit is symbolized by the oil poured upon 
the head of Aaron the high priest, of which we read that 
it ran down the skirts of His garment, even to its hem. 



This typified that the Holy Spirit, poured out upon our 

Head, Christ Jesus, has come down over the Church, His 

Body, during all these nineteen centuries, beginning at 

Pentecost— the anointing, ordaining, qualifying power of 

God on all His Royal Priesthood, authorizing them to 

declare the "Good Tidings of great joy, which shall be 

unto all people." And any who give evidence of possessing 

this anointing of the Holy Spirit, and who have 

the ability and the spiritual qualifications of character-development 

in the likeness of Christ, which are Scriptural 

requisites in teachers of the Church, may be chosen 

by the Ecclesias of the Lord's people to minister to them 

publicly, as their more special servants in spiritual things. 

But any one who has received the Spirit's anointing is 

Scripturally ordained to proclaim the Message of God 

according to his ability and opportunity, observing only 

the proprieties pointed out in the Word as to sex distinctions, 

etc., regarding public proclamation. 

So then, adhering closely to the written Word of God 
in our teaching, and striving to follow faithfully in 
the footsteps of the Master in our daily walk and conversation, 
we pray with all saints: "Thy Kingdom come. 
Thy will be done on earth, as it is done in Heaven." 



"And this hath been the Lord's wise will. 
To find one here, one there. 

Who counting earthly gain but dross. 

Would daily take the Christian's cross. 

E'en at the risk of any loss- 
God finds one here and there. 

"And oh! the grandeur of the work 

For this one here and there, 
To join in lifting up our race, 
To wipe away of sin each trace. 
To make of earth a perfect place, 

Put glory everywhere!" 



R5972: page 310 

THE RANSOM NOT THE SIN-OFFERING 

IT SEEMS difficult for some of our dear 
readers to distinguish clearly between the 
Ransom and the Sin-offering. Although we 
have repeatedly tried to make the subject 
clear, we will try again. 

The word "ransom" in the Old Testament 
seems to be used less definitely than in the 
New Testament. In the Old Testament, the 
Hebrew word translated ransom is kopher, 
and signifies a covering, a protection, as 



when we read, "The wicked shall be a ransom for the 
righteous" (Proverbs 21:18)— their covering, their protection. 
The righteous are few and uninfluential in the 
world; and laws would not generally be made especially 
for their protection. The laws of society are made for 
the masses of the people— not for the saints; but those 
laws made for the people in general we— the Lord's saints 
—have as a covering. 

The Prophet David declares that no man can give a 
ransom for his brother. (Psalm 49:7.) That is to say, 
all mankind are imperfect through the Adamic fall. All 
are sinners; therefore none could stand before God in 
the sense of justifying themselves; and thus unable to 
justify themselves, they would be wholly unable to justify 
another— their brother. Here the thought is very similar 
to that attaching to the word "ransom" in the New 
Testament, showing that to be such a ransom, or covering, 
requires perfection, righteousness, which no man of all 
our race possessed, except the Man Christ Jesus, "holy, 
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners," who was 
therefore able and qualified to give Himself "a Ransom 
for all, to be testified in due time."— 1 Timothy 2:6. 

The word used in the New Testament Greek for 
"ransom" is very explicit; it signifies a price to correspond, 
or a corresponding price. The implication is that something 
was lost that needs to be re-purchased, redeemed, 
bought back; and the thing which is competent to purchase 
it back must be of equal value to the thing lost or 
forfeited— no more, no less— a "corresponding price." 

WHY A RANSOM WAS NECESSARY 

The tiling that was lost by Father Adam for himself 
and all of his family was the right to life. As the perfect 
man, God's arrangement provided him with the privilege 
of living forever on condition that he would be obedient, 
loyal to his Creator. His sin was disloyalty, disobedience, 
and its penalty was death— the forfeiture of the right 
to live. Thus, because of Adam's disobedience, he came 
under the death sentence, "Dying, thou shalt die." (Genesis 2:17, 
margin.) Adam's children were born to him 
after he had thus forfeited his life-rights, and he was 
unable to give them more than he possessed— a dying 
nature. Thus we read: "Wherefore, as by one man sin 
entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death 
passed upon all, for that all have sinned, etc.— Rom. 5: 12. 

God reveals to us in His Word that while He wishes 
to be merciful and to receive back to Himself all the 
willing and obedient of the race, nevertheless He must 
maintain the dignity of His own Law and cannot set 
aside the death sentence except upon the conditions 
which He has arranged; viz., a Ransom. If Adam is 
ransomed from the sentence of death. Justice will have 
no further claim against his life, and the ransomer would 
have the right to restore Adam and his race. But no 
ransomer could be found amongst all the family of men; 



for all were sinners— none was perfect, all had inherited 
the blemishes of sin. Hence God's arrangement— the 
sending of His Only Begotten Son to be the Redeemer, the 
Ransomer, of Adam and his family, and ultimately to be 
the Restorer of all that was lost. 

To this service— to this carrying out of the Divine 
Program— God attached a very great reward of glory, 
honor and immortality. The Logos, "The beginning of 
the creation of God," "the first born of every creature" 
(Revelation 3:14; Colossians 1:15), accepted the Divine 
arrangement gladly and humbled Himself. Leaving 
the honors and favors of His high position on the spirit 
plane. He was made flesh in order "that He by the grace 
of God, should taste death for every man" (Hebrews 2:9) 
as the Ransomer of Adam. St. Paul tells us of Him 
as the One "who for the joy that was set before Him, 
endured the cross, despising the shame," and now as a 
result, "is set down at the right hand of the Throne of 
God" (Hebrews 12:2), henceforth expecting, waiting, 
until the time shall come for Him to bless Adam and 
his race for whom He has already died— waiting that 
the Father in due time, after the selection of the Bride 
Class, may put all things in subjection under Him— 
under the Messiah— that He may reign a thousand years 
for the uplifting and blessing of those for whom He died. 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE RANSOM 

As the sinner was the perfect man, Adam— in full 
harmony and fellowship with God and only a little lower 
than the angels and crowned with glory and honor as a 
perfect human being— so the one who would redeem him, 
or be his ransomer, must have all these qualifications. 
He must be a man, and a perfect man; in him God's 
image and likeness must be complete; he must be crowned 
with the glory and honor of perfection; he must be "holy, 
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners" and in full 
fellowship with God. 

All these requirements were fully met in the Man 
Christ Jesus when He was thirty years of age, at which 
time He presented Himself at Jordan to complete and 
confirm His consecration unto death, giving Himself a 
Ransom-price for all the race, to be testified to them 
all in due time. As a bullock could never take away sin 
by its death, neither could an angel or other spirit being 
ever take away sin by dying for Adam. Under the 
Divine arrangement, the Redeemer must be a corresponding-price 
to the one redeemed. Jesus was all this; 
nothing more was either necessary or possible. There 
was nothing lacking in the merit of the perfect Man to 
redeem the first man and his family; nothing therefore 
that the Church could give or do that would help in the 
matter. Justice could accept only the corresponding price. 

That Ransom-price, that Corresponding-price for 
Adam, has already been placed in the hands of Justice. 
Jesus did this in His consecration at Jordan, in that He 



agreed to do the will of the Father even unto death; and 

on the Cross He declared, "Into Thy hands I commit My 
spirit"— the spirit of life. His right to life, which He had 
not forfeited, either by sin or otherwise. That Ransom-price, 
or Price sufficient to redeem Adam and all of his 
race, has been in the hands of Justice as a deposit ever 
since, and is there now— still unapplied. It cannot be applied 
piecemeal, a little to each one; when applied, it 
must be applied for all at the same moment. 

Why must it be applied all at one moment? Because 
it is just the one life. It would require the entire merit of 
Christ's sacrifice to recover Father Adam from his condemnation, 
and it would require the entire merit of that 
sacrifice for any one of the children of Adam. The 
Ransom cannot be divided up into millions of parts and a 
little piece given to each member of the race. The whole 
sacrifice of Christ was necessary for each one of the race, 
and is sufficient for the entire race, when it shall be so 
applied. It is to be applied for the entire race, but not 
until the Father's time has come for turning over the 

R5972: page 311 

race to the Redeemer— not until His appointed time for 
the Redeemer to take possession of the race as King of 
kings and Lord of lords, to establish over them His 
glorious Kingdom, to release them from the power of sin 

and death and to give them all the Restitution privileges 
which His Ransom-sacrifice makes possible. 

THE SIN-OFFERING 

In the meantime, another feature of the great Heavenly 
Father's Plan is working out— an arrangement by 
which a certain number of the children of Adam may 
become associates with Jesus in the suffering of this 
present time and in the glory that is to follow. This 
feature of the Plan is not the providing of a Ransom; 
for that was already provided in the death of Jesus; but 
this plan is to provide an under-priesthood who are 
eventually to be kings with the Savior— a Royal Priesthood. 
Evidently therefore the Sin-offering must not 
be confused with the Ransom-price; for the Ransom-price 
is complete, and was complete before the Church was 
invited to come into this position of self-sacrifice. 

The Jewish Day of Atonement pictured the entire 
work and operation of the Sin-offering, which began in 
the person of Jesus. The death of Jesus was typified by 
the killing of the bullock on the Day of Atonement. That 
was the great sacrifice for sins— a Sin-offering which 
was made by Jesus, who offered up Himself. He was 
both the anointed Priest of God and also the devoted 
Sacrifice. The merit of that Sacrifice might have been 
applicable to all the people; but if so, there would have 
been no room for the sacrifice of the Lord's Goat Class, the 
sacrifices of the under-priests, who, if faithful, are by and 



by to be made the Royal Priesthood of the Millennium. 
In the type, the High Priest allows the merit of his sacrifice 
to be applied to himself and his house— himself representing 
the Church which is Christ's Body; his house 
representing the Household of Faith, the consecrated ones 
who will fail to become members of the Body of Christ 
and will instead be on the spirit plane, "a great multitude" 
who will serve God day and night in His Temple— in the 
Church glorified. 

OFFERINGS MADE DURING THE GOSPEL AGE 

This passing of the merit of Jesus' Sacrifice, first of 
all, to and through His Church does not diminish the merit 
of that sacrifice nor its value, for every one who shares 
in that merit, participates on condition that he will surrender 
his earthly rights, following in the footsteps of 
Jesus. The priestly class includes those who keep their 
covenant arrangement, voluntarily and heartily lay down 
their lives in the Lord's service. The Great Company 
Class is composed of those who have failed to fully surrender 

R5973: page 311 

their earthly lives and rights, and will therefore 

have these earthly rights taken from them through great 

tribulation. Any others who receive of the Lord's favor 

during this Age and fail to get into one or the other of 

those classes— if they fail to become members of either 

the Royal Priesthood or of the Levite-servant company 

—cannot retain any Restitution blessings or privileges, 

but will die the Second Death. Thus the entire merit of 

Jesus, designed for Adam and his race, merely passes 

through the Church Class, the consecrated ones, on its 

way to Adam and his race. The Church having the opportunity. 

by reason of this arrangement, to share with 

Jesus in suffering for righteousness' sake— the great High 

Priest accepts our consecrated beings and makes them 

part of His sacrifice, and the full measure of His merit 

as the Ransom-price passes on to humanity to give Adam 

and his family Restitution privileges for a thousand years. 

These are the better sacrifices and offerings for sin 
not made by us, but made by the great High Priest whom 
the Father has appointed for the purpose. This great 
High Priest has been completing His sacrifice for sins; 
first His own flesh, and then the flesh of all those who 
have come unto the Father through Him during the past 
nineteen centuries. He will soon complete His sacrificial 
work, and glorify with Himself those who suffer with 
Him— making of them His consorts in His Messianic 
Kingdom. Then He will apply on behalf of all mankind 
the merit of the sacrifice which He finished at Calvary 
and which He has merely loaned or imputed to the Church 
during this Gospel Age. 

This Sacrifice will be given fully, completely, everlastingly, 
to Justice, appropriated as the full offset of 



Original Sin. Forthwith Adam and all of his children 
will be turned over by Justice into the hands of Jesus. 
Divine Justice will have no more to do with mankind. 
All will be under the administration of the Millennial 
Kingdom. For a thousand years the Redeemer, the Ransomer 
of the race, will teach, reward, punish, deal with 
humanity for their instruction in righteousness and their 
uplift from the sin and death condition, giving to every 
one a full opportunity for returning to perfection. 

At the close of the thousand years, Messiah having 
accomplished everything possible for every member of the 
race, will turn over all to the Father and will say to the 
sheep class, "Come, ye blessed of My Father, inherit the 
[earthly] kingdom prepared for you from the foundation 
of the world." (Matthew 25:34.) All others, found 
unworthy of everlasting life, will be destroyed in the 
Second Death, symbolically pictured as a devouring fire. 

Thus we have striven to make plain the distinction between 
the Ransom-price and the application of the Ransom-price, 
and the Sin-offering and the blessings resulting 
to the Church from the privilege of participation in those 
sin-offerings— the sufferings of Christ. 

THREE INTERESTING QUESTIONS 

We take occasion here to answer some related queries: 

Question.— Is it proper to say that we, the Church, 
receive by imputation "a certain portion" or "our share" 
of the merit of the Ransom now— during the Gospel Age? 

Answer.— The person using this language might have 
the proper thought, but would not be using the best words 
in which to express that thought to avoid being misunderstood. 
As above shown, all the merit of Christ is 
necessary to each member of the race. If we divided up 
the merit of Christ, nobody would have enough. If it 
were all given to one, the others would get none. God's 
Plan, therefore, is to hold that Ransom-price in reserve 
until the due time for the inauguration of Messiah's 
Kingdom, and then apply that price and transfer the 
whole race at one time to Jesus— to the Messianic Kingdom. 
Then during the Millennium, it might be proper 
to say that every one will be receiving the Restitution 
blessings as his share or participation in the Ransom 
merit; but strictly speaking, the whole blessing of the 
whole world is the ransom blessing. 

Question.— If the Ransom has not yet been applied, 
apportioned, credited, to the race on the Books of Justice, 
and if we who are of the Church are members of the 
world, how do we participate in the Ransom blessing? 

Answer.— The entire Ransom merit being in the hands 
of Justice, the one who owns that merit, Jesus— in harmony 
with the Father's Plan— imputes it to the whole 
company who will accept the offer of this Gospel Age 
and surrender themselves sacrifices to walk in the Master's 
footprints. There is quite a difference between 
giving and imputing, just as there would be a difference 



between giving a man a thousand dollars and imputing to 
him a thousand dollars by endorsing his note. Jesus, as 

R5973: page 312 

our great Advocate, imputes to us, or endorses us to the 
full extent of our contract with the Father. Our contract 
is that, like Jesus, we will surrender our earthly rights. 

The Heavenly Father could not recognize us as worthy 
of entering into such a contract, except as our great Advocate 
endorses for us, or guarantees us, in the matter. 
What does He guarantee? He guarantees that we shall 
lay down our lives— that our earthly lives shall be fully 
surrendered in due time. 

As we have seen, there are three classes for whom 
Jesus becomes Surety, Guarantor. First are those who 
fully and completely carry out their contract both in letter 
and spirit, laying down their lives voluntarily, after the 
Master's example. These will be the "more than conquerors," 
the members of the Body of the Anointed. Next 
will come the Great Company class, who will eventually 
be conquerors, but not "more than conquerors." Because 
conquerors, they will be granted everlasting life on the 
spirit plane; but because of lack of zeal and love, they 
will fail of the election as members of the Body of Christ. 

Third, there are those who will be neither more than 
conquerors nor even conquerors, but failures— turning 
back to sin, like the sow to her wallowing in the mire. 
These will die the Second Death. In any event, our 
great Advocate, the High Priest, having endorsed for 
all of these, will thus be ultimately free from all liability 
for them in that they all will have died according to the 
flesh and none of them will receive or retain Restitution 
rights or privileges. Those Restitution blessings will be 
fully and completely released when the last member of 
the Body of Christ shall have gone into death. 

Question.— Would it be proper for us to suppose that 
the world might begin to receive its share of Restitution 
blessings while some of the members of the Church are 
still in the flesh? 

Answer.— No! This would be an impossible thought. 
The whole merit of Christ is mortgaged by the imputation 
which Jesus has made of His merit to the company consecrating 
during this Age. This mortgage must be released 
fully, completely, before the New Covenant can 
be sealed and put into operation for giving Restitution 
blessings to Adam and his race. Hence, we are not to 
expect any Restitution, either of the Ancient Worthies 
or others, until the Little Flock shall have passed beyond 
the Veil and the Great Company class shall have passed 
through its tribulation. 



R5973: page 312 



"SUFFER THE WORD OF EXHORTATION" 

"Let all bitterness and wrath and anger and clamor 
and evil speaking be put away from you, with all 
malice, and be ye kind one to 
another."— Ephesians 4:31,32. 

THE same Apostle who uses these words of our 

text has elsewhere classified these evil fruits 

here enumerated as works of the flesh and 

of the Devil. He tells us that they that do 

these things shall not inherit the Kingdom 

of God. He indicates that these traits have 

come with our fallen nature. But we who 

have left the world, who have renounced its 

spirit, are under the most solemn obligations 

as New Creatures in Christ to bring 

our fallen nature with its tendencies to evil into full subjection 

to the new nature, to bring the old creature under 

control of the mind of God, the Holy Spirit, the holy will, 

crucifying the flesh and bringing every thought into captivity 

of obedience to Christ. More and more the Lord 

is impressing this thought upon us day by day. 

St. Paul contrasts these fruits of the Adversary and 
of the fallen flesh with the precious fruits of the Spirit 
of God. The one Spirit is Heavenly, Godlike, while the 
other is "earthly, sensual, devilish." Faith, goodness, 
meekness, gentleness, patience, peace, self-control, love— 
these are the Heavenly fruits. They are the very opposite 
of the spirit of the Adversary. As we endeavor to do the 
will of God, to cultivate the sweet qualities of the Holy 
Spirit, we find continual warfare with the inherited weaknesses 
of our fallen flesh. Some may succeed in a comparatively 
short time in gaining to a large degree the victory 
over these works of the flesh and of the Wicked One, 
while others may have a great war to wage. But the 
victory over this evil disposition must be won; else we 
shall never be granted an entrance into the Kingdom. The 
Lord is watching to see the zeal and earnestness with 
which we strive to put off these works of the fallen flesh, 
these evil traits of character. Knowing our own natural 
weaknesses, each of us is so to watch and guard 
himself, so to cry unto the Lord for help, so to fill his 
heart and mind with the Word of the Lord, that he 
may be kept pure and free from the alloy of sin. 

Coming to analyze the Apostle's exhortation of our 
text, it would seem as if he were mentioning one of the 

R5974: page 312 

worst traits first— "all bitterness." Bitterness is an acrid 
condition, the very opposite of sweetness. It represents 
a rancor in the heart, and is very closely allied to the last 
trait mentioned— "malice." Maliciousness in the heart, 
leads one to malevolence, to seek to do injury to another. 
The spirit of bitterness and malice, granted an entrance 



into t lie heart, is very likely to extend to all the affairs 

of life and to make complete shipwreck of the New Creature. 

Its effect is most baneful. While it is possible for 

one to become angry, and to feel vengeful momentarily, 

without the feeling amounting to bitterness which would 

be lasting, without a development of malice, nevertheless, 

fleshly anger and wrath are sinful, dangerous and certain, 

if not conquered, to lead to bitterness and malice. 

"AS YE WOULD THAT MEN SHOULD DO UNTO YOU" 

The Lord's Word admonishes us, "Let not the sun go 
down upon your wrath." No matter what provocation 
one may have had, he should see to it that the matter is 
settled as quickly as possible. Anger or wrath must not 
be harbored and cherished; for it is sure to lead to permanent 
bitterness and hatred. The word anger seems not 
to be so strong a word as wrath. Wrath in an imperfect, 
fallen being, seems to be deep, determined and lasting 
anger, something that is resentful, retaliatory. Evil speaking 
is a more refined, a more subtle matter, more deceitful, 
more malicious. Many people become so weak in character, 
so unbalanced, that they do not realize the proper 
application of the Golden Rule in their daily lives. They 
say things of others that they would not wish others to 
say of them. They treat others in a way that they would 
not wish to be treated. All such conduct should be put 
far away from the Lord's children, from those who have 
taken God's holy Covenant upon themselves and who 
profess to be God's ambassadors. 

We are not saying that there is no such thing as righteous 
anger, righteous wrath. "God is angry with the 
wicked every day." Even now His righteous wrath is 
kindled against the nations of the earth, and He is smiting 
them to their final overthrow. If all anger is wrong, 
then God Himself would be guilty of sin. But God's 
wrath. His anger, is always of a proper kind. It is not 
fleshly anger or bitterness. God is angry with wickedness, 

R5974: page 313 

and this anger signifies that He will punish it. The Scriptures, 
however, never refer to the Lord as being bitter 
or malicious. God is Love; He is patient and good, even 
to the wicked. He does everything injustice and love. 

Now if it is right for God to have certain anger, certain 
wrath, would it be right on our part to exercise anger or 
wrath on any occasion? There may, as we have intimated, 
be times when one may properly be angry. For instance, 
we should properly feel a certain degree of anger against 
ourselves. If we found that we had not properly improved 
our opportunities, if we have been careless or negligent 
in watching our "thoughts, and words and doings," we 
might well be provoked, even angry with ourselves. But 
if the heart is right, we should be neither too indignant 
nor discouraged on account of our failures in this direction. 



but strive more and more carefully, with the Lord's 
assistance, to overcome, endeavoring to learn a lesson 
from every mistake we make. 

NEED FOR EARNEST HEART-SEARCHING 

Not having the right or the ability to judge the heart 
of another, we should be very slow to anger, and very 
careful how we express ourselves. We are to remember 
that only the Lord has the right to punish. The Lord's 
people should strive against all of these weaknesses, these 
blemishes, of the flesh, which are stimulated by the Adversary 
and his hosts— anger, wrath, strife, malice, hatred. 
We should fear these things as we would a plague. 

What carefulness, what scrutiny of ourselves, what 
earnest prayer for help, this thought should bring! How 
we should guard our tongues against evil-speaking, back-biting, 
slander, for this is the fruit of lovelessness and 
malice. And in guarding our tongues, we must remember 
that it is from the heart that these evil words proceed. 
Therefore our heart must be made and kept so loyal to 
Christ, so in tune with God's Holy Spirit, that it will 
not send forth any such bitter waters. 

The Psalmist says, "Let not an evil speaker be established 
in the earth." See also St. Paul's counsel to Titus, 3:2-8, 
and to Timothy. (1 Tim. 3:1 1.) Oh, that the spirit 
of love and kindness and consideration one for another 
might so richly dwell in every member of the Church of 
Christ that each one would not only refrain from speaking 
evil of a brother or sister, but that it would give pain to 
hear a defamatory tale about any one, and particularly 
about a fellow-pilgrim in the "narrow way"! If this were 
the attainment of each member of all the different Ecclesias, 
how much more closely would they be bound together 
in the bonds of Christian love! 

As we have said before, we believe that the majority of 
the dear friends are developing more and more of this 
spirit of love and consideration; but there is still room 
for improvement in the cases of some, at least. The mischief 
that can be done with the tongue is almost unlimited. 
How watchful and prayerful, then, we should be of our 
influence! We urge a careful rereading of Vol. 6, pp. 
583-588, of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. It is good that 
our pure minds be stirred up by way of remembrance. 
We believe that our time is short in which to complete 
our work of character structure. This should be impressed 
upon us more and more as we see one after another 
of the Body members of Christ passing beyond the 
veil. Let us seek by prayer and by daily, yea, hourly 
effort, that we may in all things become copies of God's 
dear Son, and hear, when our time shall come, the 
Master's sweet "Well done!" 



R5974: page 313 



"STRAIGHT PATHS FOR YOUR FEET" 

"Make straight paths for your feet, lest that 
which is lame be turned out of the way; but let 

it rather be healed."— Hebrews 12:13. 

OH, FOR a trumpet voice with which to call 

upon the Lord's people everywhere to be on 

the alert to resist our great foe— Satan! 

And in the word "Satan," we include all the 

arts of our great Adversary, whereby he lies 

in wait to deceive and to entrap the Soldiers 

of the Cross. He is indeed the Adversary 

of the whole world, in that he is the Adversary 

of God and of all the wise and 

gracious provisions and laws which God has 

made for human protection against the downward and 

destructive tendencies of sin. 

From information reaching us in various ways, we 
incline to the belief that a great wave of immorality and 
sensuality is passing over the civilized world. No doubt 
the War and the various new conditions which it has 
opened up have much to do with this evil condition. It 
could hardly be otherwise. But additionally, it would 
appear that our great Adversary has for thousands of 
years found sensuality, immorality, to be one of his best 
avenues through which to attack mankind, and especially 
those of humanity who have acknowledged the Lord and 
the righteous regulations which He establishes for all 
those who will be His people. 

Bible students familiar with the history of typical 
Israel will recall that it is along this line that Balaam and 
Balak plotted against Israel with so great success, bringing 
upon the Israelites Divine judgments. St. Paul tells us 
that it was in this manner that our race, originally created 
in the image of God, fell so far into degradation. "Because 
that, when they knew God, they glorified Him not 
as God, neither were thankful; but became vain in their 
imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened. Professing 
themselves to be wise, they became fools. * * * 
God also gave them up to uncleanness through the lusts 
of their own hearts, to dishonor their bodies between 
themselves. * * * As they did not like to retain God 
in their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate 
mind, to do those things which were not proper; being 
filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, 
covetousness, maliciousness; full of envy, murder, debate, 
deceit, malignity; whisperers, backbiters, haters of God, 
despiteful, proud, boasters, inventors of evil things," etc. 
—Romans 1:21-32. 

If any one wonders how our race came into its present 
depraved condition, he has in the above words of the 
Apostle a full explanation. And now, after the propagation 
of the Gospel for more than eighteen centuries— after 
the Bible has been printed in every language, and when 



education is so general that practically everybody can 

read the Bible, and when knowledge on every subject is 

so greatly increased, is it not astounding to see that our 

Adversary's early tactics are again prevailing? Again the 

learned are professing to be wise, and are foolishly 

rejecting the wisdom from above; and again immorality 

is rampant: anger, malice, hatred, strife, backbiting, whispering, 

wars, and murders are prevailing. The Lord 

seems to be letting mankind learn the lesson that Civilization 

does not spell Salvation, as some had expected. 

The Bible represents mankind as birds, and the great 
Adversary as the hunter seeking to entrap and to kill 
them; but the saints are pictured as speckled birds, especially 
attractive to the hunter. Against these he uses his 
arts and snares with keen interest in their downfall. 

R5975: page 314 

A BLESSED MEANS OF GRACE 

Some years ago, in the Lord's providence, we were 
guided to a presentation of A VOW UNTO THE LORD which 
we earnestly recommended to His people and which 
we believe has done them great good. Not that this Vow, 
or any other vow, could be greater or wider in its scope 
than the vow of self-sacrifice which each of the Lord's 
people took upon himself before he was acceptable to the 
Lord and begotten of the Holy Spirit; but this Vow has 
proven helpful to His saints in that it has drawn 
to their particular attention certain dangers of the way, 
counseling as respects their abiding in the Lord's favor. 

About 20,000 of the Lord's consecrated people have 
written us, desiring to be enrolled as amongst those who 
have taken this Vow. From very many of these we have 
heard what great blessings have come to them through 
their endeavors to observe faithfully the various items of 
that Vow— how their feet have been kept from stumbling; 
how they have been helped in respect to their fellowship 
with the Lord; how they have been refreshed in spirit as 
they remembered daily at the Throne of Grace all others 
who have taken the Vow; how they have been blessed 
also in their daily remembrance of the Harvest Work and 
their own privileges therein; and how they have been 
made the more cautious by the resolutions respecting 
Spiritism and Occultism, and respecting their fellowship 
with persons of the opposite sex. 

With the thought that many may be readers of THE 
WATCH TOWER now who were not at the time this Vow 
was presented, we print it afresh: 

A VOW UNTO THE LORD 

1. Our Father, which art in Heaven, hallowed be Thy 
name. May Thy rule come into my heart more and more, and 
Thy will be done in my mortal body. Relying on the assistance 
of Thy promised grace to help in every time of need. 



through Jesus Christ our Lord, I register this Vow. 

2. Daily will I remember at the Throne of Heavenly Grace 
the general interests of the Harvest work, and particularly the 
share which I myself am privileged to enjoy in that work, 
and the dear colaborers at the Brooklyn Tabernacle and 
Bethel, and everywhere. 

3. I Vow to still more carefully, if possible, scrutinize my 
thoughts and words and doings, to the intent that I may be 
the better enabled to serve Thee and Thy dear flock. 

4. I Vow to Thee that I will be on the alert to resist 
everything akin to Spiritism and Occultism, and that remembering 
that there are but the two masters, I shall resist these 

snares in all reasonable ways as being of the Adversary. 

5. I further Vow that with the exceptions below, I will at 
all times, and in all places, conduct myself toward those of 
the opposite sex in private exactly as I would do with them in 
public— in the presence of a congregation of the Lord's people. 

6. And, so far as reasonably possible, I will avoid being in 
the same room with any of the opposite sex alone, unless the 
door to the room stand wide open. 

7. Exceptions in the case of Brethren— wife, children, 
mother, and natural sisters. In the case of Sisters— husband, 
children, father, and natural brothers. 

A WORD OF WARNING 

We have heard from some that, while they had great 
blessings when they carefully observed the Vow, they 
gradually grew careless of it and began to lose their 
blessings, and stumbled into sin. We shall never be beyond 
danger, dear Brethren, so long as we are in the flesh. 
Hence everything that we can do on the side of the 
Lord, on the side of righteousness, as New Creatures 
enlisted under the banner of our Redeemer, we should 
do— for the maintenance of our own standards and for 
the assistance of others in the fight against the world, the 
flesh, and the Adversary, in which we have enlisted. 

The text at the head of this article should never be 
forgotten by any of the Soldiers of the Cross. The 
strongest need to remember it, and surely the weaker ones 
need to obey it. We are all lame. None is able to walk 
uprightly, perfectly, in the footprints of our Lord. At 
very best, we limp. How necessary, then, that we do our 
best to avoid trials and temptations which would be a 
special strain upon us because of our weaknesses of the 
flesh! How we should seek to walk close to the Lord 
and to hold firmly to His hand while passing through the 
trials and the difficulties of the present time! 

Does some one suggest that such a course represents 
weakness and dependence? Surely, it does; and surely 
the one who does not know of his weakness and dependence 
upon the Lord has not learned his primary lesson! 
Let us not be ashamed of regulating our lives so as to 
avoid temptations as far as possible; for this is the wise 
course admonished by the Lord's Word. To be proud, 
self-confident, and willing to trust in ourselves anywhere 



bespeaks the spirit which is not in close fellowship with t lie 
Lord, who shows His face to the humble and the meek. 

If there are special trials upon the world and upon 
the Lord's followers now, we may expect that these will 
be increasingly severe in coming days and years. How 
necessary it is that the Lord's followers shall be courageous, 
strong, determined for the right— especially in all 
matters of self-control! "He that ruleth his own spirit 
[his own mind] is greater than the warrior who captures 
a city," is the inspired announcement. Let us seek to be 
great from the Divine viewpoint— pleasing to the Lord; 
guarding well our words and thoughts and doings, not 
merely on our own account, but additionally in the interest 
of all with whom we have to do. Thus we shall more and 
more be bright and shining lights, showing forth the 
praises of Him who has called us out of darkness into 
His marvelous light."— 1 Peter 2:9. 



R5975: page 314 

FROM MALTA TO ROME 

-NOVEMBER 19.-ACTS 28:11-24,30,31.- 

THE JOURNEY TO ROME ACCOMPLISHED-MEETING WITH THE 
BRETHREN-FRESH EVIDENCES OF BROTHERLY LOVE-ST. 
PAUL CALLS TOGETHER THE LEADERS AMONGST THE JEWS 
AT ROME-THE GOSPEL PROCLAIMED AND EXPOUNDED-AS 
USUAL, SOME REFUSED TO ACCEPT THE MESSAGE. 

"I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ; for it 
is the power of God unto salvation to every one 
that believeth."— Romans 1:16. 

EARLY in the spring, A.D. 60, Centurion Julius 

and his soldiers of the Augustan Band 

started from Malta with St. Paul and the 

other prisoners for Rome in another ship, 

Luke and Aristarchus accompanying the 

Apostle. The voyage was effected without 

special incident, the landing being made in 

the Bay of Naples, at Puteoli, the seaport of 

Rome, which is one hundred and fifty miles 

inland. Here they tarried for seven days, 

the centurion awaiting orders from Rome respecting the 

disposal of his prisoners. 

This delay afforded St. Paul an opportunity to meet 
with a little band of Christians residing at Puteoli. Doubtless 
he took the opportunity also to send word to the Christians 
residing at Rome, whom he had repeatedly declared 
that he longed to meet, and whom the Lord promised that 
he should meet. The journey to Rome was made on foot. 
En route the Apostle was frequently cheered by evidences 
of the Christian love of the brethren. Some of them met 



him at Appii Forum, forty-three miles distant from Rome; 
and another delegation met him at Three Taverns, thirty 
miles from the great city. 
Many famous generals had come this same way with 

R5975: page 315 

their troops to the imperial city, to receive honors and applause. 
But few preachers have had so great honors as 
were accorded to St. Paul. The journey to and from 
Rome was sixty miles for one delegation and eighty-six 
miles for the other; and the record shows us that by these 
manifestations of loving interest the Apostle was made 
acquainted with the true spirit of brotherhood amongst the 
Christians at Rome. The brethren doubtless came on the 
journey for their own refreshment and joy, not realizing, 
perhaps, that the Apostle needed this evidence of their love. 

Commenting along these lines a gifted writer says, "We 
often forget that great men are often very lonely; and 
while we hesitate to say kind words to them, yet words 
of recognition for what they have done are refreshing to 
those who receive more criticism than praise. A few 
days ago an editor showed me a letter which he had just 
received from one who had held nearly the highest position 
in the gift of the American people, thanking him for 
his kindly words in a late editorial. My friend said that 
at first he was astonished that so great a man should care 
for anything that he could say; but that on further thought 
he understood the value of generous appreciation even to 
the greatest and wisest of men." 

"IN HIS OWN HIRED HOUSE" 

The fact that there were no charges of an evil character 
against St. Paul, and the further fact that the centurion 
who had him in charge during the voyage became 
his friend, were quite sufficient reasons why the Apostle 
should not be treated as an ordinary prisoner, but permitted 
to live in his own hired house under the care of a 
soldier to whom he was lightly chained. Although not 
permitted to go at liberty, he was allowed, however, to receive 
his friends and others who called upon him. 

It is difficult to estimate how much Divine providence 
had to do with all these arrangements. Moreover, the 
soldier on guard was changed every few hours, so that 
probably the Apostle came into contact with at least six 
every day. Thus gradually he probably came into close 
contact with the entire imperial guard, and thus many were 
made acquainted with Christian teachings and example. 
It is claimed that through these soldiers the Gospel Message 
was carried to France, Germany and Great Britain. 
Truly, "God works in a mysterious way!" 

St. Paul must have had some financial means. It is assumed 
that ere this he had come into his patrimony. The 
Scriptures intimate that Felix had held him captive at 
Caesarea in hope of receiving a bribe for his release, implying 



some knowledge respecting St. Paul's finances. 
PREACHING TO THE JEWS OF ROME 

The Lord's servant was not slow in using his God-granted 
privileges. He knew not when they might be 
taken away. First of all, of course, he met the Christian 
brethren. But, as early as the third day after his arrival 
at Rome, he sent for the Jewish leaders and officers of the 
synagogue; for at that time there were seven synagogues 
in the imperial city. He desired to give them information 
at first-hand respecting why he was there and a prisoner. 
Then he wished to preach to them the Gospel of Christ. 

The Jewish leaders accepted his invitation and visited 
the Apostle. Doubtless they came readily for several 
reasons. First, the Jews at Rome had been subject to 
persecution, which some three years previous had driven 
Aquila and Priscilla from the city. This persecution had 
now to some extent abated; but doubtless it had left the 
hearts of the Jews in a much humbler condition than 
otherwise they would have been. Second, the Jews doubtless 
were interested in a fellow countryman in distress, 
especially one whom they found to be so peculiarly treated 
by the Roman government— one granted so great liberty as 
St. Paul enjoyed. 

The Lord's providence was certainly in this matter; and 
the Apostle's peculiar form of restraint was evidently 
favorable to the cause which he represented. The Jews 
would certainly beware how they would raise a commotion 
against one who, although a prisoner, was treated with 
such consideration, one who was under the direct protection 
of a soldier, and one for violence to whom they would 
be directly responsible to Julius, supposed to have been the 
prefect of the Praetorium— "the captain of the guard." 

St. Paul explained to his guests that, although a 
prisoner at the instance of the Jews of Palestine, he was 
not disloyal to his nation or to its customs. He had been 
pronounced innocent at the Roman Court, but had been 
compelled to appeal to Caesar for his safety. Even then, 
however, he was making no accusation against his countrymen. 
He proposed that gladly he would explain to them 
the good news that the long-expected Messiah had come, in 
whom the Jewish expectations had rested. 

Mark the Apostle's wisdom in handling his subject. 
He not only showed no unkindness of sentiment toward 
those who had been the cause of his imprisonment, but he 
declared to his hearers that he was suffering imprisonment 
because of his loyalty to Israel and to the hope of Israel. 
Kindness often begets kindness. The Jewish leaders responded 
in most considerate terms that they knew nothing 
against the Apostle, and that they would be pleased to hear 
his story from his own lips. They admitted, however, that 
they had some prejudice against the doctrines which he 
advocated; for they had unfavorable reports concerning 
Christianity— that "everywhere it is spoken against." 



TESTIFYING FOR THE KINGDOM OF GOD 

On the day appointed, the Jews came to hear the 
Apostle's Message. From morning until evening he 
quoted, explained and expounded, showing from the Law 
and from the Prophets that Jesus is the Messiah; that He 
is now gathering a Spiritual Seed of Abraham to be His 
Kingdom; that when this Kingdom class is complete, it 
will be glorified in the First Resurrection; and that then 
will begin the work allotted to the Seed of Abraham— the 
blessing of all the families of the earth.— Gal. 3:8, 16,29. 

Doubtless, too, the Apostle gave an account of the 
purity of our Lord's life and teachings, and narrated the 
facts proving His resurrection from the dead. Doubtless 
he witnessed that the Lord was no longer a man, but a 
glorious spirit being, whose presence, when seen by St. 
Paul himself, shone above the brightness of the sun at 
noonday. Doubtless, also, he pointed out the High Calling 
of the Church, and explained that this opportunity for becoming 
Spiritual Israel was accorded first of all to Fleshly 
Israel; and that the Gentiles, nevertheless, according to the 
words of the Prophets, would be called in to fill up the 
elect number which God had predestinated to this glory. 
Doubtless he showed that the Call involved suffering, sacrifice 
and self-denial now on the part of those who desired 
to share in the glories of the Heavenly Kingdom as it will 
be established at the Second Coming of Messiah and the 
resurrection of the one true Church.— Rom. 8:28-30,17-19. 

When some of his audience refused the Message, St. 
Paul sought further to influence them, or at least to influence 
the believing ones, by quoting from the Prophet 
Isaiah (6:9,10), showing that God had foreknown and 
had foretold that the majority of the Jews would reject 
the Message when it should come to them. As our Lord 
said of them, "Hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand; 
and seeing ye shall see. and shall not perceive." 
The Apostle was not responsible for the effect of the 

R5975: page 316 

Truth upon his hearers. He earnestly desired to do them 
good, and used his very best endeavors to present the 
Truth wisely. The responsibility then lay with the hearers, 
not with St. Paul, not with the Lord. 

The Apostle did not mean that those who are deaf to 
the Gospel will be eternally tormented; but that they will 
lose a great blessing— the wonderful privilege of becoming 
heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ the Redeemer 
in His Millennial Kingdom. They lose a share 
with the saints in the glorious work of human uplift, which 
will then be in progress. They lose this privilege because 
not worthy of it. For this cause they were blind to the 
Truth. Had the unworthy ones been permitted to see, 
hear and understand the Gospel Message, their responsibilities 
would have been increased, and possibly the outworkings 
of the Divine purposes would have been to some 



extent hindered. 

WHY THE GOSPEL IS REJECTED 

Some of the Jewish leaders believed St. Paul's Message, 
and some did not. It is always thus. The Truth is a 
searcher and discerner of the hearts; it is also a separator. 
It is the Lord's purpose that the Truth shall attract only 
the one class— the pure in heart, the "Israelites indeed"; 
and that it shall separate and antagonize those who are 
not in the right condition of heart, but who are moved 
even in their religious life by selfishness. Not all are 
ready for the Present Truth. Some who are noble and 
generous in many respects have a prejudice of mind or of 
heart, which hinders them from receiving the Good Tidings. 
With others it is love of the sect, the party, with 
which they are identified, and whose teachings must be 
more or less antagonistic to the Truth because of the error 
they contain. With still others it is the fear of man, which 
bringeth a snare— the fear of unpopularity, and the realization 
that faithfulness to the Gospel of Christ would mean 
self-sacrifice, the giving up of the will. 

Now, as then, the Lord is using just such testings to 
separate the wheat from the tares, the gold from the dross. 
We cannot expect that He will do otherwise. Therefore 
our prayers and our endeavors must be in the direction of 
thorough honesty with the Lord, with the brethren, and 
with His Truth— the love of the Truth being above all 
things else. The Lord's declaration respecting the class 
that will fall during this time of testing is that He will 
send them strong delusion, that they will believe the lie, 
because they received not the Truth in the love of it. 
—2 Thessalonians 2: 1 0, 1 1 . 

For nearly two years St. Paul remained under these 
conditions, preaching the Kingdom of God, and explaining 
how it may be attained at the present time by becoming 
members of the Elect Little Flock, the Bride of Christ, 
and how the Kingdom, when established, will during the 
Millennium bless the whole earth. He taught that all 
these things were dependent upon the Lord Jesus Christ 
and His sacrifice; that without the redemption which is in 
Christ Jesus there could be no remission of sins, no everlasting 
life, no Kingdom class upon the spirit plane, but 
only everlasting destruction.— Acts 3:23. 

Here the narrative of St. Paul's work ends. Tradition 
tells us that at the end of two years he was liberated; that 
again he visited the churches of Asia Minor and subsequently 
went to Spain; that, later on, he came back to 
Rome as a prisoner without favor; and that after spending 
a considerable time in the Mamertine prison, a dread 
dungeon, he finally suffered martyrdom. Tradition also 
says that his Roman citizenship saved him from crucifixion; 
and that instead he was decapitated. St. Paul's 
Cathedral at Rome is said to have been built near the 
place of his execution. 



R5975: page 316 

A LIVING SACRIFICE 

-NOVEMBER 26.-ROMANS 12:1-8.- 

THE PURPOSE OF THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS-THE ADVANTAGE 
OF THE JEW OVER THE GENTILE-THE CAUSE OF ISRAEL'S 
FAILURE TO GET THE CHIEF BLESSING-THE CALL OF THE 
GENTILES TO COMPLETE THE ELECT NUMBER OF THE BODY 
OF CHRIST-ISRAEL'S RETURN TO FAVOR THE SIGNAL 
FOR BLESSINGS UPON THE WHOLE WORLD-THE CHURCH 
CALLED TO SACRIFICE-VARIOUS INSTRUCTIONS. 

"Present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable 
to God, which is your reasonable service."— Verse 1. 

WHILE the Apostle Paul was a wonderful 

logician, and in his writings has set forth 

the elements of Christian faith along doctrinal 

lines more than has any other Apostle, 

yet we notice that he is in pursuit of a certain 

object. He is not beating the air, not 

discussing theological points for the sake of 

making an argument or of showing his own 

ability. His arguments along doctrinal lines 

lead the reader in every instance onward and 

upward, as a stairway, to a grand upper room of perfected 

Christian character. 

Nowhere is this more manifest than in St. Paul's 
Epistle to the Romans. Beginning with the distinctions 
between the Jew and the Gentile, he contrasts the former, 
informed respecting God and to some extent respecting 
the Divine Plan, with the latter, "without God and having 
no hope in the world." After calling attention to the general 
ignorance of God prevailing amongst all classes of 
Gentiles, the Apostle carries the mind forward, pointing 
out how the degradation had come, and how the knowledge 
of God had reached Israel first— not because the Israelites 
were better than the Gentiles, but because of the Divine 
favor, "grace," "election." 

Then the Apostle demonstrates that nevertheless "the 
Law made nothing perfect," but was merely a pedagogue 
—a servant, whose business it was to take the children to 
school. Thus the Law was designed to bring Israel to 
Christ, the great Teacher, that they might learn of Him. 
He further demonstrates that, while Israel was seeking 
Divine favor, they failed to get the chief blessing because 
they were not thoroughly candid with themselves, and 
hence mistook the mission of the Mosaic Law. They 
hypocritically claimed that they kept the Law inviolate 
and were therefore entitled to its blessings of eternal life, 
etc.; whereas they should have admitted that the Law was 
so grand and so perfect, and they themselves so fallen 



from perfection, that they were unable to keep it. Then 
they should have looked to the Lord for help. In this attitude 
of mind they would have been ready to receive 
eternal life as a gift, through Jesus Christ our Lord, and 
would have given up the seeking of life by the perfection 
of their own works. 

So the Apostle points out that Israel failed because 
they sought the blessing not by faith, but by works. Thus 
"Israel hath not obtained that which he seeketh for; but 
the Election hath obtained it, and the rest were blinded." 
(Romans 1 1 :7.) He then points out that Israel's fall into 
blindness and the calling of a peculiar people from 
amongst the Gentiles to complete the elect company was 
foreknown of God and declared by Him through the 
Prophets of Israel. (Romans 9 and 10.) But he shows 

R5975: page 317 

that Israel is not cast off forever; but that when the elect 
class shall have been completed, all Israel shall be saved 
from the blindness into which they stumbled in the rejection 
of Christ; and that their recovery then will be the 
signal for blessings upon the whole world of mankind.— 
Romans 11:15,25-32. 

THE MAIN POINT OF THE ARGUMENT 

After eleven chapters of argumentative, logical, beautiful, 
instructive, blessed reasoning the Apostle reaches the 
crown of his argument, saying, "I beseech you therefore, 
brethren, by the mercies of God [presented in the previous 
eleven chapters], that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, 
holy, acceptable to God, which is your reasonable 
service." He is addressing the Household of Faith, urging 
them to accept the Divine invitation to enter the elect 
Body of Christ, a part of which was being gathered from 
amongst the Jews, and the remainder of which was being 
made up from those called from amongst the Gentiles. 
These were already justified by faith in Christ Jesus as 
the Redeemer, and therefore were "brethren" of the 
Household of Faith. 

St. Paul exhorts these brethren to appreciate fully the 
grace of God through Christ and to become faithful sons 
and heirs of God. The way to this exalted position is 
pointed out as a way of sacrifice. To "present your bodies 
a living sacrifice" is to do just what our Lord Jesus did. 
He said, "I came not to do Mine own will, but the will of 
Him that sent Me." (John 6:38.) It is to ignore the will 
of the flesh, with all of its ambitions, hopes and aims, 
however proper they may be in themselves, henceforth to 
devote all our time, our energies, our talents, be they 
many or few, to the doing of the Master's work, so that 
with Christ Jesus we may say, "It is my meat to do His 
will and to finish His work."— John 4:34. 

This full consecration is even unto death, when, the 
course being finished, the reward is sure. Such a sacrifice 



on the part of justified believers is reckoned of God as 
holy, because the merit of our Redeemer's sacrificial death 
is imputed to them through faith. Therefore their sacrifice 
is acceptable to God, and is but their reasonable service, 
even though no exceeding great reward had been promised. 
This class should know what are the terms and conditions 
upon which God has called them: (1) to suffer with 
Christ in the present time; and (2) to be glorified and to 
reign with Him during the coming Age, in order to bless 
the world. They should know the reason for their sufferings. 
They should have a clear understanding of the 
character which God would develop in them, and without 
which they would not be fit for a place in the Kingdom. 
It is concerning some of these characteristics, necessary 
to those who would make their calling and election sure, 
that today's Study treats. 

TRUE CHRISTIAN LIVING 

Verse 2. "And be ye not conformed to [patterned 
after] iliis world [its ideas, its hopes, its aims]; but be ye 
transformed [remodeled, changed] by the renewing of 
your mind, that ye may prove what is that good and acceptable 
and perfect will of God." This we do by taking 
the mind of Christ— endeavoring to think as He thought 
and to do as He did, or as He would do if He were in our 
circumstances. Only by coming into such an attitude can 
we fully know the will of God. Any other attitude is more 
or less biased by prejudice, thus making our discernment 
of the will of God more or less indistinct. 

Verse 3. Through the grace given unto the Apostle 
he foresaw that one of the greatest temptations amongst 
Christians would be the ambition to be great, to be highly 
esteemed— if not by the world, at least amongst those of 
the Household of Faith— and to do some great thing which 
would attract attention, rather than the common things 
which constitute the bulk of actual service. Therefore the 
Apostle counsels every man in the Church to take a sober 
estimate of his talents, neither overrating nor underestimating 
them, in order that he may make the best use of 
them as a wise, faithful steward. 

This sober thinking of one's talents must be proportionate 
to the time we have been under the Lord's instruction 
and the degree of attention we have given to learning 
the lessons designed for the increase of our faith. This 
development is in the Scriptures spoken of as a gift, as a 
fruit of the Spirit of God in us, and again as God's workmanship; 
for by His Truth and by His providences He is 
working in His children, not only to will, but also to do 
His good pleasure. He is working in us faith, hope, joy, 
peace, love and all the graces which He approves; and if 
we are obedient to His teachings and leadings, He will 
eventually complete the work. Then we shall be copies of 
His dear Son our Lord. 

Verses 4 and 5 assure us of the important and honorable 
place occupied by every member of the Body of 



Christ, even though all have not the same office. All are 
useful; all are needful, one to another; and each should 
seek to know his place and to do his part in it for the 
edification of the Body. Clearly and distinctly the Apostle 
points out to us in this illustration the close relationship 
which the members of the Church of Christ bear to their 
Lord and Head. As the head controls the body, thinks for 
it, plans for it, uses one or another member of the body for 
the assistance of others, so the Lord supervises His 
Church and sets the various members as it pleases Him. 

Verses 6-8 urge faithfulness in the use of our talents 
in accordance with a sober and just estimate of them. 
Thus, if we have no talent for public speaking or teaching, 
we should not waste our energies and misrepresent the 
Truth by poor attempts to use a talent not possessed. 
Rather, having found that capacity in which we can do 
most effectual service for the Truth, let us spend our 
energies along that line with diligence and carefulness. 
"Having, then, gifts differing," let us use them with diligence, 
patience, simplicity and cheerfulness, contented to 
be very humble in the estimation of others in order that 
our humble talents may increase the more to the Master's 
glory and in respect to our Heavenly interests. 



RESURRECTION 

Dear Lord, I pray for courage, strength and love. 
For that pure wisdom, promised from above. 
That I may faithful be and worthy found 
To stand "that day" beside the grass-grown mound 
Of my beloved dead, and say, "Arise! 
Come forth to light and life, lift up thine eyes! 
Awake, and burst the prison bands of death! 
Stand up, the God of Heaven restores thy breath! 
Return unto the land that gave thee birth- 
No longer, as of old, a sin-cursed earth— 
The desert places blossom as the rose. 
With fragrance laden, every breeze that blows! 

A Highway thou shalt find, a way of life. 
No pride, nor selfishness, no envy, strife. 
Shall prosper there; the ransomed of the Lord 
Shall walk thereon, obedient to His Word; 
No longer shall the 'lion' or 'ravenous beast' 
Upon the poor, the weak, the innocent feast; 
There God shall wipe all tears from every eye. 
No grief shall touch thine heart, not e'en a sigh. 
And there shall be no death, nor any pain! 
Awake! Rejoice and join the glad refrain, 
'Hosanna, peace on earth, good will toward men. 
All honour to the Lamb. Amen! Amen!'" 

GERTRUDE W. SEIBERT. 



R5976 : page 318 

LOS ANGELES-SEATTLE-MILWAUKEE CONVENTIONS 

THE Los Angeles Convention of the I.B.S.A. 

opened September 2d and closed September 

10th. The Chairman of the Convention, 

Brother Rutherford, declared that, without any 

exception, it was the finest and most spiritual 

Convention he had ever attended, and many 

others voiced the same sentiment. One Sister 

remarked that the addresses and general tone 

of the Convention were so spiritual that her 

eyes were suffused with tears at every session. 

Surely, it was good to be there! The program 

was closely followed, and the arrangement of 

the fixed topics in advance seemed to work beneficially, as it 

has done with other Conventions this year. 

The attendance at the Convention was estimated at one 
thousand. The special service for the public on the closing 
Sunday packed the spacious Temple Beautiful to its utmost 
capacity, with about 200 brethren on the platform and about 
600 in an overflow meeting, making a total of 3,800— besides 
about a thousand turned away. The close attention given by 
the public was remarked by many. The audience was an extremely 
intelligent one, probably one-half of it gray-haired 
people. Good results are hoped for from the public service, 
and we hope also that the Convention's general influence will 
be far reaching, not only in the Los Angeles Congregation, 
but also in the smaller companies round about, which were 
well represented. 

The PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION had two full exhibitions- 
four nights each, with a Finale, making nine in all. It was 
well attended and a large number of cards were handed in, 
requesting further information and literature. 

An interesting event outside the Convention Program was 
an address by Brother Russell in the Park Avenue Christian 
Church, Los Angeles. The Minister of the Congregation, 
Brother Anderson, has within the past few months come in 
contact with Present Truth, and has been feasting upon it. 
He has also been preaching it to the Congregation, and has 
had various of the brethren lead Berean Studies and give 
Addresses. His invitation to Brother Russell to take supper 
at his home and afterwards to address the Congregation was 
accepted with appreciation. The attendance crowded the 
edifice, about 500 being present. The attention was excellent. 
Evidently a considerable number of the Congregation were 
deeply impressed with the Divine Plan of the Ages, as were 
also visitors from the neighborhood. Brother and Sister 
Anderson seem to be very thoroughly committed to following 
the light as the Lord may privilege them to see it. They give 
evidence of full consecration to the Lord, and a clear spiritual 
insight into the Plan. 

A public witness to the Truth was given in San Bernardino 
and seemed to be well received. About 500 very intelligent 



people gave close heed to the subject, "The World on Fire." 
This was considered an excellent attendance for a Tuesday 
afternoon in September. Many requests were made for 
literature. 

Our next stop was at San Francisco, where we addressed 
about 400 of the brethren of that vicinity gathered for 
Wednesday afternoon. No public meeting was attempted, but 
we had splendid fellowship with the brethren, about 100 of 
whom accompanied us to Oakland, where we took our train 
northward. 

At Ashland, Oregon, about 50 of the friends awaited our 
train and gave us a most cordial welcome during the 20 
minutes we stopped there, some of them accompanying us 
farther. 

The next stop was at Medford, Oregon, where we had 
about 10 minutes, and were warmly greeted by about 20 of 
the friends. Again we exchanged cordial greetings and sang, 
as the train pulled out, "God be with you till we meet again." 

Portland, Oregon, was our next stop. Although about 20 
of the Portland brethren attended the Seattle Convention, 
we were warmly welcomed. About 50 awaited our arrival 
at the station. We had splendid fellowship with the 
Brethren during the day, nearly 300 being in attendance. The 
evening meeting for the public was in the largest hall available. 
Its capacity of 1,300 was stretched by putting about 200 
brethren on the platform, while about 150 stood. A more 
earnest and sympathetic audience could scarcely be imagined. 
The closest attention was given and we hope that the eyes of 
understanding of many were opened and their hearts drawn 
nearer to our Blessed Lord. 

THE SEATTLE CONVENTION 

This was one of the most successful Conventions of the 
year. There were 1,100 in attendance. A considerable number 
of these came from Victoria and Vancouver, Canada— 
probably 200. The spirit of the Lord seemed to be manifest 
everywhere amongst the brethren— love, joy, peace, the Holy 
Spirit, shone in their faces. Every way this Convention was a 
great success. We cannot say that it was better than the 
Los Angeles Convention, or others, but it would be hard to 
imagine a better one, or a more earnest and loving spirit 
of fellowship. This Convention lasted only four days, but 
they were brimful of good things— a spiritual feast. 

The service for the public was held in the Arena Sunday 
afternoon. A vast audience of 4,500 very intelligent looking 
people heard, "The World on Fire," and what the grand outcome 
will be— "a New Heavens and a New Earth," wherein 
will dwell righteousness. The closest attention was given and 
probably one -fourth of the audience, or more, were gray-haired. 
Requests for further literature were many. 

The Love-Feast Sunday evening at the close of the Convention 
was very enjoyable. All hearts seemed to be overflowing 
with love for the Lord and appreciation of His Truth, 
and with brotherly love for all who are followers of Jesus. 

The PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION was shown in another 



theater every night during the four nights of the Convention. 
The theater's capacity of 1,100 was packed, and hundreds 
were turned away each night. The DRAMA will be repeated 
on account of the interest manifested. Incidentally we remark 
that one of the brethren attending the Convention from 
Canada informed us that the showing of the DRAMA in his 
city had brought between fifty and sixty into the Truth and 
into regular class attendance. 



Our next stop was at Spokane, Wash., Monday, Sept. 18. 
We were greeted at the station by about 60 brethren and 
sisters. They had arranged a one-day Convention for friends 
from nearby points. Nearly 300 were in attendance, and a 
splendid season of Christian fellowship was enjoyed. The 
evening meeting was for the public. Brother Russell's topic 
being "The World on Fire." The attendance was about 1,500, 
many standing and many turned away. Excellent attention 
was given and we have reason to hope that some impression 
for the Truth was made upon some hearts and minds. 

Thursday, Sept. 21st, we arrived in Duluth, Minn. Again 
we were given a warm welcome, again a one-day Convention 
had been appointed, and again the Lord seemed to pour out a 
blessing upon us, refreshing our hearts as we considered together 
the good things of His Word. The attendance was 
not large— less than 100, but the loving interest manifested 
was pronounced. Although the weather was wet and cold 
about 750 were present at the night meeting for the public. 
They gave splendid attention. 

A night's ride brought us to St. Paul, where we had a 
short stopover between trains. The St. Paul and Minneapolis 
friends had heard of this stopover and quite a little gathering 
assembled to bid us God-speed for the Milwaukee Convention, 
to which some of their number had already gone, while 
others were intending to go. We had a pleasant hour with 
them, very truly refreshing and profitable. 

MILWAUKEE CONVENTION 

When we arrived the Milwaukee Convention was under 
full swing, and excellent reports reached us of blessings already 
received from the Lord by those in attendance. We 
had two days with the dear friends, and greatly enjoyed the 
same. The total number in attendance, about 950, was not as 
large as we had hoped for, but the interest made up for the 
lack in numbers. The addresses were reported to be excellent, 
along the lines of the program and very edifying. 

The PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION showed for eight nights- 
the DRAMA being repeated. The attendance throughout 
was splendid, averaging about 2,000 per session. About 2,200 
cards were handed in expressing desire for further literature. 

The climax of the Convention was the Love Feast and the 
Public service. About 900 participated in the former at the 
conclusion of Brother Russell's address on "I am the Light 
of the World." 



The public address was attended by about 4,500, mostly intelligent 
and elderly people. Excellent attention was given. 
Some results will surely follow to the Master's praise and 
His people's joy! 

Homeward bound we stopped between trains at Chicago. 
There also some of the friends met us— nearly a hundred. 
A short address was made to them along the lines of the importance 
of brotherly love amongst the Lord's people. 

Our next stop was Brooklyn, where we arrived on schedule 
lime. 

Amongst the interesting features at nearly every place was 

R5976 : page 319 

the consecration of children. And we should not forget 

to remark that the new "Pastoral Work" seemed to make 

quite an impression upon the hearts and minds of the friends. 

Many of the sisters were glad to have a share in the work 

and to know how it could be carried out. We believe that 

much will be done immediately, and that the dear sisters 

throughout the country will be awakened and taught by experience 

how to work efficiently, and that the great smiting 

of the Jordan shall begin and progress with wonderful power, 

as we expect it to do. 



R5977: page 319 

INTERESTING LETTERS 

FIERY TRIALS IN BRITAIN EASING 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Greetings and fond love in the Lord! It is now some little 
time since last we wrote you with respect to those of our 
dear brethren who are affected by the Military Service Act 
in this country. We are glad now to report some slight 
improvement in the situation. From the very beginning our 
brethren have claimed exemption from the provisions of the 
Act as Conscientious Objectors, but for a long time the 
Tribunals before which their cases came were not prepared 
to acknowledge their conscientious objection, one difficulty 
being that the I.B.S.A. was not known to them. 
Bui things have changed now and our brethren are finding 
it less hard to secure— as an alternative to Military Service- 
some work of National Importance. At the present time 
five of our brethren have been given absolute exemption, 
twenty-three are in a Non-combatant Corps, one hundred and 
fifty-four have been given work of National Importance, and 
eighty-two have been handed over to the Military and have 
suffered various punishments rather than obey Military orders. 
With reference to this latter number the Government 
put into operation a scheme whereby these men are to be 
released from Prison and— as State servants— be employed 
in work of National Importance, such as road-making, 



quarrying, etc. About thirty of the eighty-two mentioned 
are already thus engaged and about twelve others are at 
home on parole waiting for work to be found for them. 

You will be interested to know that the War Office officials 
have kindly consented to cancel the papers calling to 
the colors all those brethren who are Elders, pending the 
decision of the High Court as to the proper status of our 
Elders under the Act. This decision we expect to receive 
about the middle of November. This means, of course. 
that various Classes are to receive the benefit of their Elders' 
services meantime. We are grateful to the Lord for this 
evidence of His loving care for His dear ones in this 
hour of need. 

We need hardly say how keenly we are anticipating 
further opportunities of service that the Lord in His gracious 
purposes may have this side the veil; and we are looking to 
you as His faithful servant to point out to us such further 
privileges of witness as it may be His good pleasure to provide. 
We believe that the trials through which our beloved brethren 
here have been called upon to pass of late have had a 
mighty, sanctifying influence and have helped us all to be 
still more devoted to our Lord, and prepared to spend and 
be spent in His service— realizing the privilege of being His 
witnesses and suffering, if it be His will, for His name's sake. 

We pray for you, dear Brother, and all our beloved 
brethren associated with you in service for the Lord, that 
He grant you all Heavenly wisdom and grace sufficient each 
and every day, so that your labors may ever be to His 
praise and glory. 

With much fervent love in Him to yourself and all the 
dear colaborers with you, we are. 

Your brethren and servants in the Lord, 
LB. S. A. —London, Eng. 



REJOICING AGAIN IN THE LORD 

DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

Some twenty-five years ago I read Vols. I. and II. of 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. I found them very interesting, 
but to me at that time not spiritually helpful, so I read only 
part of Vol. III. 

Of late years I have been greatly oppressed by the growing 
power of evil in every denomination, and I felt a withdrawing 
of the Holy Spirit from me. I prayerfully sought 
to know the reason, and my only answer was a direction to 
study the book of Revelation. I tried to do so several times, 
but even with the help of a commentary, I could not understand 
it. Finally, I thought that if I carefully and prayerfully 
read your books they could not harm me. I did 
so, and looked up every reference and the context, and also 
the history of the world. 

The dates from the Bible seemed very conclusive; but 
the Pyramid chapter convinced me, and I resolved that I 
would be guided in the future according to the STUDIES. 



I belonged to the Anglican Church, and had a fair knowledge 
of its doctrines and those of several denominations; 
and I thought you belonged to one that 1 did not know about. 

While trying in St. John to get other volumes of your 
books, I met with some people who believed as you do. I 
bought the whole set of books and subscribed for THE 
WATCH TOWER. 

I rejoice now again in the Lord, and in our dear Savior's 
Second Presence. 

I have not yet finished all the volumes, but I have taken 
the Vow, and I mean to follow on in the way that God may 
guide. Praise His name! 

I wish to thank you for the help I have received through 
your writings, and I mean to do all I can to spread them, 
and speak about the Truth. 

Your Sister in Christ, ELIZABETH WETMORE. 



MAGNIFYING GOD HER CREATOR 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Our Father has been doing great things for me, whereof 
I am glad; and I am sure that you, too, will rejoice with me. 

It was just a whole year (a long one) that He saw fit to 
permit me to be laid on the shelf— until He graciously opened 
the way for me to go out again in the follow-up work, just 
six weeks ago. You know something of the starvation of soul 
it meant. Now I can tell you that, true to His promise, when 
we hunger for these things, we shall be filled; so my whole 
soul doth magnify the Lord my Creator for His refilling. 
Through this experience I realize that I have never in the 
past sufficiently appreciated the goodness of the Lord in permitting 
me to handle His precious truths and to feed His 
Iambs, to uphold His name and character to all with whom we 
come in contact. Henceforth many times daily I will by His 
grace remember my vow to thank Him, "particularly for the 
share which I myself am privileged to enjoy in that work," 
and with reverence handle these sacred vessels of the Lord. 

Every day we meet some hungry souls who declare 
inability to understand the Bible— some who say their neighbors 
think them peculiar because they love to talk about the 
Bible; some say they are "starved" for the truth of the 
Bible. "What manner of persons ought we to be" who are 
entrusted with a Message for just such waiting hearts! 

The Father Himself has provided "strength for every 
day"— temporal blessings far better than we deserve or would 
ask for and spiritual joys which we could not have dreamed 
of, except that "it is just like our Father." We wish that 
we had much more that we could sacrifice for Him, for our 
little sacrifice is completely lost sight of because of present 
joys and the joys in prospect. 

If He is so good to us we know how He is caring for 
and blessing His faithful servant "over His household." May 
your joys in Him daily increase! With love and daily prayers. 

By His Grace, 



HOLDING TO FAITH'S ANCHOR 

VENERATED BROTHER IN THE LORD:- 

While renewing my subscription to THE WATCH TOWER, 
I avail myself of the opportunity to tell you how much its 
semi-monthly calls gladden us. We ever find therein, abundantly 
given, the strong meat necessary to properly maintain 
us as new creatures, that we may grow in all the graces and 
fruits of the Spirit. 

In spite of the trials and difficulties abounding in these 
perilous times, the condition of our little class is very satisfactory. 
Each of us is holding firmly to the anchor of faith— 
the precious promises of our Heavenly Father, which alone 
can protect us against the waves already foaming, roaring 
and threatening to engulf the "mountains." We make 
Psalm 46 ours. 

In behalf of the whole Ecclesia here and vicinity, I present 
to you, beloved Brother Russell, this expression of the 
sincere sentiments of our love in the Lord. 

Your humble brother in the One Hope. ELIE THEROND. 



page 321 

VOL. XXXVII. NOVEMBER 1 No. 21 
A. D. 1916-A.M. 6045 



CONTENTS 

How We May Grow Up Into Christ . . .323 

Natural Qualities That Need Restraint 324 

Cultivation of Love Especially Needful 325 
Presenting the Message of the Kingdom . 325 

Begging for the Lord Not Authorized . 326 

Some Timely Words of Caution . . . 327 
"The Hour of Temptation" .... 327 

"Take Heed to Yourselves" . . . 327 

"Deceiving and Being Deceived" . .328 

Remember Doctrinal Tests Also . . 329 

The V. D. M. Questions . . . .330 

Supposed Objections Answered . . 330 
World-Wide Pastoral Work . . . .331 

Work in Which Sisters May Cooperate . 331 

Hints to Those in Large Cities . . 332 

Hints to District Workers . . . 332 

District Workers' Canvass . . . 333 

District Book Loaning .... 334 

Some Questions Answered .... 334 

New Opportunities of Service . . . 335 

page 322 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



ANGELOPHONE HYMN RECORDS 

In our issue of June 15, 1916, we announced arrangements by which 
our readers may obtain the Angelophone at Jobbers' prices, one -third 
of the usual retail prices-$8.33, $16.67, $33.33, instead of $25.00, 
$50, $100. 

Now we have a still more important announcement— Angelophone 
Records of 50 of our most beautiful hymns. They gave us the selection 
of them. We are confident that all WATCH TOWER readers will 
appreciate them, and believe that they will have a very wide circulation 
everywhere. They are 7-inch records, "hill and dale cut," of a size 
which usually sells for 35c up. But, indeed, such hymns and in such 
variety are not to be had anywhere for any money. 

The Singer's voice is excellent, clear, distinct— quite unlike hymn 
tunes you have usually heard, very few of which can be understood. 
They are the work of Prof. Henry Burr, the well-known barytone. 

NOW THE ASTONISHING FEATURE! 

The entire set of 50 hymns can be ordered through us for $5— only 
ten cents per record. 

With a view to stimulating daily family worship (having this excellent 
singer's voice to lead), the hymns with music have been published 
in neat, attractive form at 5c and 10c per copy, according to 
binding— postage 2c extra. 

At our request the Angelophone Company are mailing to the Secretaries 
of the principal classes a sample record and a sample each of 
the two hymn-books. If a quantity of the books and records are ordered 
together, carriage charges will be prepaid in the United States. These 
records are known as the original "hill and dale cut," the same as the 
ones used by Edison and Pathe. It contains a great deal more music 
to the inch than the zigzag cut. The latter is used by the Victor and 
was gotten out to avoid the patents covering the original, superior 
"hill and dale cut"; said patents have now expired. 

The Angelophone has a reversible sound-box, which permits it to 
play any kind of record made. But not so the Victor and Columbia 
machines: to use the Angelico records on them, a little sleeve is necessary, 
which can be purchased at any 10c store, or can be ordered with 
the books and records. Address orders to ANGELICO, 28 West 63d 
Street, New York City, or to 184 Fulton Street, Brooklyn, New York. 



It affords us genuine pleasure to think that Bible Students can now 
have in their homes phonograph music which really represents their 
sentiments— much better than does the majority of the jiggy, rag-time 
stuff usually sold at from 60c to $ 1 per record. 

"A little nonsense now and then. 

Is relished by the best of men;" 
But nonsense all the time nauseates even the worldly. On the other 



hand, there is a sweet, quieting influence exerted by the beautiful 
hymns of our selection which go to the heart of old and young, saint 
and sinner. Surely, Bible Students will wish to "Lift high the Royal 
banner," and to show forth the praises of their King! And such hymns 
as these in so clear and distinct a voice will surely appeal to your 
neighbor, too. 

We are glad that these records have come out in time for the 
Holiday Season and the longer winter evenings. We have warned 
the Angelophone Company to be prepared for many large orders 
to be shipped out promptly. We vouch for the Angelophone Company 
that you may safely send the money for whatever you may wish to 
order, by P.O. Order. 



PILGRIM BROTHER JOHNSON IN GREAT BRITAIN 

Classes in Great Britain desiring appointments will please communicate 
with our London Office. 



THE WATCH TOWER IN GERMAN 

The war has interfered greatly with the regular arrivals of the German 
WATCH TOWER. To meet the difficulty we have started to issue a 
German edition from Brooklyn. Our German Brethren will please note 
this and act accordingly. We expect to continue it only until the 
mail service from Germany becomes regular again. Our American 
edition is a monthly in two sections— $ 1 .00 per year, two copies to each 
subscriber. 



NOTE A CORRECTION 

In Oct. 15 Tower, p. 312, referring to three classes for whom Jesus 
becomes Surety or Guarantor, the reading should be: 

"Our great Advocate, the High Priest, having endorsed for all of 
these, will thus be ultimately free from all liability for them in that 
they all will have died according to the flesh and none of them will receive 
or retain Restitution rights or privileges. Those Restitution blessings 
will be fully and completely released when the last member of the 
Spirit-begotten shall have gone into death." 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR DECEMBER 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
December follow: (1) 293; (2) 191; (3) 313; (4) 145; (5) 1; 
(6) 71; (7) 130; (8) 230; (9) 83; (10) 197; (11) 172; (12) 299; 
(13) 328; (14) 50; (15) 326; (16) 333; (17) 104; (18) 106; (19) 
195; (20) 129; (21) 43; (22) 303; (23) 87; (24) 195; (25) 16; 



(26) Vow; (27) 272; (28) 193; (29) 209; (30) 12; (31) 274. 



R5977 : page 323 

HOW WE MAY GROW UP INTO CHRIST 

"Speaking the Truth in love,. ..grow up into Him in all 
things, which is the Head, even Christ."— Ephesians 4: 15. 

IN PROPORTION as any who seek to know 

God are led to see His true character, they 

have confidence in Him. After such have 

come to the point of full consecration to the 

Lord, they receive the begetting of the Holy 

Spirit, and become of the Church class, the 

sanctified in Christ Jesus, the set apart ones 

—set apart by the Holy Spirit. Of these the 

Apostle Paul says, "God hath not given us 

the spirit of fear." The New Creature must 

repel every attack of servile fear— which belongs to the 

flesh, the fallen condition. The new mind must triumph 

over this natural tendency, must cultivate trust in the Lord. 

No man could do more than take away our earthly life. 
No man can take away our future life. "Fear not them 
which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; but 
rather fear Him which is able to destroy both soul and 
body." So the child of God is to be very courageous, 
knowing that no one can do him harm, knowing that God 
will not permit anything to come to him that will not be 
for his good. The enlightened child of God would have 
no fear, or dread, of eternal torment. He would still have 
proper fear such as a husband would have toward a 
wife, or a wife toward a husband— a fear of displeasing 
or disappointing, and thus losing the esteem and confidence 
of the companion. 

In respect to all the brethren we should have such 
fear. We should have a filial fear toward God, but not 
with the thought that He would harm us or torment us or 
do us violence of any kind, but fear lest we should lose 
our fellowship with Him. So, then, whatever fear we 
have of a slavish kind is not from God. Such fear brings 
a snare. But love, inspired by a true knowledge of God, 
and begotten of His Spirit, delivers us also from the fear 
of man, in proportion as this love abounds in us. 

God has given us the spirit of love, the spirit of a 
sound mind, the spirit of power. The Christian knows 
that "all things work together for good to them that love 
God." This is to him a source of power, of strength. 
Circumstances and conditions which would quite overwhelm 
others, he may expect to have. This spirit is not 
only a spirit of power, but a spirit of love— a spirit of 
kindness and gentleness. It is a spirit that loves to do 
good, to do right, to be helpful. And so the Christian 
with this spirit of love and of a sound mind becomes more 



and more Godlike. This enables him to have more and 
more compassion for those who are out of the way. And 
as God sent His Son, and as the Son came and provided 
the blessing of life for all at such a great cost to Himself, 
so all who have His spirit will strive to bless others. 

EVIDENCES OF A SOUND MIND 

The fall of Adam has worked ruin to mankind, so that 
from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot there 

R5978 : page 323 

are none sound. (Isaiah 1:5,6.) None are sound of 

mind or body. All are out of the way. "There is none 

righteous; no, not one." (Romans 3: 10.) But in proportion 

as we receive the Spirit of the Lord, and in proportion 

as that Spirit of the Lord works in us and develops 

us and influences all the conduct of life, in that same proportion 

we receive the spirit of a sound mind. 

This soundness of mind will teach us how better to use 
our bodies. A person of unsound mind may either eat too 
much or eat what does not agree with him. In proportion 
as we have a sound mind, it influences what we eat, what 
we drink, and everything we do; it helps to regulate and 
control everything in life for us. It gives us broad views 
of all the affairs of life. It gives us more generous views 
of mankind. We recognize that mankind are under the 
curse, and we have a feeling of compassion for them. We 
have much advantage every way, because God has opened 
the eyes of our understanding. 

This spirit of a sound mind makes us more helpful. 
We know better how to deal with each other as brethren. 
We know better how to deal with our children, with our 
neighbors, with the butcher, with the ice man and with 
every one else. The Truth does not come to many of 
those who are naturally soundest of mind, and it takes 
time for the Truth to bring in a measure of soundness. 
But we notice that when one receives the Truth in the 
love of it, it has a healing effect on his mind. He will 
begin to think more correctly and to act more wisely. 

Then he will desire to proclaim the Truth. The Truth 
is to be spoken humbly, but fearlessly. The Christian is 
not at liberty to speak contrary to the Truth. If he is a 
professed minister of the Gospel, when the Truth reaches 
him, he is not at liberty to continue to preach error just 
because the congregation appointing him might not desire 
the Truth. A worldling in that pulpit would have no 
qualms of conscience. He would say, "I am giving these 
people the very things they want. They are paying my 
salary." That would be his attitude because he had not 
received the spirit of the Truth. 

One who had received the spirit of the Truth would 
say, "I now see that some of the things I have been 
preaching for years are injurious, dishonoring to God, 
misrepresenting His character, and more or less turning 



people away from the Truth. I have been teaching error, 
the very opposite of what I wish to do; I cannot longer 

R5978 : page 324 

dispense these errors. I am not the ambassador of this 
denomination; I am the ambassador of God. I am not the 
servant of this denomination; I am the servant of God, 
of the Truth. If I should preach error, that which would 
be contrary to the Truth, I would be guilty before God. 
I must stop immediately." 

Such a person would lose his standing— honor 
amongst men, favor, influence, etc. But all this is not to 
be considered. St. Paul says that these things are all but 
as loss and dross, are but vile refuse, if we can only win a 
place in the Kingdom. Then we shall have won the 
"pearl of great price." So, then, the speaking of the 
Truth is essential to the Christian. In his own heart, of 
course, he must have it enshrined. When he has received 
the Truth into his heart, he will esteem it a blessed privilege 
to speak it. 

Our tongue is the most powerful member of our body. 
Its influence is the greatest of all— the most far-reaching. 
It may be an influence for good or for injury. The 
Apostle says that with the same tongue we may praise God 
and injure men. To speak the Truth, to confess Christ 
before men, either publicly or privately, is a great privilege. 
But in order to be a servant pleasing to the Lord, 
we must speak the Truth in love and without fear. 

In this connection the Apostle calls attention to the 
fact that we are not to expect to be mature in these respects 
at the beginning of our Christian way. When we 
first enter the family of God, less might reasonably be 
expected of us than after we had been in the family for 
some time. We as dear children of God are to grow in 
the likeness of our dear Elder Brother, our Pattern, our 
Head. We are to "grow up into Him in all things." We 
are to recognize that He is the Head of the Church. And 
if we are to be members of that Body in glory, we must 
be developed. We are to mature in the fruits of the Holy 
Spirit, that we may be qualified and prepared to share in 
future that glorious Kingdom which is to bless the world. 

"EXPRESSION DEEPENS IMPRESSION" 

We are to exercise our function of ambassadorship— 
we are to "show forth the praises of Him who hath called 
us out of darkness into His marvelous light." And in 
telling this Message courageously and lovingly we should 
grow in grace and in knowledge. We are to proclaim the 
Truth, and at the same time to grow and develop in character. 
Why attain a growth of character? Because it 
will make us more like God. "God is love." He has other 
qualities; but this quality of love is the especially predominating, 
the overruling quality of His character. God's 
Justice operates in conjunction with His Love, and His 



Wisdom would not attempt to carry out any plans that 
Love would not approve. 

And so as we grow, the quality of love should be more 
and more manifest. The Truth is to be spoken in love. 
This is one of the things we should attain earliest. We 
are to curb, to bridle, our tongues. We are to see that our 
words are loving, kind, gentle. Speaking the Truth in 
love, we shall not only be accomplishing more for others, 
but the lesson will also thus be more impressed upon our 
own minds. It has been well said that "expression deepens 
impression." Whoever appreciates and speaks forth 
these things of God in love will receive a blessing in his 
own heart and mind. In helping others he will be helping 
himself. "He that watereth shall be watered also himself." 

NATURAL QUALITIES THAT NEED RESTRAINT 

We see a difficulty in this respect in some of the 
stronger characters that come into Christ. There are 
characters that have less combativeness naturally, who 
would not be inclined to bring force to bear upon others 
in connection with their ambassadorship. If their Message 
did not seem to be favorably received, they would be 
likely to feel, "They do not like this, so I will not talk on 
this subject." But those who have more combativeness 
are liable to manifest the force of their disposition in the 
way they present the Truth. They might be too forceful; 
they might place the matter before others as an obligation. 

But we are to remember that consecration is not now 
a compulsory matter. It is an invitation. By and by force 
will be needed. The ones who are now sought are merely 
those who have the ear to hear; and such need only to 
have the word of counsel. If any use too great force in 
presenting the Message, the Great King would not be so 
well served, and hence would not be so well pleased. 

Others may have great approbativeness. They might 
have pride and wish to show off in the way of language, 
or in their skill in handling the Sword of the Spirit. They 
might give out the Message with the idea of rousing in 
others the thought, "See how much he knows; he is a 
wonderful digger in the Bible." This seems to be a 
temptation to many. They seem to like to be in the lime-light, 
just as others like to keep out of the lime-light. 
The one might have to force himself in order to go and 
speak the Truth in public as an ambassador; while the 
other would have to curb himself somewhat in this respect. 
The only way for the latter to do is to learn to 
speak the Truth in humility, in love— the love of the 
Truth, the love of the brethren. It is God's Plan, we 
have nothing whereof to boast. We are always to present 
His Plan in meekness, gentleness, brotherly-kindness, love. 

The Apostle Paul urges that we "consider one another, 
to provoke unto love and to good works." The 
word provoke here means to stimulate, to call forth. Love 
is not easily called forth to anger. It is longsuffering. 
We might say, strictly speaking, that it is not the quality 



of love that would be moved to anger. Yet righteous 
anger is not incompatible with love. God is the highest 
representation we have of love— "God is Love." Yet the 
Scriptures assure us that God is angry with the wicked 
every day. His anger is righteous indignation against sin. 

Looking to God as the Great Example, we see that 
His love was manifested toward His creatures in the beginning. 
It was love for humanity that provided the 
Garden of Eden with all its blessings and its perfect life, 
just as for the angels His love provided for all their 
blessings. But when sin came in. Love stepped back; in 
other words. Justice was the special attribute of God then 
manifested. Yet it was for the good of mankind that 
there should be this punishment for sin. Even here God's 
Love persisted, though man had by sin become an opponent 
of God— an enemy of God; and Love was provoked 
to anger. 

The Lord said through the Prophet, "Why have they 
provoked Me to anger?" (Jeremiah 8:19.) Many 
Scriptures speak of God's anger. The anger of God has 
been against sin. It has been resting upon the world for 
six thousand years. But the Love of God has not been 
violated by this; therefore Love can be provoked to anger. 

"Love is not easily provoked." It required the act of 
intentional disobedience on the part of Father Adam to 
provoke God to anger. It was not because Mother Eve 
was deceived that the sentence came upon the world. 
The anger of God came upon the world, and the sentence 
of death was pronounced, because of Father Adam's sin, 
which was committed with full knowledge. During these 
six thousand years of sin God's Love has been in abeyance, 
so to speak, provoked to the point of withholding its 
manifestation. 

R5979 : page 325 

But all the while God's character has not changed. He 
did not cause the diabolical conditions which prevailed in 
the Dark Ages. Love would never sanction sin. "The 
wages of sin is death." And everything that goes with 
death is a part of that penalty, that sentence. But God 
has permitted these conditions for man's ultimate good. 
This love of God, held in abeyance, has bided its time to 
manifest itself to our race. 

In due time God sent forth His Son to be man's Redeemer. 
He came and gave His life a willing sacrifice for 
human sin. In due time the call went forth to gather the 
Church. And this Church is being gathered— during this 
Gospel Age. In due time the Church will be exalted in 
Kingdom glory. In due time that Kingdom will lift up 
from sin and degradation all those of mankind who are 
willing to accept life on God's terms. 

CULTIVATION OF LOVE ESPECIALLY NEEDFUL 

How earnestly we need to watch and pray, that we 



may indeed be fitted for our great future work! There is 

a danger that love will not be sufficiently strong in us; 

for by reason of the fall sin and selfishness have come to 

be preponderating influences. These principles, having 

the ascendency, and operating for six thousand years, 

have made man very lacking in love, sympathy, brotherly-kindness 

and long-suffering. Now there is a greater natural 

tendency toward anger, malice, strife, hatred, than 

toward love. Consequently, when God accepts us into His 

family He tells us that one of the first requirements is 

love. Love must grow in our hearts and minds; it must 

permeate all our thoughts, words and actions. 

The Apostle in speaking of love as respects the 
Church assures us that if we would be pleasing to the 
Lord we must develop this grace richly. Those who possess 
this quality in goodly measure will not be easily provoked 
to anger. Those who possess little love will be 
easily angered. The love which the Lord appreciates is 
long-suffering. This does not mean that there would not 
be proper occasions for anger in God's people. There 
should be a feeling of righteous indignation when we see 
injustice. Why? Because injustice is wrong. God is 
angry with injustice; and so God's people should have no 
sympathy with injustice in any form. 

If the Lord's people do not cultivate the quality of 
justice, they will get into that attitude where they will not 
appreciate justice at all. While knowing what is right 
and what is wrong, and while appreciating justice, we are 
to cultivate the quality of love. None can say that his own 
estimate of justice is altogether right and the other man's 
is entirely wrong. None can say, "I do not need to cultivate 
this quality, but my brother needs it." But each 
should think, "Here is a brother— perhaps he labors under 
greater disadvantages than I have to strive against. 
He is a brother of mine according to the spirit. He 
seems to me to be doing wrong, but I sympathize with 
him because he probably does not see that it is wrong. On 
the other hand, it is possible that I may be wrong myself." 

LET US HAVE SYMPATHY FOR ALL MEN 

God has no sympathy with sin. But He has so much 
sympathy for the sinner that He has provided His Son to 
uplift the sinners, and has set apart a thousand years for 
the work of uplift. We note injustice. We ought to note 
it. But it is not for us to flay, to inflict the punishments. 
It is for us to leave the punishments to the Almighty. We 
are, therefore, to "judge nothing before the time." We 
see wrongs committed. We say, "I know that to be a 
crime; but it is not for me to settle with the criminal. 
God knows to what extent he is responsible; I do not. It 
is my duty to look at him from the standpoint of sympathy. 
It is my duty to pray for him and to assist him all in my 
power— out of his wrong views into right views. But 
even in this I am to be wise as a serpent, harmless as a 
dove. I may know that such conduct is wrong, but I cannot 



know as to the individual— how wrong he may be." 

So love looks out and sees that the whole world is in 
much difficulty through the fall. And love says, "Be 
gentle toward all— be meek. I am ever to remember that 
we are in a world of sin, pain, sickness, death." From 
this viewpoint love will not be easily provoked, but will 
think kindly and sympathetically of others. So, dear 
brethren, let us grow up into our glorious Head in all 
things, until, made perfect and complete, we are "presented 
faultless before the presence of His glory, with exceeding 
joy."— Jude 24. 

"The time is short! Then be thy heart a brother's 

To every heart that needs thy help in aught. 
How much they need the sympathy of others! 

The time, the time is short!" 



R5979 : page 325 

PRESENTING THE MESSAGE OF THE KINGDOM 

"Into whatsoever house ye enter, first say. Peace be to this house; 
and if the son of peace be there, your peace shall rest 
upon it; but if not, it shall turn to you again."— Luke 10:5,6. 

WHEN our Lord Jesus sent forth the seventy to 

proclaim the Gospel of the Kingdom, the 

above words were a part of the instruction 

which He gave them. He sent them out 

without special preparation in the way of 

money or extra clothing. They were to find 

those in Israel who would have an ear for 

God's Message then due to be presented— the 

"Israelites indeed." These would gladly entertain 

them free of charge. In this respect 

Oriental countries are somewhat different from those of 

the Occident. Hospitality is more characteristic of the 

people of the Far East than of those of Europe and 

America. This was true of Palestine in the days of Jesus. 

When the seventy returned from their mission, our 
Lord asked them whether they had lacked anything. They 
replied that they had lacked nothing at all. Jesus had instructed 
them that their Message was to be a house-to-house 
Message— not a public one— not given in the streets 
or in the public squares. The disciples were to go about 
seeking the worthy of each city which they visited. When 
they came to a house, they were first to say, "Peace be to 
this house!" If they were kindly received, their peace was 
to abide; if not, their peace was to return to them; it 
should not rest upon that house. 

This form of salutation sounds rather peculiar to us; 
for it is not our custom to use this style of greeting. But 
it is still customary in Eastern countries to salute one another 
thus, not only in the houses, but in the street or by 
the way. People will say to one another, "Peace be to you 



this morning." Nearly every one salutes, and nearly all 
say something of this kind. We remember how surprised 
we were when visiting Palestine first, in 1892. Our guide 
was well known in that country; and as we passed along 
the street people would address him in the Arabic language, 
and he would reply. We afterwards asked him, "What 
did they say to you?" He answered that they said, "Peace 
be unto you;" or, "God's blessing be with you." We were 
surprised that the people there would so generally speak in 
this gracious manner. We could scarcely turn into a road 
without receiving some kind of salutation. 
We have something akin to this, however, in our salutation, 

R5979 : page 326 

"Good day," or "How do you do?" or, "We wish 
you good day," etc. These phrases express much the same 
sentiment. In the case of Jesus' disciples their salutation 
was to prove a test to the people as they went from house 
to house throughout Israel. If they were well received, 
they were to abide at the house where they had been made 
welcome, and not change from house to house during their 
stay in the place. If the people manifested no interest in 
them or their Message, they were to proceed on their 
journey. If they should go over a whole city this way, and 
find no one ready to welcome them, no one to lend an ear 
as they proclaimed, "The Kingdom of God is at hand," 
they were to leave the place, figuratively shaking the dust 
of that city from their feet. If the people said, "Tell us 
about it," they were to enter the house and tell them about 
Jesus, His great commission. His miracles, etc. When 
their Message was delivered, they were to let their peace 
abide with the family and hasten on their way. 

Today conditions are different. To follow the method 
of the early disciples would not now accomplish the purpose. 
With us it is much better to take with us some 
tracts, or to sell to the people at a moderate price some 
literature, which will stir up their interest and fix it, 
which will give them the necessary information about the 
Kingdom soon to be established in a much fuller manner 
than in the days of our Lord's First Advent. At that time 
it was to be set up in the hearts of a few; now it is to be 
set up in power and great glory over all the earth. We 
are to go with a Message of peace, however, as did the 
early disciples— the Message of the Kingdom of Peace. 

PROPER DEMEANOR OF GOD'S MESSENGERS 

It is not the great Time of Trouble that constitutes our 
Message. We are to tell the glad tidings of the Gospel 
which shall be unto all people, and of the Times of Restitution 
soon to be ushered in. The Time of Trouble, if referred 
to at all, should be mentioned only as a necessary 
accompaniment of the change of dispensations because of 
the world's unpreparedness for the Kingdom and its blessings. 
As we go along in our work of proclamation, we 



would very properly keep in mind that we are peacemakers, 
not breeders of strife and contention. Some of us 
might be taken for strife-breeders if we were not very 
careful how we present the Message. We are to seek so 

R5980 : page 326 

far as possible to promote peace, to tell the people about 
God's love, mercy and goodness. As we do this in love, 
we find and reach the very class which the Lord now designs 
to reach. He is not now seeking the froward. He 
is seeking a special class, the Bride class. 

If we are wise, we shall take heed to the special features 
of the Message. It is a Message of peace and good 
will. It is to point men in the right direction— that is, 
those who are of the proper class. The Message is not 
now for the swinish, for the quarrelsome, for the selfish 
and wicked. It is for the humble, the teachable, the 
honest-hearted. If any refuse our Message, we are not to 
manifest antagonism or bitterness. We are not to say, 
"Some day you will wish you had heard me!" This is not 
our business. It was particularly said of our Master that 
when He was reviled He reviled not again. We are to 
follow His example in this. 

Some might say, "But did not our Lord, when opposed 
by the Scribes and Pharisees and Doctors of the Law, use 
very plain language to them? Did He not call them hypocrites, 
whited sepulchres and vipers?" This is true; but 
we are to remember that our Lord Jesus was in a position 
of authority which we do not occupy. He was perfect, 
too, "knew what was in man," and could make no mistake 
in respect to the heart-condition of each of His opponents. 
This is not true of us. Moreover, when Jesus used this 
language He addressed a class, and not an individual. 
When we have presented the Message of the Lord faithfully, 
we are to feel that we have done our duty; and we 
should leave the results with the Lord of the Harvest. 
The Truth itself is a sharp sword, and will do all the cutting 
necessary. Moreover, it should be the Truth itself 
that causes the opposition wherever it is found, and not 
any rudeness or unkindness of word or act on our part. 
All with whom we come in contact should be able to see by 
our sweetness of spirit, by our patience under provocation, 
that we have indeed "been with Jesus" and learned of 
Him.-Acts4:13. 

The "peace of God which passeth all understanding" 
should have such control of each one who would represent 
the Lord and His Message, that a hallowed influence would 
go with each, especially in every service rendered and 
every word spoken in the name of the Prince of Peace. 
The character of His true people is described by the Master 
Himself. They who would be properly termed the 
children of God should be peacemakers. He declared that 
these were blessed. The Apostle Paul also urges, "So far 
as lieth in you live peaceably with all men." (Romans 12: 18.) 
It is not possible to live peaceably with all and 



still be true to the principles of righteousness, but the interests 
of peace should be conserved in every proper way 
by the Lord's representatives. 

Upon entering any house, our thought should be to do 
good, to carry blessing, to exercise an influence favorable 
to the peace, joy and uplift of those within— not by preaching 
at them, but by simply, unobtrusively presenting our 
Message. If, as the Lord's ministers, we should be rebuffed 
and disdained, not welcomed, we should be careful 
not to intrude ourselves further. In this figurative sense 
we would wipe off the very dust from our feet, hastening 
away to find those whose hearts are hungry for the Word 
of grace; for if the Truth is properly, lovingly presented, 
and meets with no response, the Father would not have us 
violate the proprieties of courtesy by imposing ourselves 
upon those who are unappreciative. Our Lord set us a 
good example in this matter. 

BEGGING FOR THE LORD NOT AUTHORIZED 

The disciples of Jesus who were sent forth to preach 
the Kingdom Message were not to go from house to house 
as beggars, to get a meal here and a lodging there; but 
were to expect that if the Lord had guided them providentially 
to those who received them. He meant to give 
their hosts a blessing proportionate to the cost of their 
brief entertainment. They were not to consider these hospitalities 
in the light of alms; for as the Lord's representatives 
they were there to confer blessings greater far than 
they would receive, and as common laborers even the service 
they rendered should be worth at least their keep. This 
principle was to apply not only to a house, but to a city. 
They were not to be fastidious, but to accept such hospitalities 
as were proffered them; and if this meant no hospitality, 
they were to leave the city and go to one where 
they would be received and their Message given a reasonable 
hearing. The Lord's servants are not in any sense to 
be beggars, nor to beg for the Lord. 

Verse 9 of the chapter from which our text is taken 
might at first sight appear to be applicable to the Jewish 
Harvest only; but not so. There is spiritual as well as 
physical sickness, and the Lord's ambassadors of today 
should consider it to be their mission, their business, to 
open blind eyes, to unstop deaf ears, and to assist the 
spiritually sick by pouring the balm of Gilead upon bruised 
and broken hearts. It is proper now, as then, to declare to 
all people, "The Kingdom of God is come nigh unto you." 
This announcement has not been proper all through 

R5980 : page 327 

the Age, but has been appropriate merely in the ends, or 
Harvests, of the two Ages. 

MESSAGE OF TRUTH MAKING A SEPARATION 



We have now come to the end of the time which God 
set apart for the gathering of Spiritual Israel; and the 
proclamation is now due. Behold, the King is at the door! 
This Message has been going forth from the Wise Virgins 
for the last forty years, and has been separating the wise 
from the foolish. This work is now nearly finished. As 
in the days when our Lord walked from city to city in 
Israel, proclaiming the Call of the New Dispensation to 
joint-heirship in the Kingdom, He declared to the cities 
that rejected His Message, "It will be more tolerable for 
the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the Day of Judgment 
than for you" (Matthew 10:15), so we may expect it 
to be now. Those who have been favored with the Message 
of Truth and have turned a deaf ear, while still professing 
to be followers of Christ, and perhaps teaching in 
His name, will find the conditions of the incoming Age 
less favorable to them than to heathen peoples who have 
never heard the true Message of God, the Gospel of the 
Kingdom, the establishment of which is now very near. 

These heathen will probably fall in line with the Kingdom 
conditions and requirements more readily and with 
fewer stripes than will those whose hearts have been more 
or less hardened because of sinning against light and opportunity, 
and because of refusing to hear and properly 
weigh the evidences presented to them by the Lord's 
messengers. Some who in this life have enjoyed high 
position in the Jewish and in the Christian systems will be 
greatly humbled in the coming time, when in Christ's 
Kingdom, judgment will be laid to the line, "and righteousness 
to the plummet, and the hail shall sweep away the 
refuge of lies" (Isaiah 28: 17), and when all evils and deceptions 
now practised shall be exposed and overthrown. 
Many then, we fear, will be the stripes that some of these 
will receive before they are brought into a humble, teachable, 
obedient condition of heart. 

SOME TIMELY WORDS OF CAUTION 

In the days or months yet remaining until the completion 
of our work here in the flesh, let us be worthy exponents 
of the precious Truth and worthy representatives 
of Him whose name we bear. There is danger that those 
who have not been long in the narrow way, and have as 
yet learned but partially the lessons of meekness, gentleness, 
patience and love, may not always leave a sweet, 
helpful influence in the homes which they enter. There is 
danger that there may be evil-speaking, backbiting, evil 
insinuations against others, ungentleness of word or conduct, 
impatience, etc. The influence of such, even though 
they may be pupils in the School of Christ, is carnal, 
highly injurious to spiritual development, injurious to the 
growth of the various fruits of the Spirit in themselves 
and in others who are seeking to walk in the right ways, 
directed by the Lord in His Word. 

How important it is that all who have named the name 
of Christ, who have entered His School, should apply 



themselves well to the lessons set for us by our great 

Teacher! How important it is that we who have made a 

covenant with the Lord, should walk worthy of our great 

vocation, and not be a reproach to Him whose Cause we 

have espoused! There are no people upon the face of the 

earth who should so exemplify in their daily walk and conversation 

the precious fruits and graces of the Holy Spirit 

of God as should those who have been led out of darkness 

into the marvelous light of the Lord. We believe 

that we are earnestly desirous of thus glorifying our Lord 

and of showing Him our gratitude and appreciation for 

His loving-kindness to us. 

The Church is today "as a city set upon a hill, which 
cannot be hid." Much is expected of us, even by our opponents. 
Much is surely expected of us by our Lord. 
Then let us be faithful, dear brethren, in word, in act, in 
all our deportment. Thus shall we honor the name of our 
God and of our Savior and King, whom we hope soon to 
see face to face. 



R5981 : page 327 

"THE HOUR OF TEMPTATION" 

IS IT in vain that the Lord instructed His 

people that the closing time of this Gospel 

Age would be an "hour of temptation" coming 

upon the whole world? (Revelation 3:10.) 

Surely we have not been taught of 

the Lord in vain! and so, all loyal to Him 

are buckling on the breastplate, the helmet 

and the sandals, and are taking the sword 

and the shield. If we have not yet entered 

into fierce conflicts, we know that we are to 

expect them; and we should be prepared, and have such 

practise and experience as would enable us to acquit ourselves 

valiantly in "the hour of temptation." 

Since we are instructed that this "hour of temptation" 
cometh upon the whole world, as well as upon the Church, 
we perceive that it must be something in the air, as it 
were, that would affect everybody. We believe that this 
temptation is a thing spreading itself gradually in every 
direction; and the Master assured us that unless these 
days would be cut short by the establishment of His Kingdom 
in the hands of the Elect, no flesh would survive. 

We understand this to mean that the spirit of selfishness 
and ambition, which is already operating among the 
nations and driving them insanely to war for commercial 
supremacy, is the spirit which will increase more and 
more, and will involve everybody, everywhere. This spirit 
is seen in the strikes, etc., of our own land— everybody 
anxious to serve self, and willing to fight for honors. 
privileges, positions, etc. 

But we are more interested in the Church and in seeing 



how this "hour of temptation" will involve the Lord's 

people. What we are about to write is far from what we 

would prefer, but it seems to be our duty as respects the 

Lord's Cause and people. We believe that a great crisis 

is upon the Bible students; and that the sooner il is discerned. 

the more successfully it may be passed. It may 

mean divisions; but as the Apostle remarked, divisions are 

sometimes necessary that the approved course and the approved 

doctrines and the approved methods may be discerned, 

and that the true teachers be the more fully appreciated. 

-1 Corinthians 11:18,19. 

Before mentioning the sad feature, we mention one for 
general encouragement; namely, that, so far as we can 
discern, through intercourse with the friends at conventions, 
etc., there was never a time when the rank and file 
of Bible Students possessed such a spirit of meekness, 
gentleness, patience, love, intelligence, faith, joy, as now. 

"TAKE HEED TO YOURSELVES" 

It causes real grief to write that much of the difficulty 
and danger to the Church seems to lie at the door of the 
Elders and Deacons— not all, thank God, but apparently a 
small minority of them, judging from the queries which 
come to the Office from time to time from the bewildered 
sheep, who seek advice as to their proper course. The 

R598 1 : page 328 

true, loyal servants in the Church should be all the more 
appreciated by the Lord's people in proportion as they 
realize the difference between true Elders and Deacons 
and those who are untrue. Nor are we writing with a 
view to the discouragement of the unfaithful, but rather to 
open their eyes to the true situation, that perchance they 
may be recovered out of the snare of the Adversary and 
become helpers of the Lord's Flock, instead of hinderers. 

So far as we are able to judge, the same conditions 
prevail today amongst Bible Students which the Apostle 
pointed out to the Elders of the Church of Ephesus when 
he charged them: "Take, therefore, heed unto yourselves 
and all the Flock, over which the Holy Spirit hath made 
you overseers, to feed the Church of God which He hath 
purchased with the blood of His own [Son]." (Acts 20:28.) 
St. Paul's prophecy came true: "After my departing 
shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not 
sparing the Flock. Also of your own selves shall men 
arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples 
after them. Therefore watch, and remember that by the 
space of three years I ceased not to warn every one night 
and day with tears. And now. Brethren, I commend you 
to God, and to the Word of His grace."-Acts 20:29-32. 

COURSE OF TWO OF GOD'S SERVANTS CONTRASTED 

As it was ambition which first misled Lucifer, and converted 



a glorious servant of God into an adversary, so it 
is his spirit that has been dangerous all the way down. 
The spirit of our Master was the very reverse of this. 
"He humbled Himself, even unto death," in the doing of 
the will of the Father. We see nothing of the spirit of 
pride or ambition or self-seeking of any sort in our Master. 
We are warned by the Apostle to humble ourselves 
after His example, if we desire to be exalted with Him 
in His Kingdom. 

But how many seem to forget entirely these Scriptures, 
which we so frequently bring to the attention of the 
Lord's people as essential to our attaining to any position 
in the Kingdom! From reports given us, a horrible state 
of affairs prevails in some Classes when an election is to 
be held. The servants of the Church attempt to be rulers, 
dictators— sometimes even holding the chairmanship of 
the meeting with the apparent object of seeing that they 
and their special friends shall be elected as Elders and 
Deacons. We have heard of cases in which an Elder refused 
to speak to one of the Congregation because the 
latter had not voted for him. Yet doubtless that very 
Elder would think himself the personification of modesty, 
humility and meekness. 

Oh, for shame that such a spirit should have any place 
amongst those who have any knowledge of the teachings 
of God's Word and of the conditions upon which we may 
hope for joint-heirship with the Master! Of course, there 
are various degrees of brazen-facedness in such matters. 
Some quietly try to take advantage of the Class by having 
the election at some time which is especially favorable to 
them and their friends. Others seek to pack the meeting 
with their friends, bringing in comparative strangers, who 
have no thought of being regular in attendance at the 
Class, but come merely as an act of friendship to vote 
for one of their friends. 

Additionally, it may generally be expected that such as 
manifest an ambition of this kind to be leaders and teachers 
and to ignore the principles of the Golden Rule, as 
well as the special instructions for the New Creation, are 
generally the ones who bring in false doctrines. The 
same ambitious spirit of the Adversary which leads them 
to strive for honor in the Class seems to lead them on to 
pose as great teachers— bringers forth of new light. This 
also, the Apostle explains, is a characteristic of Satan. 
He says, "What wonder if he transforms himself into an 
angel of light"— makes himself to appear a leader amongst 
the children of light.— 2 Corinthians 11:14. 

In many cases, the Classes are solely to blame, according 
to their own statement. In some instances, persons 
have been elected to Eldership who had not even made a 
profession of consecration to the Lord or who had not 
symbolized their consecration. Why? Because the Class 
happened to be without any special talent, and the one 
who was not a Brother at all, not a New Creature in 
Christ, was chosen because he had some speaking talent. 
What could we expect from such a one being exalted to 



the position of a teacher amongst Bible Students? We 
could expect only injury to the Cause and injury to the 
person thus pushed forward contrary to the directions of 
the Lord's Word. If the natural man cannot receive the 
things of the Spirit himself, how could he communicate 
things of the Spirit to the Lord's consecrated ones? How 
could we expect the Lord to guide such a one, who had 
not given over his life to be a footstep-follower of the 
Lord and to be instructed by His Word? 

The selection of improper leaders is evidently a sin, 
and quite a reflection against the Classes who have the 
improper leaders. How could such get into positions to 
represent the Lord's people, except by the latter's votes? 
When will the Lord's people learn that ability to talk in 
public is only one of the qualifications of an Elder? Time 
and again we have noted how the Lord's Cause has been 
hindered, and spirituality amongst the brethren has been 
stifled, by attempts to imitate the nominal church in putting 
forward persons glib of tongue, lacking in spirituality. 

In such a case, is it not pride on the part of the Class 
—a desire to make a fair show in the flesh before the 
world? If not, why do they elect such persons? If they 
have made a mistake, why do they not at once rectify it 
in a quiet and positive manner? When Elders seek to 
bring the Class under their power and control and succeed, 
does it not show that the Class lacks the very 
quality that the Lord tells us He desires to see— courage, 
overcoming? And does the Class not injure such a 
would-be ruler, as well as itself, by permitting him to succeed 
in his unscriptural methods'' 

"DECEIVING AND BEING DECEIVED" 

We have already alluded to the ambitious and selfish 
spirit in the world leading on to anarchy; and we have 
just pointed out how the same selfish, ambitious spirit is 
leading on to anarchy in the Church. We foresee a Time 
of Trouble for the world upon this score, and a Time of 
Trouble also for the Church. The world cannot purge 
itself of this class; for the leaders and the led have 
the worldly spirit, which is sure to wax worse and 
worse. But not so in the Church of Christ. Ours 
is the spirit of the Master, the spirit of loyalty to 
Truth, the spirit of the Golden Rule, the spirit 
of brotherly love, the spirit of liberty and helpfulness, the 
spirit of fidelity to what we believe to be the Truth. It is 
inexcusable for the Church, possessed of this spirit, to 
continue under the domination of ambitious men (and 
sometimes ambitious women). If they have not been conducting 
their Class affairs along proper lines, should they 
not begin at once? We believe that this is the time in 
which to set the House of the Lord in order. 

But some one will say, "We would have a great disturbance 
if we attempted to do anything contrary to the 
wishes of those who have fastened themselves upon us as 
our leaders and rulers. To make a move at all, would 



endanger a division of the Class, and how could we think 
of anything which would result in that catastrophe?" 
But, we inquire, which would be the better, to have a 

R5982 : page 329 

smaller Class operating along the lines which the Lord 

has indicated, or a larger Class upholding principles contrary 

to the Lord's provision, injuring themselves, hindering 

their influence, and encouraging as a leader one who 

is either a "wolf" or else a "sheep" which has been mistakenly 

misled into the wolf spirit? We encourage all the 

dear Brethren who are in such trouble to be very heroic; 

to see that they do nothing from strife or vain-glory, but 

everything in the spirit of meekness and love, that they 

may get back again to the liberty wherewith Christ made 

free, and be not again entangled in any human bondage. 

REMEMBER DOCTRINAL TESTS ALSO 

Repeatedly Bible Students write us that their Elders 
try to hinder them from the use of the WATCH TOWER 
SOCIETY'S publications as textbooks in Bible Study. Some 
of these Elders go so far as to tell the classes that they 
are out of harmony with many of the things in these textbooks. 
Sometimes, as rulers, they forbid the use of these 
in the classes. We are asked what should be done under 
such circumstances. 

We reply. Let those who wish to follow such leaders 
do so— that is their right. We shall wish them well. But 
let us not follow with them nor submit for a moment to 
such arrangements. It is the height of impertinence for 
such a leader to intrude himself in such a manner, and 
attempt to tell the Church what they shall and what they 
shall not do. As the power of election is in the hands of 
the Church, so the power of dismission is in their hands. 
We recommend that such Classes vote to dismiss such an 
Elder from his position of service, telling him kindly that 
his services are no longer desired. Perhaps with a back 
seat for a while, and an opportunity for thinking over 
the matter, he may be benefited himself, and the Class also 
be greatly helped forward by taking such a stand— no 
matter whether there be no other person in the Class able 
to address a public meeting or accustomed to leading 
Classes. Far better would it be to appoint any one of 
your number to act as chairman, or to take turns in the 
matter of opening and closing meetings— anything to preserve 
your liberty and to continue the work of worship 
and study along proper lines. 

Let us make a discrimination between the positive 
teachings of the Bible— the doctrines of Christ— and the 
slightly variant ways of expressing those doctrines. We 
are not to expect any two persons to use exactly the same 
words; but there are certain doctrines which are fast and 
immovable from the viewpoint of the majority of Bible 
Students. Any one not in good harmony with those presentations 



should not be encouraged in the slightest degree, 
but, on the contrary, should be discouraged. If he has 
different views, do not persecute him— do not follow the 
style of the Dark Ages, but follow the proper course of 
letting him "flock to himself," or with as many as prefer 
to view matters as he views them. 

We have not given such strong advice heretofore; but 
we perceive that many of the dear sheep are being 
troubled, hindered of development and imposed upon. We 
see that proportionately such Elders and Deacons are 
growing more bold, and hence the need is the greater that 
all who do have the right spirit, and who realize that, 
under the Lord's guidance in our study of the Divine 
Plan of the Ages, we have not been following "cunningly 
devised fables," should now take a positive stand for the 
good of themselves, for the good of the leaders who 
manifest a wrong spirit, and for the good of the public, 
who are inquiring for the way of the Lord as never 
before. 

While we are encouraging positiveness and courage, 
we are not wishing to encourage a spirit of strife, or of 
nagging and fault-finding amongst the faithful servants 
of the Lord who do manifest the humble spirit and who 
do accord the Class its rights and liberties and who seek 
to "serve well." Again we repeat, "Let nothing be done 
through strife or vain-glory, but all to the glory of God," 
and with the sole object in view of purging the Church 
of the influence of those who never should have been 
chosen, or having been chosen in proper condition, have 
since manifested a perverted and ambitious spirit. Again 
we counsel for these positiveness, but kindness and, if they 
repent, mercy— with a view possibly to restoring them to 
confidence later on. The Apostle wrote, "I hear that there 
are divisions among you; and I partly believe it. For 
there must also be heresies among you, that they which 
are approved may be made manifest among you." ( 1 Corinthians 1 1 : 1 8, 1 9.) 
Here the division evidently must 

come; and evidently the sooner it comes, the better it will 
be for the Truth and for all who love it. 

"BY MY SPIRIT, SAITH THE LORD" 

We should never forget the Apostle's instruction, "The 
natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, 
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually 
discerned." (1 Corinthians 2:14.) Additionally, experience 
demonstrates to us that even after we have been begotten 
of the Holy Spirit, our ability to understand 
spiritual things depends, not only upon our study of the 
Scriptures, which are able to make us wise, but also upon 
the measure of the Holy Spirit which we possess. Hence 
the Apostle's exhortation, "Be ye filled with the Spirit!" 
— Ephesians 5:18. 

This means that only the spirit-begotten may understand 
the deep things of God at all; and that their understanding 
would be in proportion as they attain more and 



more a filling, a saturation with the spirit of holiness, the 
spirit of God, the spirit of Christ, the spirit of Truth. 
Every Bible Student should realize that if, as a New 
Creature, he walks after the flesh and not after the 
Spirit, his mind will become more or less darkened, and 
not only will his ability to understand the deep things of 
God decrease, but even his recollection of the Lord's 
Word will decrease; and that, on the contrary, when he 
is living near to the Lord— walking after the Spirit and 
not after the flesh— his memory of the Divine Word and 
his ability to appreciate its Spirit are increased. 

Additionally, let us remember that a correct understanding 
of the Lord's Word is not enjoyed by all the 
educated and talented, but comes to those who are of a 
meek and teachable heart, who study the Lord's Word 
and who live it and absorb its spirit. Thus we have 
illustrated to us the Divine declaration, "Not by might 
[greatness], nor by power, but by My Spirit, saith the 
Lord of Hosts."— Zechariah 4:6. 

The lesson to us is that no matter how great, no matter 
how able any brother or sister may be, this will not 
make such fit to be a leader of the Lord's people unless 
he have additionally the all-important items— first, a knowledge 
of the Lord's Word; and second, the possession of 
a good degree of the spirit of Truth— one who always 
dare be trusted as an ambassador of the Lord. None 
others should be recognized as teachers or leaders 
amongst the Lord's people. It is the thought of Churchianity 
that only the great, the learned, the talented, should 
be the ministers of the Lord's Word; but the Bible's presentation 
is to the contrary of this. "The spirit of the 
Lord God is upon Me, because He hath anointed Me to 
preach the Good Tidings to the meek."— Isaiah 61:1. 

R5982 : page 330 

It is in view of these things that we feel justified in 
urging upon the Classes of Bible Students everywhere 
that they esteem with double honor such Elder brethren 
as manifest the Spirit of the Lord, the spirit of meekness, 
the spirit of gentleness, the spirit of patience, the spirit of 
long-suffering, the spirit of brotherly-kindness, and the 
spirit of love— those who have a good knowledge of the 
Word of God and of the Divine Plan, and who manifest 
an appreciation of the Spirit of Truth, the Spirit of holiness, 
and who have an aptness to teach; and that on the 
contrary, all others be refused. 

THE V.D.M. QUESTIONS 

Long ago we called attention to the fact that many of 
the titles applied by the nominal church to their ministers 
are wholly un-Scriptural— Reverend, Most Reverend, 
Doctor of Divinity, etc. They are not only opposed to the 
letter, but also to the spirit of the Scriptures. We called 
attention to the fact that the words Elder, Deacon and 



Pastor are Scriptural terms. We also called attention to 
the Latin title, Verbi Dei Minister (V.D.M.), and stated 
that this expresses exactly the Bible thought that every 
representative of Christ who preaches in public is a Minister 
of the Divine Word— not a minister of human creeds 
or of self. All Bible Students approved of God and of 
His people are of necessity Ministers of the Divine Word 
—each according to his talents, opportunities and restrictions, 
as set forth in the Bible. 

In view of the fact that quite a good many Classes of 
Bible Students seem to be not sufficiently particular in 
respect to the qualifications of those whom they choose 
as their representatives, we formulated a number of questions 
styled, V.D.M. Questions, believing that the study 
of these questions would be helpful to everybody, and 
that the answers of them would help to mark out such as 
have a reasonable knowledge of the Divine Word, and 
whose ministries, therefore, it might be hoped would be 
profitable and not injurious. These questions are not 
sectarian, but would be proper for any minister of any 
denomination. Neither are they catch questions, intended 
to trip up the unwary. They are simple bona fide queries, 
the answering of which should be helpful to each individual, 
and especially helpful in designating those fit to be 
teachers and leaders amongst the Lord's people. 

These we prepared and sent to the Pilgrims— the 
traveling preachers sent forth under the auspices of the 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, and to all representatives 
of the Society in any capacity everywhere. 
Next came applications from Elders and Deacons in 

R5983 : page 330 

various quarters, and from others of the Bible Students. 
Then we advised that the questions be studied and answered, 
as formulated, by all Bible Students. We received 
many applications, and many of these have been filled out 
and returned. It is our recommendation to all the Classes 
that any brother not able to answer these questions in a 
reasonable way be not considered a suitable representative. 
In order that all Bible Students may have these questions 
and note their simplicity, we publish them below. 
Brothers Sturgeon, Burgess and Stephenson have been 
appointed a committee to examine the answers sent in by 
the Pilgrims. We have no doubt that every one of their 
answers will be found satisfactory as a whole. None will 
be rejected except for good cause, and this will be duly 
pointed out. By vote the New York City Class decided 
that none should serve it as Elders or Deacons who could 
not give a reasonably satisfactory reply to these questions. 
We suggest a somewhat similar course in all the Classes. 
The examiners of the answers could either be a committee 
from the Class or, if desired, the Society's representatives 
above mentioned, to examine the answers and give 
their criticisms upon request. 



V.D.M. QUESTIONS FOR ADVANCED BIBLE STUDENTS 

(1) What was the first creative act of God? 

(2) What is the meaning of the word "Logos," as associated 
with the Son of God? and what is signified by the 

words Father and Son? 

(3) When and how did sin enter the world? 

(4) What is the Divine penalty for sin upon the sinners? 
and who are the sinners? 

(5) Why was it necessary for the "Logos" to be made 
flesh? and was He "incarnated"? 

(6) Of what nature was the Man Christ Jesus from infancy 
to death? 

(7) Of what nature is Jesus since the resurrection; and 
what is His official relation to Jehovah? 

(8) What is the work of Jesus during this Gospel Age— 
during the time from Pentecost until now? 

(9) What has thus far been done for the world of mankind 
by Jehovah God? and what by Jesus? 

(10) What is the Divine purpose in respect to the Church 
when completed? 

(11) What is the Divine purpose in respect to the world 
of mankind? 

(12) What will be the fate of the finally incorrigible? 

(13) What will be the reward or blessings which will 
come to the world of mankind through obedience to Messiah's 
Kingdom? 

(14) By what steps may a sinner come into vital relationship 
with Christ and with the Heavenly Father? 

(15) After a Christian has been begotten of the Holy 
Spirit, what is his course, as directed in the Word of God? 

(16) Have you turned from sin to serve the living God? 

(17) Have you made a full consecration of your life and 
all your powers and talents to the Lord and His service? 

(18) Have you symbolized this consecration by water immersion? 

(19) Have you taken the I.B.S.A. Vow of holiness of 
life? 

(20) Have you read thoroughly and carefully the six 
volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES? 

(21) Have you derived much enlightenment and benefit 
therefrom? 

(22) Do you believe you have a substantial and permanent 
knowledge of the Bible which will render you more efficient 
as a servant of the Lord throughout the remainder of your 
life? 

Note: It is, of course, expected that each person filling 
out one of these reports will do so from his own knowledge 
and not by inquiring for or copying the answers of others. 
The BIBLE, STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES and TABERNACLE 
SHADOWS may be consulted, however, and citations given. 

SUPPOSED OBJECTIONS ANSWERED 

One, and only one, objection was raised to the foregoing— 
a fear that it is Babylonish, Sectarian. Ah! it is 
wonderful how the great Adversary strives always to make 



out that the right is wrong, that the light is darkness. 
Babylon's method is to take all power and authority out 
of the hands of the people of God and put it into the 
hands of one person or a clique of preachers or bishops 
or elders. Our aim continually is to preserve the liberty of 
each ecclesia and have each recognize its own authority 
and responsibility. 

Our reply to the objecting Brother may be of interest 
to all of our readers, and so we present it below: 

DEAR BROTHER:— I am glad to see you scrupulously careful 
of all of the rights and liberties of the Church of God, and 
careful to oppose anything that would seem to savor of 
sectarianism. 

I remind you that sectarianism is an attempt on the part of 
many companies or classes to control each other in matters of 
doctrine and practise. We are suggesting nothing of this 
kind, but feel as much opposed to it as you do. We are not 
attempting to establish any law or rule which must govern 
all the classes of the Lord's people, but merely suggesting to 
them the establishment of law and order in their own midst, 
by themselves. 

For instance, each member of every class in voting for 
Elders and Deacons should certainly consider before voting 
the qualifications of those for whom he votes: (1) What 

R5983: page 331 

are his religious professions as respects faith in the teachings 
of the Bible on the fundamental points; (2) Whether or 
not the one to be voted for is clear in his understanding 
of the Truth so as to be apt at teaching it to others; (3) 
Whether or not the individual has made a consecration of 
himself to the Lord and has symbolized it; (4) Whether or 
not the individual manifests a high standard of morals in his 
deportment, and whether or not he is in sympathy with 
high ideals such as are represented in the Vow. 

Heretofore, the classes have been obliged to surmise on 
these subjects, and our proposal now is that they do not surmise, 
but ask the brethren our list of V.D.M. Questions or 
any other set of questions which the class may prefer, and 
have their answers to these questions before deciding that 
they are suitable representatives of the class as its honored 
servants. This maintains the authority of the class, the 
Ecclesia, as no sectarian system does, and makes the class the 
judges of the qualifications of its representatives as the Bible 
directs should be shown by the stretching forth of the hand 
and the ordaining or authorizing of the individual to serve as 
a representative of the class. 

Your letter intimates a query as to the propriety of appointing 
three brethren to examine the answers to the V.D.M. 
Questions. 

I reply that each class certainly has the right to recognize 
or appoint certain brethren in whose judgment they would 
have confidence to examine the answers given to the questions, 
and to report if any of them were answered unsatisfactorily 
in their judgment— so that the class could have the final decision. 



This seems to be an easier way than to have each 
member of the class read over the answers to the questions 
before voting. However, the matter is one for the class 
to decide. In the case of the New York City congregation, 
the vote was unanimous that all would have confidence in the 
broad-minded decision of the three brethren approved as a 
committee of examiners. 

In respect to the Vow: Your letter seems to intimate that 
you have some opposition to it, and think an acknowledgment 
of its principles should not be required. Instead of saying 
what there is in the Vow that you object to, you hide behind 
the proposition that the expressions of the Vow are not found 
in that particular form in the Scriptures. I remind you that 
nothing in the English language is found in the Scriptures, 
because they were written in another language; and furthermore, 
that our hymns are not found in the Scriptures, and 
that what we believe to be clear statements of our faith are 
not found in the Scriptures in the very terms in which we 
would express them today. The Scriptures lay down for us 
the general principles of righteous living, and the true foundations 
of the faith once delivered unto the saints. We are to 
see to it that all that we sing and preach and pray and write 
and do is in line with these fundamental principles which the 
Bible sets forth. The great mass of THE WATCH TOWER 
readers have informed us that they believe that the phraseology 
of the Vow is in full harmony with the essence and spirit of 
the Word of God. If it is, and any brother finds himself in 
opposition to it, is he not finding himself in opposition to the 
spirit of God's Word? and if so, would he be a suitable representative 
of any class of Bible Students, as its Elder or 
Deacon? We think not. If any fault can be found with the 
Vow— if it can be shown to be in any sense or degree antagonistic 
to or out of harmony with the letter and essence 
of the Word of God we want to know it in no uncertain 
terms— all Bible Students would want to know this. But no 
one has yet shown any antagonism nor any deflections in the 
letter and spirit of the Vow from the letter and spirit of the 
Bible. We therefore advise all classes that anybody unwilling 
to assent to the Vow, unwilling to make it his own, has 
something the matter with him— either his head or his heart, 
in our judgment, must be out of harmony with the letter and 
spirit of God's Word and he would not be a suitable Elder 
or Deacon. 

I trust, dear Brother, that as you read this over and ponder 

R5984: page 331 

it and pray about it, you will realize that you have erred in 
your first judgment; or if you think of any points that I have 
not covered and thoroughly answered, it will afford me pleasure 
to have you state those points. 

I here remind you that this Vow is unto the Lord, and not 
unto the brethren! We hold therefore that any one who 
declares that he has taken the Vow, has not brought himself 
thereby under bondage to any of the brethren; but merely 
declared to the brethren the obligation he has recognized and 



declared to the Lord— hence it would not be the province of 

the brethren to investigate the affairs of the brother who declares 

he has taken the Vow, any more after his declaration 

than before it. The keeping of that Vow is between the individual 

and the Lord. It neither adds to nor diminishes his 

responsibility to the brethren and the class. His declaration 

that he has taken the Vow merely informs the brethren of 

the high standard of moral living which he recognizes and is 

seeking to follow. 



R5984: page 331 

WORLD-WIDE PASTORAL WORK 

ABOUT five hundred Classes of Associated 

Bible Students have voluntarily elected the 

Editor as their Pastor, and have notified the 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

of the fact— requesting that in addition to 

his expositions and pastorals through THE 

WATCH TOWER columns, he would remember 

them in prayer and also from time to 

time send them such advice as lie might believe 

would be for their profit and the 

Lord's glory through representatives and by mail. 

We have rejoiced to note activity in the Lord's service 
amongst the Brethren, and have done our best to open up 
ways and means by which they could render service to the 
great King and assistance to His followers. But only of 
late has the Lord deeply impressed upon our attention a 
considerable work in which the Sisters might engage with 
profit both to themselves and to the Cause. 

Before suggesting the matter to outside Classes, we 
made a trial of it in New York City. The resulting success 
was so pronounced that we felt justified in calling it 
to the attention of all the Classes which have notified us 
of our election as their Pastor, sending to each Class 
copies of the following letters— one to the regular Class 
Secretary for the benefit of the Elders and the Class in 
general, and the other for the special use of the Sister 
chosen to be the Pastor's lieutenant in this work. The 
publication of the letters here will make the whole matter 
the better known to each member of such Classes, some 
of whom may not have heard the reading or may have 
forgotten the contents: 

PASTORAL WORK IN WHICH SISTERS COOPERATE 

Some months ago we called the attention of THE WATCH 
TOWER readers to an important Follow-up Work possible in 
connection with addresses received at Public Meetings, DRAMA 
Exhibitions, from Colporteur Lists, etc.— persons who supposedly 
have some interest in religious matters and who presumably 
would be more or less amenable to the Truth. We 



have since been attempting to classify and arrange these addresses, 

but there are so many of them and our time is so 

limited that we have gotten comparatively few into the shape 

originally intended. Rather than delay the important work 

further, we purpose sending lists of addresses to those who 

will be colaborers in this Pastoral Work, at once, that they 

may be copied and classified by the workers of each district. 

While this branch of the work is intended for the Sisters 
only, because we find that usually they are more successful 
and additionally have more time to invest in the work, nevertheless 
we are not proposing anything which would ignore 
the Classes of the I.B.S.A. Indeed, so far as we are able to 
designate, we are suggesting this work only to Classes which 
have informed us that they have chosen me as their Pastor. 

The plan is to bring together the Sisters of each class who 
have time at their disposal and the desire to engage as Pastoral 
Workers under this plan. In such a group, of course, 
there would be some with more and some with less talent 
for the service, and some who could do one part of the work, 
but who would be totally unfit for another part. Hence it is 
desirable that the Sisters choose from their number a Lieutenant 
having considerable time at her disposal and considerable 
executive ability, and that breadth of mind which would 
enable her to appreciate and use the position properly, dividing 
the work wisely amongst the others and herself. Before 
the Lieutenant would be elected, prayer should be made for 

R5984 : page 332 

wisdom and guidance in the matter. I have already asked 

the Lord for special blessing upon such arrangements and 

will continue so to do. Any Sister not qualified for the 

service ought to rejoice that she has the privilege of setting 

herself aside for the good of the cause, and might take 

pleasure in helping another Sister who possesses the necessary 

tact and other qualifications for the work. The Lord 

will look at our hearts and reward us according to our faithfulness 

to Him and to the Truth, and not merely according 

to the amount of our work. 

The activities of this Committee, elsewhere detailed, will 
in a general way consist of visiting the addresses mentioned, 
ascertaining interest, removing prejudice, loaning STUDIES, 
etc.; and the culmination of the project is to interest as many 
as possible to the extent of gathering them into classes- 
first to hear Chart Talks, and later to become regular Berean 
Classes. When the matter is worked up sufficiently, the Lieutenant 
will call upon the Elders of the I.B.S.A. Class to 
appoint thoroughly competent Brethren to give the Chart 
Talks. Meantime the Elder Brethren should be qualifying 
along this line. Shortly we will have a new edition of "Outlines 
of Chart Discourses," which will be helpful to them 
and which we will supply free. We will also be prepared 
shortly with a good supply of Cloth Charts for such service. 

After the Chart Talks have been given and the Study 
Classes arranged for, the Elders of the Class will be expected 
to see to it that the Classes are supplied regularly 



with efficient teachers. Remember the Apostle's instructions 
as to the qualifications of a teacher— "apt to teach." Do not 
spoil the Lord's work by any favoritism or by seeking either 
to give or to receive honor according to the flesh. Let our 
motto in everything be "God First," and self and every way 
of the flesh subordinate. 

The plan is already in operation in several of the large 
cities with astonishing success. We think it strange we did 
not sooner realize the importance of this work and get it 
into operation. But perhaps it is a part of the work of the 
present hour— perhaps in some way it is connected with the 
smiting of the waters with the mantle of Elijah. We would 
not suggest that it would fulfil that type, but merely that it 
may be one of the features connected with it. 

With this introduction to the work we leave the matter 
in the hands of the Lord's people, praying Divine blessing 
upon all who are disposed voluntarily to cooperate. 

With this we are furnishing some suggestive hints as to 
method of procedure. With Christian love. 

Your brother and servant in the Lord, C.T. RUSSELL. 

HINTS TO PASTORAL WORKERS IN LARGE CITIES 

The Pastoral letter, sent sometimes through a special representative 
and sometimes through the Class Secretary, being 
read to the I.B.S.A. Class, constitutes a call for a meeting 
of all the Sisters of the Class who have the time and strength 
to invest in the work described. Their first meeting should 
be for the purpose of choosing from their number one whom 
they believe to be the Lord's choice, to serve as Lieutenant, 
and another to be the Pastoral-Work Secretary and Treasurer. 

(We regret that through some misunderstanding our representative 
appointed Lieutenants at some of the Conventions; 
and that when our Pastoral Letter arrived directing the 
election of the Lieutenant and Secretary a little confusion ensued. 
The Society's representatives are properly appointed, but 
in all matters connected with the Classes their choice or their 
sanction of our choice is the rule. So in this case: while we 
doubt not that very suitable Sisters were appointed, we request 
that the Sisters of each Class vote on the question and advise 
us of the results.) 

The Class will doubtless consider it a privilege to supply 
the moderate expenses that will be incidental to this branch 
of the service, but should it not be so disposed, and should 
the matter be neglected, refer the same to the below address 
before it has run longer than a month, in the regular monthly 
report, calling attention to it very particularly. 

All reports should be signed by the Lieutenant and the 
Secretary-Treasurer. Of course, we should be notified immediately 
after you have had this first meeting— the number present 
and your selection for Lieutenant and Secretary-Treasurer. 

Your first meeting will help to make you acquainted with 
each other and to enkindle your enthusiasm respecting this 
part of the work, and enable the Pastor's representative (if 
present) to form an estimate of the material she will have 
to use and how it can best be used. Wherever possible we 



are sending Sister Genevieve Sanford to assist in the organization 

and classification and explanation of what we have 

found to be the successful methods of work. If she be with 

you the explanations here will be the less important, except as 

you shall wish to have them for reference when she has 

gone. But if for any reason Sister Sanford cannot be with 

you, remember that all the more you will need to depend 

R5985 : page 332 

upon the Lord and to exercise your own best wisdom, justice 
and love in all arrangements. "Let nothing be done 
through strife or vain glory." 

AT THE SECOND MEETING 

This meeting should not be long deferred— "Weld while 
the iron is hot." Our representatives are first to remember 
that system is necessary to the best results in anything. Before 
the second meeting the Lieutenant should procure four 
city maps as clear and distinct as possible, and four directories 
of city streets; a red pencil and a blue pencil and a 
couple of pads of stiff writing paper. The Lieutenant should 
prepare the first map herself— afterwards give it as a sample 
to helpers that they may prepare the other three maps. 

Using one of your colored pencils, divide your city into 
sections of approximately ten blocks one way and fifteen the 
other; or 12 x 12, or 5 x 25, as may be most suitable to the 
shape of your city. After thus dividing the map, number the 
different districts with the other colored pencil. 

Some of the names furnished you by the Society will be 
on cards, addresses on which some of the Sisters can be set to 
locating on the maps. When they find the district to which 
they belong, that number, in colored pencil, should be marked 
on the card plainly. Others of the names sent to you will be 
in lists, and each of these will need to be written off on a 
small pad-paper and in turn each address will need to have its 
colored figure representing the district to which it belongs. 

Cheap file cards may be made by cutting stiff letter paper 
into convenient sizes, approximately like small post-cards. 
Do not immediately transfer the names from the DRAMA card 
or other memorandum or address to the file cards. Merely 
locate the addresses and district them. When interest is confirmed 
the address can be transferred to the file card. 

Secure address of every Sister in the congregation, and 
let these be the start of the file cards, a red cross in the 
corner indicating that she is in the Truth. Her district 
should be indicated also on the map, and a small "x" should 
indicate approximately the location of her home. 

The Lieutenant should select District workers according 
to supposed efficiency and without partiality. Give each 
worker preferably the district in which she lives, as her field 
of activity, or a district near, or otherwise the nearest district 
possible. 

If you have an abundance of helpers, one in each district 
might attend to the Book-loaning, and another to making 



calls on the addresses, bill if the workers are not sufficient in 
number let the calling be done first and the book-loaning be a 
subsequent work, except as the person called upon might not 
have the books, but be willing to accept a volume on loan. 

The Sisters should report to the Lieutenant within a week. 
You may find that some of them have been hindered by sickness, 
or others have not found the time they had expected, 
or others may have broken down and proved inefficient, while 
still others may need further explanations and assistance. 
Write a kindly letter to any sister who fails to report in a 
week, encouraging her, expressing appreciation for what she 
already has done and hopes respecting her future progress, 
and assuring her that you will be pleased to have a call from 
her in respect to anything she does not fully understand. 
Keep each branch of the service up to its full capacity. 

As the Sisters complete their visits in their districts the 
cards or other addresses showing no interest at all should 
be destroyed by the Lieutenant. Then three copies of addresses 
of all showing any interest should be made on the 
file cards, one copy for your file, one to be sent to the 
Brooklyn office, and the other copy to be retained by the 
District worker for further use. Impress upon the Sisters 
the need of care in handling cards, lest any addresses should 
be lost. This copying should be done as promptly as possible. 

Some of the districts should be ready for Chart Talks 
within two weeks after the opening. With much Christian love. 

Your brother and servant in the Lord, C.T. RUSSELL. 

N.B.— We will supply you monthly report blanks, which 
please send to Brooklyn at the close of each month, addressing 
"PASTORAL WORK DEPARTMENT, 
c/o Mrs. Genevieve Sanford, 
122 Columbia Hts., Brooklyn, N.Y. 

HINTS TO DISTRICT WORKERS RE PASTORAL WORK 

Arrange your address cards and memoranda alphabetically. 
Copy them in this order— alphabetically— into a book, 
leaving room for four or five names under each letter. Then 

R5985 : page 333 

you can rearrange your cards according to convenience in 
calling. If any of the cards are not sufficiently neat in appearance, 
they should be copied, rather than use anything unsatisfactory. 

Wherever possible, these cards or memoranda should have 
a notation of what the individual called upon has already had 
in the way of Truth literature, as a guide to you in respect 
to what you shall say when you call. Arrange the cards so 
as to economize your time in making the visits. After each 
call write a brief history of that call on the card; for instance, 
"Interested, will attend Chart Talks"; or, "Not Interested"; 
or, "Moved," etc. This information on each card 
you should give to the Lieutenant every two weeks, that she 
may transfer the information to her file, destroying those 
showing "Moved" or "No interest." 

While the meetings to be held will be supervised by the 



Elders of the I.B.S.A. Class, we wish still to keep well in 
touch. Hence please report weekly by post-card to the Lieutenant 
the numbers in attendance at the meetings, and anything 
else that would seem to be helpful, as also the names 
of any who purchase the books. Remember, however, that 
while it is desirable that the people should buy the books— 
because they will then give the more earnest heed to the 
reading of them— yet nothing that would give any suggestion 
of merchandising the Truth is to be sanctioned. Rather than 
give the impression of trying to sell books, we would offer 
to loan them; but if the person prefers to purchase, of course 
we would be glad to have it so. 

DISTRICT WORKERS' CANVASS 

"Good morning! Is this where Mrs. Wood lives?" 

"Yes." 

"I am making some calls respecting a Circulating Library 
for Home Bible Study. I think you indicated an interest in 
this work some time ago. I would like to talk the matter 
over with you, if agreeable." 

After being invited in, continue: 

"At that time, Mrs. Wood, I believe you purchased a set 
of books called STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. May I inquire 
whether or not you found in them something that interested 
you?" 

This is merely a supposed start to the conversation, which 
of course should vary according to the circumstances of the 
case, which you have noted on the card. What you shall say 
further must depend on circumstances as you find them. 
Possibly you will get a suggestion or a statement that the 
party found nothing to interest her, but that she knows of 
some people who are much interested. You thus have the 
opportunity of learning the address of others; and perhaps, 
by a little wise conversation, you may awaken interest in the 
one whom you are interviewing. Or the trouble may be 
prejudice, slander or misrepresentation. Such opportunities 
for correcting false impressions are valuable. Each worker 
should pray earnestly and continuously for wisdom from 
Above to say the right thing, and for grace from the Lord- 
meekness, patience, love in the heart— that her words might 
be like perfume and an anointing oil to all who are in sympathy 
with righteousness. 

If the lady has not the books, offer to loan her a volume, 
and tell her of the proposal soon to have some Chart Talks 
on "The Divine Plan," given in that district. Explain to 
her how the CHART OF THE AGES helps to open the Bible to 
our understanding and to make it a new book. Assure her 
that the volume you offer to loan her will awaken 
her interest keenly, because it is different from other 
religious books and gives the chapter and verse, showing 
that it is really the Message of God's Word, even 
though different from what some of us had supposed. Inquire 
whether she would like to be notified respecting the 
Chart Talks when arranged for. Elsewhere we give some 
remarks especially on book-loaning, which see. On leaving. 



express the hope that your next call will find that she has 
read considerably and is deeply interested. 

Write a brief history of this interview on your address 
memoranda, before going on to your next call. While covering 
your district note especially those who indicate sufficient 
interest to attend a Chart Talk. Be on the lookout also for 
the Lord's guidance for a place in which to hold the meeting 
—someone who has expressed interest and whose large parlor 
or sitting room would seem to be a favorable place. In 
such a case you might remark, "I was just thinking how convenient 
this room would be for such meetings, if you would 
like to have them here. I could not say definitely whether 
this would be considered the most suitable place or not, but 
would be glad, if you thought well, to make a memorandum 
that you would like to have the meetings here." 

Confer with the Lieutenant respecting what you have 
found and the most suitable time for holding the meeting and 
the most suitable place— the Lieutenant, in turn, keeping in 
touch with the Elders of the Ecclesia before deciding definitely 
on the subject. 

R5986 : page 333 

As soon as the decision respecting the Chart Talks has 
been reached, call again upon those who seem favorable. 
Tell them about the arrangement and ask whether you may 
expect to see them there. Additionally, write a post-card to 
each of them so that it will reach them the day before the 
meeting. It might read something like this: "Just to remind 
you that we are to meet tomorrow, Thursday evening, to hear 
a talk on the CHART OF THE AGES at the home of Mrs. Wood, 
122 West Charles St., at 7:30. I note that your home is about 
nine blocks from Mrs. Wood's home and suggest that the 
Fulton Street car, running east, will take you within one 
block. Get off at E Street. Yours, etc."— Signed. 

You should be sure to be in attendance at every Chart 
Talk in your district, and should call on the interested to 
keep the interest alive, though the call need not be a lengthy 
one. Send also a post-card reminder each week. 

At the close of the series of Chart Talks, a Question 
Meeting on the Chart will be in order, and should be announced 
by the lecturer himself. It is to be hoped that the 
Elders will select only wise and capable Brethren for this 
important service. If a considerable number of those present 
so desire, it might be intimated at this meeting that a First 
Volume Berean Study could be started. 

Meantime, ascertain some other friendly one who would 
like to have the Berean Study in her home, provided the one 
who has volunteered the apartments for the Chart Talks 
should not seem anxious to have the Berean Study follow in 
her home. Other things being equal, the Berean study should 
preferably be held in the home of one of the Bible students. 
Let the vote for Berean Study of First Volume be taken on 
the night of the Question Meeting, the fourth night of the 
Chart Talks— the fourth week. 

After the Berean Class has gotten properly started, you 



may consider it as weaned and, if other important work presents 
itself, may feel free. Keep in touch with the Class; and 
should any of its members fail to attend for two weeks, be 
sure that you call upon them before the third meeting. 

These Classes should be notified respecting all public lectures, 
and should be made acquainted with the meetings of 
the I.B.S.A. Class as soon as their interest begins to develop. 
It is preferable that not many of the regular Bible Students 
attend these Chart Talks and Berean Studies at first, lest the 
newcomers should be embarrassed and lest the parlors be 
too crowded; and that the newcomers may the more freely 
ask questions and be in less danger of being stumbled— all of 
the lecturing and leading being done by the one experienced 
Brother chosen by the Elders. 

We advise that no singing be done at the Chart Talks, nor 
at first at the Berean Study Lessons. Every meeting, however, 
might be properly opened with a brief prayer. The 
meetings should begin promptly and not continue longer than 
one hour. Please call this to the attention of the leader. 

Never sell anything at Chart Talk meetings, considering 
that those in attendance are your invited guests. If they do 
not have the books, their homes will be the proper place at 
which to suggest the purchase. 

The Society will furnish, through the Lieutenant, question 
books for all such Classes, free. 

Each district worker should have with her when making 
her first calls in the district a copy of Vol. I., SCRIPTURE 
STUDIES, so that she could refer to it, saying, "This is the 
Study which I hope will stimulate your interest in Biblical 
themes." Then will be an opportunity for you to give a talk 
on the book, offering to loan it if the listener is interested. 

Report in person or by letter at least every two weeks to 
the Pastor's Lieutenant, and every week during the time that 
the lectures are in progress. 

Should you need assistance do not yourself attempt to 
select an associate, but refer this matter to the Pastor's 
Lieutenant, who has the full responsibility. 

Call upon the Bible Student Sisters residing in your district. 
They may be able to give you some information. Do 
not permit such calls to be of the ordinary kind, with minds 
diverted to chit-chat or gossip, but hold yourself strictly to 
your work and be an example. If the circumstances are 
favorable it would not be inappropriate to have prayer with 
such a Sister. If such a Sister is not engaged in any service, 
but has time for it, make a mental note of what you think she 
would be best suited for, and draw the matter to the attention 
of the Lieutenant, with full particulars as to the time at 

R5986 : page 334 

her disposal, health, activity, age, color, married or single, 
etc.; also in respect to her spiritual condition, and whether 
or not she is well posted in the Truth and apt at giving it 
out. Note whether the Sister is inactive or discouraged or 
new in the Truth. Let this information come to you as 
naturally as possible, without boring or close questioning. 



Note also if she is of a gentle spirit or the contrary. 

This information may be valuable to the Lieutenant when 
at some future time selecting suitable persons to make calls, 
to read to shut-ins, to fold tracts or to distribute volunteer 
matter for Chart Talks, Drama, Public Lectures, etc. 

Always remember your privilege in connection with the 
stimulating of the Sisters in the Truth, as well as all with 
whom you come in contact, with respect to the glorious things 
of the Divine Plan and our wonderful opportunities and 
privileges. 

The book-loaning is a separate work entirely from what 
we have outlined above; yet where the helpers are numerous 
and the cards of the interested ones few, the district worker 
may obtain the consent of the Lieutenant to add the Book-loaning 
feature, which we elsewhere describe. 

We suggest the importance of full consecration of heart 
and life to the Lord before undertaking such work— before 
it will be acceptable or pleasing to the Lord. Then the consecration 
should be kept up to date. Every morning Divine 
blessing and guidance should be sought; and every evening a 
report of our endeavors, failures and desires should be made 
to our glorious Head, that we may find grace to help in every 
time of need. Everybody called upon should be impressed 
with our manifestation of the Holy Spirit of Love, and with 
the fact that it alone has actuated our visit. We should sympathize 
with all who have good desires in any sense of the 
word; with those who are deep in churchianity, for we are 
glad to find them interested in higher things; with others 
who have turned away from churchianity, for we know how 
hard it is to retain faith under present church conditions; 
and with others who have been prejudiced, for we are not 
surprised, and much prefer prejudice to lukewarmness. 

Very truly your Servant, C.T. RUSSELL. 

PASTORAL WORK EXTENDED LATER 

It may seem early in this work to suggest an extension of 
effort outside of the large cities to smaller cities and villages. 
However, we think it best to lay before you the entire scheme, 
that we may be working together to the one end— the finding 
of God's jewels everywhere. 

Our suggestion is that the Pastor's Lieutenant and the 
Elders in each large I.B.S.A. Class be ready to cooperate, as 
God's providence may indicate, with smaller classes within a 
radius of— say forty miles. After getting the work of your 
own city well under control and everybody busy— Chart Talks 
going, Bible Studies going— then look afield to help others. 

Some of the smaller classes may be able to adapt our suggestions 
to their own immediate conditions, and some may 
not. Such as are not able to do so we recommend should 
appeal to us or to the larger Classes when they want advice 
or assistance. Then will be your opportunity. But let us 
never forget the Lord's arrangement— that each Class has 
charge of its own affairs, and only as it might request or 
desire should any other Class intrude or assist. Extension 
work may therefore best be done in towns where there 



are no classes— the EUREKA DRAMA possibly being used to 
open the door. 

LIEUTENANT AND SMALL CLASSES CONTIGUOUS 

Correspondence requesting aid in the starting of such a 
work should be sent to the PASTORAL WORK COMMITTEE, c/o 
Mrs. Genevieve Sanford, 122 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, 
N.Y. Sister Sanford, or in her absence some one authorized, 
will communicate with a large center of the work near 
to the inquirer and endeavor to provide the necessary assistance, 
instructions, etc., for a start. But the work should 
be carried on practically the same as in the larger centers, 
with such adaptations as may be necessary. 

DISTRICT BOOK LOANING 

An important feature of the Pastoral work now being 
widely undertaken is the loaning of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. 
We recommend that only Vol. I. generally be distributed; 
but of course we should be glad to loan other 
volumes subsequently, if desired. Our hope would be that 
an interest would develop which would eventually lead interested 
ones to desire to own the entire set of SCRIPTURE 
STUDIES; and since they are sold for so small a price— considerably 
less than cost of manufacture— none could think of 
our having any mercenary object in connection with their 
sale. Either the regular edition or the karatol may be used, 
but in some respects we favor the latter; for it looks smaller 
and therefore invites the attention of the busy. Nevertheless 
some may prefer the other edition because more easily read 
by the elderly. 

A chief, or librarian, of either sex, may be chosen by the 
Class. On account of the weight of the books, a brother 
having a central office or store is sometimes preferable for 
librarian. The book supply should be kept at some place of 
easy access to all the workers. 

R5987 : page 334 

The Class should purchase as many volumes as it desires 
to use. These will be supplied at the rate charged Colporteurs 
—25c per volume, for each of the first three, and 30c 
for each of the second three volumes (in lots of 50), plus 
freight charges. Each volume should be numbered, and the 
numbers may as well begin with 500. If the number be plainly 
marked upon the paper cover, it will facilitate the keeping 
track of the books given out to each worker, and loaned by 
the worker to the interested. 

In order that those visited may not think that they are 
being offered charity in the loaning of a book, we style this 
work the starting of a Circulating Library for Home Bible 
Study, otherwise they might be offended, and say, "We are 
able to buy all the books we need." or. "We can get at the 
Public Library whatever books we desire." 

The volume should be loaned for two weeks and a call 



made to collect at the end of that time; but of course if 
there is any interest manifested and for some reason it has 
not been read in the interim, it might be loaned afresh. Make 
a memorandum of the date when the book was loaned, and 
make a monthly report to the Book-loaning Department of 
the Class, as well as to the Pastor's Lieutenant. 

CANVASS OF THE BOOK LOANER 

"I am making some calls in the interest of A CIRCULATING 
LIBRARY FOR HOME BIBLE STUDY. I wish to talk the matter 
over with you and enlist your cooperation. This movement 
is an organized effort to provide everyone who loves the 
Bible with the means to understand its mysteries— making 
God's great Book plainly understood. 

"I have brought with me a little volume containing sixteen 
Studies that cover THE DIVINE PLAN OF THE AGES. If you 
are interested in the Bible, I should be glad to loan it to you." 

Upon the acceptance of your proposition say: 

"Now, by taking one Study a day you will finish the 
Volume in two weeks, with an extra Study on Sunday. By 
that time you will be so well informed on God's Plan that its 
various divisions will be well defined in your mind. Would 
you be willing to take one Study a day if you could be sure 
that in two weeks you would understand God's purposes 
toward you and yours and the whole world?" 

"Yes!" 

"Well, that is just what I propose to guarantee you! But 
remember, my guarantee is based upon your promise of a 
Study a day, which will require only about one-half hour 
each day." 

Nothing in this book-loaning work interferes at all with 
the work of regular Colporteurs, and the loaner is fully authorized 
to take an order for books at any time, but is 
cautioned to remember that this is not her special work. 

SOME QUERIES ANSWERED 

We take this opportunity of answering publicly some 
queries that we have received about this work. 

(1) Should Brethren also engage in this work? 
We have not invited the Brethren to engage in this 

work because we believe that there are other things which 
they can do that Sisters cannot do. Besides, while there 
are tactless Sisters who might do more harm than good 
in this Pastoral Work, we believe that on the whole the 
Sisters are apt to display as much tact as the brothers 
or more; although there are some Brethren, of course, 
who are very resourceful, very wise. We are merely 
speaking in general terms and believe that the Sisters, on 
the whole, can render this service better than can the 
Brethren, and it gives them something special to do in the 
service of the King. 

(2) Is it right, Scriptural, for the Pastor to select a 
Sister to be his Lieutenant in such a work? 

We believe it to be in full harmony with the Lord's 



teachings that the Sisters might so be used. All who receive 
the Holy Spirit, as previously pointed out, are 
anointed to preach the Gospel. The Lord, through St. 

R5987 : page 335 

Paul, has seen fit to limit the conditions under which a 
Sister may preach— that her preaching may not be of a 
public character, and that she may not be considered a 
teacher in the Church. Nothing in this, however, interferes 
with her doing private Pastoral Work of the kind 
here suggested. 

(3) After the Sisters shall have formed Classes for 
Bible study, what would be the necessary procedure if 
there were no consecrated Brother in the Class, or none 
qualified to give a Chart Talk or other address? 

In such event, inquiry might be made of some nearby 
Class whether or not one of its Elders might be spared to 
render this assistance. If there be no nearby Class, or if 
none could be spared to render the assistance, the Pastor 
hereby authorizes the Sisters to choose one of their number 
as his representative to give the Chart Talk and, subsequently, 
to start a Berean Bible Study. She should perform 
her duties with head covered, explaining the significance 
of this to the audience, and declaring that she 
is merely serving because of the necessity of the case, 
until some consecrated brother shall have developed the 
necessary knowledge and qualifications to become the 
leader. Furthermore, she should remind all present that 
the Apostle's instruction is that the Sisters are not to 
teach in the Church, and that a class of inquirers is not 
understood to be an organized class of Bible Students or 
an Ecclesia or Body of Christ, but merely novices who, 
it is hoped, will develop speedily to maturity. 

(4) Ought some of the younger Brethren be drilled 
into this work by having them occasionally address the 
regular Class? 

Assuredly novices should not be introduced into this 
work. Good intentions count with the Lord as respects 
the heart; but more than good intentions are needed for 
His service, according to the instructions of the Word. 
Only those that have a talent for public speaking, and additionally 
have a clear knowledge of the Truth and an 
aptitude for teaching— only such should be assigned to 
the important work of interesting people who have only 
recently come to a knowledge of the Truth and to a 
limited degree, and whose minds are more or less prejudiced 
with erroneous ideas. The very best talent that the 
Class possesses will be none too good for this service. 

Let us say, additionally, that to invite novices to address 
the Class on Sundays or at other times in a public 
lecture would be entirely wrong. The Lord's people 
should not be bored any more than the public. Such 
Brethren as show some talent should be encouraged to 
study and to practise, but not to practise upon others 
than themselves. We have already recommended, and do 



so again, that the less experienced of the Brethren who 
feel that they have talents for the Lord's service might 
well be encouraged to have meetings by themselves, with 
perhaps some Elder Brother present as a moderator to 
hear them and to offer kindly criticisms— of manner, 
voice, tone, doctrinal intelligence, logic, etc. The members 
of the Class should be permitted to criticize each 
other, but not too severely, lest the humbler ones should 
be discouraged from making further effort. 

We recommend Chart Talks as one of the best instructions 
for these novices and one of the most efficient 
ways of learning how to present the Divine Plan. They 
should be encouraged to follow quite closely the outlines 
of Chart Discourses. Following these three outlines, on 
the fourth night the audience should be invited to ask 
questions along every phase of the Divine Plan illustrated 
in the Chart, and a competent instructor should be able to 
answer every such question. To fulfil these requirements 
requires more than a novice; and even the mature of the 
Lord's people will do well to keep their minds continually 
refreshed by constant study. 

Although we have sent a letter on Extension Work, 
our thought is that nothing whatever should be attempted 
beyond the boundaries of the city in which the Class is 
located until that city shall have been thoroughly worked. 
We would have preferred not to send that letter at the 
same time; but we considered it advisable that all the 
dear friends should have the matter well before their 
minds, and thus learn the wide possibility which may come 
to them, if faithful, in due time. 

NEW OPPORTUNITIES OF SERVICE 

Many of the dear friends have been astonished to find 
what opportunities this work opens up. We find that 
many who have gotten a little taste of the Truth are very 
willing to attend a meeting, an entertaining Chart Talk 
on the Divine Plan set forth in the Bible— some who are 
not interested enough to undertake special reading. As 
they become interested in a Chart Talk, they generally become 
interested in the reading; and all of the talks should 
be had with a view to impressing upon them the importance 
of Bible Study, and the need that they have for 
the Bible Keys, if they will get any profit out of the study. 
They know, and we all know, that the Bible has been in 
the hands of the people freely for over one hundred years, 
and that much Bible reading, verse about and by the 
chapter and by so-called Bible study, has been going on 
in all denominations with little result. 

Few, except Bible Students, can really answer any 
Bible questions. Having learned how to study the Bible, 
let us continue in the same way and extend the same 
helping hands to others. Nevertheless, if there are some 
who have not yet convinced themselves of the folly of the 
old method of Bible study, it is not for us to hinder 
them, but to bid them God-speed, and ourselves to continue 



in the way in which the Lord has blessed us and 
is continuing to bless us. 

SMITING OF JORDAN NOT FAR OFF 

Our thought, dear Brethren and Sisters, is that a 
great work is before us, and that in proportion as we get 
ready for it, the Lord will be pleased to bless us with a 

R5988 : page 335 

share. Some may have a share in the calling at the addresses 
already gathered. Others may have a share in 
giving the chart talks, and others may have a share in 
leading Berean lessons. Let us not forget, dear Brethren, 
that we must have humility. The Lord has no use for 
the proud and self-sufficient, either in the present Age in 
the instructing and building up of the Church, or in the 
future Age in the instruction and uplifting of the world. 
The Scriptures assure us in no uncertain terms that the 
Lord abhors the proud and shows His favor to the 
humble. The Apostle says, "Humble yourselves, therefore, 
under the mighty hand of God that He may exalt 
you in due time" (1 Peter 5:6); for "he that humbleth 
himself shall be exalted."— Luke 14:1 1. 

Let us not forget the importance of knowledge. No 
one is capable of teaching others who has not a clear 
knowledge himself. 

Finally, let us remember that knowledge without the 
humility might puff up. We shall be built up under the 
influence of self-sacrificing love. Let us all, dear friends, 
get more ready— nearer to the Lord and more ready for 
His service. The smiting of the Jordan assuredly is not 
far off; and do we wish to have a share in it? As Elijah 
did the smiting, so all those who belong to the Elijah 
Class will have a share in it. 



page 337 

VOL. XXXVII. NOVEMBER 15 No. 22 
A. D. 1916-A.M. 6045 



CONTENTS 

Death of Charles T. Russell . . . .338 

"The Earth Trembled"-And Fell . . .339 
Lightning Flashes From the Throne . 339 

One of the Master's Forceful and Beautiful 

Lessons 341 

Proper Consideration of the Lily . .341 
Rest and Peace in Perfect Trust . . 342 

"How Long, Oh Lord, How Long?" (Poem) . 342 



"Jesus Christ— the First and the Last" . 343 
What the Beloved Disciple Saw . . 344 
The Master's Comforting Message . . 344 
"In His Right Hand Seven Stars" . .345 

"Faithful Unto Death" 346 

The Lord's Second Coming .... 347 

Some Items of Interest 348 

Holiday Remembrancers 348 

Interesting Letters 350 

Whom the Lord Loves He Chastens . . 350 
British Conditions Grow Serious . .351 
Carefully Studied Vow— Then Accepted It .351 

R5988 : page 338 



DEATH OF CHARLES T. RUSSELL 



The sudden death of Pastor Charles Taze Russell, 
Editor of THE WATCH TOWER, has created a profound 
impression upon his many friends throughout 
the world. Hundreds of letters and telegrams received, 
further evidence the love and esteem in 
which he was held, and express unqualified desire to 
cooperate in continuing the great cause for which 
he stood so many years. 

Brother Russell left Brooklyn in the evening of 
October 16, to fill appointments in the West and 
Southwest, but was obliged to start homeward before 
his scheduled time, owing to ill health. 

It was on a Sante Fe train at Pampa, Tex., that 
he died. Brother Menta Sturgeon, who accompanied 
him on the trip as his Secretary, telegraphed 
the information to the headquarters of the WATCH 
TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY at Brooklyn, adding 
that "he died a hero." 

The body lay in state at Bethel Home Saturday, 
and at The Temple throughout the day Sunday. 

In the afternoon at the hour of 2, funeral service 
was held for the congregation, and in the evening 
a service was conducted for the public. 

At about midnight the body was taken to Allegheny, 
Pa., where in the Carnegie Hall, at 2 in the 
afternoon of Monday, service was held by the Pittsburgh 
congregation, of which he had been resident 
Pastor for many years. 

Interment took place in Rosemont United 
Cemeteries at Allegheny, in the Bethel Family plot, 
according to his request. 

We rejoice to know that instead of sleeping in 
death, as the saints of old, he is numbered among 
those whose "works follow with him." He has met 
the dear Lord in the air, whom he so loved as to 



lay down his life faithfully in His service. 



PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agenciesr-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



A MEMORIAL NUMBER 

Owing to the fact that this issue of THE WATCH TOWER 
was ready for press at the time of Brother Russell's death, 
the Society decided to insert a brief notice, with the announcement 
that the following issue, December 1, will be in the 
nature of a Memorial Number. 

Brother Russell's Will provides for the continuance of the 
publication of THE WATCH TOWER, for which he left ample 
manuscript to insure its publication for an indefinite period. 
The affairs of THE WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
will likewise be continued according to provision made by 
him before death. 

Anyone desiring extra copies of the Memorial Number 
will please advise us immediately. Extra copies at the usual 
price— 5c each. 



WATCH TOWER BIBLES 
Our present stock is nearly exhausted. The prices of 



these Bibles will be advanced on November 15, 1916. 



I.B.S.A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR MONTH OF DECEMBER 

QUESTIONS FROM 
MANUAL ON SERIES THIRD 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
STUDY VIII.-"RESTORATION OF ISRAEL" 
Week of Dec. 3..Q. 8 to 14 Week of Dec. 17..Q. 22 to 28 
Week of Dec. 10..Q. 15 to 21 Week of Dec. 24..Q. 29 to 35 
Week of Dec. 3 1 ....Q. 36 to 42 



R5989 : page 339 

"THE EARTH TREMBLED"-AND FELL 

"His lightnings enlightened the world; 
the earth saw, and trembled."— Psalm 97:4. 

GOD'S holy Prophets of the Old Testament and 

of the New give us numerous pictures of 

our day and the events now taking place in 

the world. The Psalmist David, taking 

prophetically a standpoint of observation 

future from his day declared, "The Lord 

reigneth; let the earth rejoice; let the multitude 

of isles be glad thereof!" (Psalm 97:1.) 

As we have shown in SCRIPTURE 

STUDIES, Vol. III., Study 9, this began to be 

true when our Lord Jesus, having returned to earth to set 

up His Kingdom, took unto Himself His great power. Yet 

not until His Kingdom has been fully established in the 

earth will His glorious Reign be clearly recognized. 

That the Prophet David is referring especially to the 
present time, from 1878 down to the full inauguration of 
the Kingdom, is clear from his succeeding statement: 
"Clouds and darkness are round about Him; righteousness 
and judgment are the habitation of His Throne. A 
fire goeth before Him, and burnetii up His enemies round 
about." How true it is that the storm clouds are all about 
us in this Day of the Kingly presence of Jehovah's great 
Representative, the Executor of His great Purposes! 
Daily the darkness of gloom and perplexity deepens on 
every side for those not acquainted with Jehovah's purposes. 

"A FIRE GOETH BEFORE HIM" 

If we inquire. Why is this Day of His presence such 
a Time of Trouble and distress of nations? the answer 
comes. Because righteousness and judgment are the habitation 
of His Throne, and He is judging the nations and 
weighing them in the balance. Judgment is being laid to 



the line and righteousness to the plummet (Isaiah 28:17), 
to the intent that ere long the equitable principles of His 
Government may be established in all the earth. Not 
only will all unrighteousness be made manifest, but "a fire 
goeth before Him and burneth up His enemies." (Psalm 97:3.) 
All the wilful and persistent opposers of His 
righteous course shall be "cut off," "destroyed," "burned 
up," "devoured with the fire of His jealousy."— Zeph. 3:8. 

This work of judgment and the consequent Time of 
Trouble being a necessary preparation for the glorious 
Reign of Righteousness that shall immediately succeed it, 
and all being wisely directed by the High and Holy One, 
who is "too wise to err, too good to be unkind," the 
Prophet bids us discern in it an abundant cause for rejoicing 
and gladness. (See Psalm 96:9-13; 98:1-9.) Indeed, 
there is great cause for rejoicing, not only among 
the saints, but in the whole earth; and it is the privilege 
of the saints to tell the glad tidings to all who will hear. 

But whether men hear or whether they forbear, let us 
tell it out, and by and by when the great afflictions of 
this Judgment hour begin to seal the instruction upon the 
hearts of men, then the blessed testimony will be as healing 
balm. They will see that He who smote them in His 
wrath, and scourged them in His hot displeasure, is also 
merciful and gracious, and unwilling that they should 
perish, but desirous rather that they should turn unto 
Him, obey His counsels and live. 

LIGHTNING FLASHES FROM THE THRONE 

It is in the midst of the clouds and darkness of this 
Day of Trouble incident to the setting up of Messiah's 
Kingdom that the statement of the Prophet is verified: 
"His lightnings enlightened the world; the earth saw, and 
trembled." How apt is this figure! Truly like lightning 
flashes in the midst of the gloom and perplexity of this 
cloudy day, come to men the remarkable glimpses of the 
great principles of Truth and Righteousness in contrast 
with which the world's present disorder is so manifest! 
A flash of lightning from the obscured Throne discloses 
here one error, and there another, and another. 

Soon the whole world will be aroused. Already it is 
largely so. Every day adds to the intensity of the trouble, 
and the whole world trembles for fear, not knowing what 
the outcome will be, but dreading the worst. The editorials 
of some of our great newspapers read as if 
written from the standpoint of Present Truth, so remarkably 
do they foretell what they declare to be almost certain 
to follow this present terrible war. Revolution and 
black anarchy are freely prophesied, to precede a great 
reconstruction period. The great French Revolution is 
referred to in contrast, as an April shower compared to a 
destructive hurricane of the tropics. How truly are the 
Master's words concerning this time being fulfilled — 
"Men's hearts failing them for fear, and for apprehension 
of the things coming on the earth"!— Luke 21:26. 



It is remarkable that these lightning flashes are continually 
calling attention to the Word of God, to the 
Golden Rule, to the equal rights and privileges of human 
brotherhood, to the faultless character and loving and 
self-sacrificing disposition of Jesus Christ, to the Law of 
Love in contrast with the law of selfishness everywhere 
prevailing. It seems remarkable, too, how often in these 
days of war and stress worldly men are drawing attention 
to the prophecies of the Scriptures, and wondering 
whether present conditions, and the troubles which all intelligent 
people see just ahead, are not fulfilments of these 
Bible prophecies. All this is leading men to reason of 
righteousness and of coming judgments (Acts 24:25), 
when they hope and believe that in some way present 

R5989 : page 340 

wrongs will be righted and righteousness established. 

By the sudden, and now increasingly frequent, flashes 
of light which issue from the storm clouds that surround 
the invisible, spiritual presence of our glorious King, 
these principles of the Word of God are being illuminated 
and brought to the front for the consideration of all men. 
They are discussed not only in the daily press, but in our 
popular periodicals, in the official labor organs, in stores 
and factories, in counting-rooms, in the market-places, at 
public gatherings. Even heathen nations are discussing 
them, and are contrasting both the daily lives of professed 
Christians and the present course of the professed Christian 
nations with the character and the teachings of the 
great Founder of the Christian religion, extolling the 
latter and ridiculing the former. 

"THE EARTH SAW- AND TREMBLED" 

As a result of God's lightning flashes which are enlightening 
the world, there is great commotion everywhere 
manifest. Never before have such conditions prevailed. 
There are ominous mutterings of dissatisfaction, unrest; 
and the whole current of popular thought throughout the 
earth is set in a revolutionary direction. The lightning 
flashes are revealing the corruption in the world, the dishonesty 
in high places, and showing men that they are 
living far below the dignity of manhood. But how to 
right things they are not able to see; and the conflicting 
ideas, voices, theories and threats, reveal the facts which 
the Prophets foretold; for "the nations are angry," "the 
heathen [Gentiles, peoples] rage," and the whole earth 
trembles from the din of a wordy conflict and from the 
blows which even now are beginning to arouse the world. 

"ZION HEARD-AND WAS GLAD" 

But in the midst of all this trouble and tumult in the 
world, what is the attitude of the Lord's truly consecrated 
and faithful people? Are they, too, in fear? As the 



judgments of the Lord fall heavily upon the wayward and 
disobedient so that the whole earth reels and staggers as 
a drunken man (Psalms 107:27), are the saints in dismay 
and distress? Ah, no; for it is written, "Zion heard, and 
was glad, and the daughters of Judah rejoiced, because of 
Thy judgments, O Lord!" It is the "sinners in Zion" 
that are "afraid." Psalm 91 and 46 show why the saints 
rejoice and are restful of heart while others weep and 
lament. It is because they "dwell in the secret place of 
the Most High [represented by the Holy of the typical 
Tabernacle], and abide under the shadow of the Almighty" 
(as the typical Tabernacle was covered by a pillar of 
cloud by day and a pillar of fire by night). It is because 
God is their "Refuge and Strength." "The secret of the 
Lord is with them that reverence Him, and He will show 
them His Covenant."— Psalm 25:14. 

These dwellers in the secret place of the Most High 
are provided in these perilous times with a clear knowledge 
of the Divine Plan, with its times and seasons, which 
enables them to see both the necessity for the present 
method of Divine discipline upon the world and also the 
peaceable fruits of righteousness which shall result therefrom. 
In the midst of the storm and battle of this great 
Day of the Lord, they hear the commanding voice of the 
Lord of armies, and their hearts rejoice; for they have 
full confidence in His ability to bring order out of all the 
confusion. They realize that in the judgments of this 
Day it is the Lord that speaks from Heaven— from the 
high place of authority and control; therefore they give 
thanks at the remembrance of His holiness (Psalm 30:4) 
—of His Justice, Wisdom, Love and Power, which insure 
His doing all things well. 

THE HEEDLESS WHO WILL NOT HEAR 

But the Psalmist intimated that, while the world at 
large would be in ignorance of the real portent of present 
events, and therefore in fear and dread, and while the 
saints, with clear knowledge, will be rejoicing and lifting 
up their heads, because they see the outcome, some- 
heedless both of the world's distress and of the Voice 
which speaketh from Heaven— will still boast themselves 
of their idols. He says, "Confounded be all they that 
serve graven images, that boast themselves of idols." 
These words call to mind the warning of the Apostle Paul: 
"See that ye refuse not Him that speaketh from Heaven." 
(Hebrews 12:25.) St. Paul addresses these words to 
those who know the Lord's voice and recognize it, warning 
them against at any time refusing longer to heed it, 
when He speaks in wrath and judgment. 

But alas! there are some who heed not the warning, 
and who, although they recognize the voice of the Lord, 

R5990 : page 340 

refuse longer to obey it. They turn away from Him that 



speaketh from Heaven, toward the idols which their wayward 
hearts have set up instead of God. These "graven 
images" are indeed the work of their own hands— the 
human philosophies, and science— "falsely so called"— of 
this evil day. And those who reject the testimony of 
God, when once they have heard it, invariably fall into 
some one of the many forms of idolatrous worship now 
so prevalent; or else they drift restlessly from one to another 
of them. 

All such shall surely be confounded; they shall be put 
to shame and confusion; their idols shall be destroyed. 
The wilful sinner, once enlightened and blessed with the 
hallowed influences of the Holy Spirit and the Truth, shall 
not, the Apostle declared, escape the just punishment for 
his deeds. Heb. 12:14-19 points out this danger to the 
children of God, and warns them of the fearful penalties 
of turning away from the holy commandment delivered 
unto them. The Apostle Paul here depicts the scenes accompanying 
the inauguration of the old Law Covenant, 
and shows it to be a picture of events which will accompany 
the establishment of the New Law Covenant, at 
the close of this present Age, under the greater than 
Moses— our Lord Jesus Christ. 

The Mountain (Kingdom) of the Lord's House is now 
being established in the top of the mountains, superseding 
the great kingdoms of this world, and is being exalted 
above the hills— the smaller governments. (Isaiah 2:2.) 
Clouds and darkness, trouble and perplexity and distress 
of nations are round about; and the thunderings and 
lightnings are making all the earth to tremble as did 
Israel at Mt. Sinai. (Exodus 19:1-25.) And now— since 
the Spring of 1878— God has "set His King upon His Holy 
Hill of Zion." (Psalm 2:6.) Therefore, if those who 
refused to obey Moses, and presumptuously disgraced the 
ceremonies of the occasion at Sinai, met with instant 
death, how can we escape if we disregard the voice of the 
great Mediator of the New Covenant, and the remarkable 
circumstances which now accompany its establishment? 

CLOSING THOUGHTS 

We see the deepening clouds of trouble. We hear the 
thunder tones of judgment that "call the earth from the 
rising of the sun unto the going down thereof" (Psalm 50: 1 ) 
—from the east to the west. We see the lightning 
flashes of Truth and Righteousness, and observe how the 
whole earth is now in the shaking process which will 
eventuate in the complete overthrow of all existing institutions, 
systems and governments. Present events indeed 
speak in trumpet tones. How shall we regard these 
things? Surely, dear brethren, it will be with thoughtful 

R5990 : page 341 

and reverent hearts! Surely we shall watch and pray, lest 
"a promise being left us of entering into His rest, any of 



us should seem to come short of it!" (Hebrews 4: 1.) We 
shall guide our course with the greatest carefulness that 
we may make our calling and election sure. 

In this eventful period everything that can be shaken 
will be shaken, that only the unshakable things of truth 
and righteousness may remain. (Hebrews 12:25-29.) 
Every one called to share in the coming Kingdom must 
be a lover of righteousness, one who will courageously 
and lovingly stand for the Truth however much it may be 
spoken against. All others will be shaken out of this 
company. The snares and delusions of this "evil day" are 
accomplishing this very work. In the end only the true 
will remain. "Seeing that we look for these things [let 
us] be diligent, that we may be found of Him in peace, 
without spot, and blameless" (2 Peter 3: 14), ready for 
the entrance into that rest which yet remains. 



R5990: page 341 

ONE OF THE MASTER'S FORCEFUL AND BEAUTIFUL LESSONS 

"Consider the lilies of the field, 
how they grow."— Matthew 6:28. 

MANY and varied are the precious lessons 
taught by the Master during His earthly ministry, 
and they never grow old. To the true 
disciple of Christ they are ever new, ever 
fresh. Whether He taught by the seaside 
or on the mountains or by the wayside, as 
He walked and talked with His chosen 
Twelve, His words of wisdom and grace 
come to us vibrant with meaning, pulsating 
with life, full of strength and power, cheering, 
encouraging and blessing our hearts. 

In using these words under our consideration, our 
Lord, as was His custom, drew an illustration of something 
familiar to all His hearers. God's care over the 
lilies seemed a fitting reminder of His greater care over 
His own people, of His infinite Wisdom, Power and Love. 
He who so carefully supervised the clothing of the simple 
flower— which bloomed only to fade in a day— that its 
robes were more regal than the kingly vesture of Solomon. 
would surely provide for the clothing of those who 
trusted in Him! 

SOME HAVE HIS PROMISE-SOME HAVE NOT 

Undoubtedly much that our Lord said to the Jews 
would not have been said to Gentiles; for the Gentiles 
were then under the general curse and condemnation 
—the whole world was alienated from God. The people 
of Israel alone had been brought back into covenant relationship 
with God, through the Law Covenant made at 



Mount Sinai; hence different words would be applicable 
to them. Having come into relationship with God, His 
promises were theirs. All things should work for their 
blessing— their cattle, their fields, everything, would be 
blessed of the Lord, if they would be faithful to Him. 
Our Lord was, therefore, in line with this thought, exhorting 
the children of Israel to have greater confidence 
in God, greater trust in Him who had chosen them to be 
His peculiar people. 

We, like the Master, should make a clear distinction 
between the persons to whom we would give consolation 
and assurances of God's care, and all others. We are to 
remember that some have come into His family and some 
have not! that some have His promises as theirs, and 
some have not. We are not to deceive others and to 
imply that they have a right to claim as their own, 
promises which were never given to them. Rather, we 
shall do them more good if we point out that these 
promises are conditional— only for those who make a 
covenant with the Lord under the special arrangement 
open during this Gospel Age. To the Christian this 
lesson of unfailing trust and confidence in God is a very 
important one, and to have learned it represents a very 
considerable growth in grace and in knowledge— in the 
spirit of love, which casts out all fear. It means a nearness 
to God, a fellowship with Him, which those who have 
not learned this lesson cannot enjoy. 

THE WORLD'S HEAVY BURDENS 

To the people whom the Master generally addressed, 
the matter of providing for the necessities of life was a 
very important one. He rarely had the very rich amongst 
His audience, generally the poor; and the poor in Palestine 
and other Eastern countries find it very difficult to 
obtain food, clothing, etc. In many parts of the world 
today, especially in India, there are people who scarcely 
ever go to bed without going hungry; and to these the 
necessities of life are a very important consideration. 

Our Lord Jesus indicated that this was so in His time, 
saying that the important consideration with most people 
was, "What shall we eat and what shall we drink, and 
wherewithal shall we be clothed?" They were anxious 
and worried. "After these things do the Gentiles seek," 
said the Master. Their object in life was to procure 
food and raiment. That was the burden of their prayer. 
And even the Jews, though professedly the people of God, 
had not learned implicit trust in Him, but were to a large 
extent grasping after the material things, seeking chiefly 
worldly gain rather than the true riches. Our Lord said 
that His disciples were to realize that God knew what 
things they had need of before they asked Him, and 
should rest fully content in the matter of what God would 
provide them respecting their temporalities. Jesus wished 
them to be sure that God would so supervise their interests 
that they should not want anything really good 



and needful to them. 

This seems to be the whole lesson that our Lord was 
inculcating in bringing in this illustration from nature— 
"Consider the lilies of the field." It was a forceful reminder 
that the things of the Kingdom were the things 
of paramount importance, and that in seeking these things 
first, they might have the assurance that all needed earthly 
things should be theirs. 

PROPER CONSIDERATION OF THE LILY 

What is it that we are to consider about the lilies? 
"How they grow!" What does this mean? Jesus Himself 
answers, "They toil not, neither do they spin; and yet I 
say unto you. that Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed 
like one of these." That is, the lilies grow in a 
very reasonable way; they develop grace and beauty, and 
are adorned in robes of loveliness without putting forth 
unnatural, unusual stress or effort. They are not worried 
about growing. The lily does not wake up in the morning 
and say, "Now, I wonder if I can make another quarter 
of an inch today. I wonder if I shall be able to grow as 
fast and to look as beautiful as that lily over there; and 
I wonder what people will think about me." It simply 
assimilates what it can absorb from the earth, and from 
the atmosphere what God has provided for it there. It 
does not say, "I think that I shall go to another place, I 
cannot grow here," but it does the best it can wherever 
it happens to be. 

The lilies of Palestine to which our Lord referred 
were evidently not the kind of flowers that we generally 
term lilies, but were apparently of some other plant 
family, and a very numerous species, we should judge, 

R5991 : page 342 

growing everywhere. Those who are accustomed to the 
flowers of Palestine point to a common reddish flower 
which they think was meant by "the lilies of the field." 

Our lesson, then, as New Creatures, is that since we 
have given our hearts to the Lord we are not to be worried, 
anxious, about the things of the present life. Nor 
are we to be over-anxious regarding our spiritual growth. 
We are simply to do our best, and trust the growing to 
Him. But we are to be particularly engaged respecting 
the things God has promised us as New Creatures in 
Christ, that we may make our calling and election sure 
and attain to the glories which our Father has in reservation 
for those who love Him. If we give our attention 
to these things, the Master assures us, the Heavenly 
Father will so supervise our affairs that we shall not 
lack any necessity of a spiritual kind or of an earthly kind. 
He will give us whatever of spiritual blessings and of 
temporal blessings we need as spirit-begotten children of 
God that we may finish our course with joy. 

We are not to interpret our Lord's words to mean 



that we are to neglect our proper duties in life; that He 

would not have us do any more spinning or toiling than 

the lilies do; that He would not have us labor with our 

hands and our brains in order to care for our family, 

home, etc. Surely not! for these things are inculcated 

in the Word of God. Here, evidently. He is merely impressing 

us with the thought that while we are doing 

to the very best of our ability in harmony with the surroundings 

and conditions which God has provided for 

us, we are not to be worried. We are to be as free from 

anxious care as are the lilies, to be fully content and to 

look up in faith to our Heavenly Father, expecting and 

accepting His providential care and overruling in all our 

affairs and interests. 

"Just leave all with Him; lilies do, and they grow; 

They grow in the rain and they grow in the snow. 
Yes, they grow. 

They grow in the darkness, all hid in the night, 

Or if in the sunshine, revealed by the light. 
Still they grow. 

They ask not your planting; they need not your care 
As they grow; 

Dropped down in the valley, the field, anywhere. 

There they grow- 
In garments of beauty, arrayed in pure white. 

All radiant in glory from heaven's own light- 
Sweetly grow." 

REST AND PEACE IN PERFECT TRUST 

God knows all about our circumstances. If we need 
to be transplanted to another place, into a different kind 
or soil, where our new nature can better thrive and expand, 
or where our reasonable, temporal needs can be 
better obtained. He can arrange for it. He knows just 
what is good for us, best for us, temporally and spiritually. 
It is our part to look for His leadings, not attempting to 
take the helm into our own hands, nor concluding that 
the Lord will never change our conditions, etc. If it is 
best for us that they shall be changed. He will change 
them, if we trust in Him; and surely, if we are His children, 
it is His will that we desire, not our own! We are 
to be perfectly restful under whatever conditions or circumstances 
we find ourselves, restful in the thought, "Your 
Father knoweth what things ye have need of before ye 
ask Him."— Matthew 6:8. 

Will this not mean sometimes strong tests of faith 
and endurance, if the conditions of our lot are painful 
and hard to bear? It may be such; but if the Lord's 
providence does not for a time offer a way of escape, we 
may be sure that the test will prove one of the "all things" 
that will work out our good, if we submit sweetly to His 
will and wait for Him to point out a different way, if it 
shall seem best to Him. Let us as lilies of His planting, 
bloom for the glory of our Heavenly Husbandman. 



ASKING FOR DAILY NEEDS 

While Jesus tells us that we should ask, "Give us this 
day our daily bread," this is not a specification of what 
we would prefer to have in a temporal way. We are not 
to specify things that would be most pleasing to our 
palate. We are to leave that part to Him. We are merely 
to acknowledge that we are dependent upon Him for the 
necessities of life, that we are looking to Him, that we 
are waiting on His providence and will accept those 
things which His Wisdom provides as proper for us in 
connection with the instructions of His Word. 

So on we go, growing daily, happy and content in God, 
and preparing for the Kingdom; for Christians who cannot 
learn now, under present conditions, to trust in God, 
would probably not be able to learn this lesson under 
other conditions. Present conditions are especially helpful, 
indeed, for those who would cultivate trust, dependence 
upon the Lord. In this respect we see that the poor 
have an advantage over the rich; and it was those who 
were poor, like the lilies of the field, that our Lord Jesus 
was addressing in the words of our text. And it is to 
those who are poor in spirit, who realize their own impotency, 
who long for the rest and peace that Jesus alone 
can give, who come to Him for this rest, that all the 
Master's gracious promises and lessons of wisdom, comfort 
and instruction are given. 

"O flower of Heavenly birth, blooming in earthly soil. 
Taking on fairest hues from sun and wind and rain. 

Soon shall thy beauty grace the Heavenly realms Above, 
Transplanted to a fairer clime to bud and bloom again!" 



"HOW LONG, OH LORD, HOW LONG?" 

How long, oh Lord, how long 
Shall weakness serve the strong? 
How long shall Might make Right, 
And darkness hate the light? 

How long, oh Lord, how long. 
Till Truth shall crush the wrong. 
Till darkness turn to day. 
And sorrow flee away? 

How long till wars shall cease. 
This turmoil end in peace? 
How long the sin-cursed Earth 
Await her second birth? 

How long. Lord, must I feel 
The proud oppressor's heel? 
I'm weary of the night. 



I long for morning light! 

I long to see Thy face, 
I long for Thine embrace- 
How long. Lord, till I come 
To my long-promised home? 



Not long, my child, not long; 
Be brave, be true, be strong! 
The Day-star doth appear. 
The Kingdom draweth near! 

Look up, my child, look up, 
The last drop's in thy Cup! 
Trust where thou canst not see— 
I soon will call for thee! 

GERTRUDE W. SEIBERT. 



R5991 : page 343 

"JESUS CHRIST-THE FIRST AND THE LAST" 
-DECEMBER 3.-REVELATION 1:1-8,17-20.- 

THE MESSAGE OF THE RISEN CHRIST-THE APOSTLE JOHN 

REPRESENTATIVE OF THE FEET-MEMBERS OF THE BODY OF 
CHRIST-IN A TRANCE HE SAW A SERIES OF VISIONS 

OF THE LEADING EVENTS OF THE GOSPEL AGE, THE SEVEN 
STAGES OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE GOSPEL CHURCH 
AND THE SETTING UP OF THE MESSIANIC KINGDOM-A 

SYMBOLICAL PICTURE OF OUR GLORIFIED LORD-THE WORD 
LIKENED TO A TWO-EDGED SWORD. 

"Fear not; I am the First and the Last, and the Living 
One; and I was dead, and behold, I am alive for 
evermore."— Verses 17, 18. R.V. 

VISIONS are not realities, although symbolically 
representing them. This is true, whether 
the visions come as Daniel the Prophet describes 
his or whether they come in broad 
daylight, as did the transfiguration scene, 
which our Lord declared was a vision. 
(Daniel 7:1; Matthew 17:9.) The visions 
granted to St. John, recorded in the Revelation, 
are in no sense to be understood as 
realities; and this is the significance of his 
statement, "I was in the spirit on the Lord's day." 

Note the simplicity of the introduction to this most 
wonderful Book. The Apostle did not write the title as it 
appears in our Bibles— "The Revelation of St. John the 
Divine." On the contrary, he claims no credit for the 



revelation; for it was not his. As he distinctly explains, 
it was from our Lord Jesus Christ, and to Him from God 
the Father. Nor was it even to St. John in any special 
sense; but, as he again declares, unto God's servants, sent 
by His "servant John." This simplicity, common to all 
the Apostles, commends them to us as men of humble 
mind— the very kind we should expect our Lord to use as 
special messengers to His people. This simplicity, this 
absence of boastfulness, so noticeable in the writings of 
all the Apostles, marks them as being in the ministry, not 
for the gratification of vanity, or for earthly rewards of 
any kind, but simply as the servants of God, who delighted 
to do His will, and to tell the Good Tidings, to 
the utter ignoring of themselves, except in so far as mention 
of themselves and their affairs might be necessary. 
St. John was instructed to write, to make clear, to 
God's people the things already brought to his attention, 
and other things subsequently to be thus brought, to the 
intent that God's people might be enabled to comprehend 
with all saints the lengths, the breadths, the heights and 
depths of the Love of God, which passeth understanding, 
and which can be received only through revelation from 
God. And here let us note the force of the Apostle's 
statement (Verse 3) to the effect that there is a blessing 
upon those who read this revelation, even though they do 
not understand, and a special blessing upon those who 
hear and understand the words of this prophecy, and who 
conform their lives to the things therein written. 

THE RISEN CHRIST'S MESSAGE 

At the time of this vision St. John was a prisoner, 
exiled to the Isle of Patmos, a penal colony of those days 
—a rocky, barren island in the Aegean Sea. The crime 
for which he suffered this banishment was his faithfulness 
as the Lord's mouthpiece. At the time he must have been 
about ninety years of age— supposing that none of our 
Lord's disciples were younger than Himself at the beginning 
of His ministry. 

St. John, the beloved disciple, in some measure or 
degree represented the last living members of the Body 
of Christ. Doubtless this was the meaning of our Lord's 
statement, "If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that 
to thee?" (John 21:20-23.) St. John did not tarry; but a 
class whom in some respects he illustrated are represented 
as tarrying— a class that see with the eyes of their understanding 
the visions and revelations which the beloved disciple 
saw in symbols in a trance. 

If, then, St. John's exile in any degree represents 
ostracism which the Lord's followers may expect in the 
close of this Age— a complete isolation from others and a 
treatment implying that they are prisoners— they may take 
comfort from the thought that as our Lord's favor and 
revelation to St. John more than offset his persecutions, 
so the opening of our eyes of understanding and the 
granting to us of greater knowledge and appreciation of 



our Lord and of the Divine Plan will far more than offset 
the various experiences which in His providence God 
may permit to come upon us. His assurance is that 
all things shall work together for good to those who love 
God. Whoever rests his faith securely upon the Divine 
promise may indeed with the Apostle Paul count all things 
else as loss and dross for the excellency of the knowledge 
of Christ Jesus our Lord.— Philippians 3:8. 

Presumably the Apostle had this vision on the first day 
of the week, now generally called Sunday. To Christians 
it is peculiarly the Lord's day— the day on which our 
Savior rose from the dead, and on which all the promises 
of God's Word received life and our hopes through 
Christ were quickened. We may see in the expression 
also a reference to the Millennial Age, called frequently in 
Scripture "The Day of the Lord." According to our understanding 
of Bible chronology we today are living in the 
early dawn of this Day of Christ; and it is here, properly 
enough, that we begin to see the wonderful things of the 
Divine Character and Plan. But to see and to understand 
we must be "in the spirit." Only those who have 
become New Creatures in Christ can be expected to appreciate 
spiritual things; and this is the class which the 
Apostle John represented. 

There are many reasons for concluding that while the 
messages were given to the seven churches specified, and 
were applicable to them, nevertheless these messages 
should properly have a still wider application to the whole 
Church of Christ, the number seven representing completeness 
and the order representing different epochs in the 
history of the Church. Thus the Church at Ephesus 
would represent the condition of the Church at the time 
of the writing of the messages; while the Laodicean 
Church would represent the Church in our day— in the 
end of the Gospel Age. The other churches would correspondingly 
represent different epochs intermediate, between 
then and now. 

To think otherwise would be to attach too much importance 
to these seven comparatively small churches of 
Asia Minor, and would have implied an ignoring of other 
churches more influential than they; for instance, the 
churches at Jerusalem, Antioch, Corinth, etc. Furthermore, 
the details of the messages given these churches fit 
historically the one Church of the Living God, over 
every member of which our Lord has a care. This 
thought that the number seven signifies completeness we 
find emphasized in other symbolical representations— seven 
spirits, seven golden candlesticks, seven stars, etc. 

"THE FIRST-BORN OF THEM THAT SLEPT" 

Verse 5 clearly teaches what the creeds of Christendom 
ignore, and what is in direct antagonism to their statements; 
namely, that the risen Christ was "the first 
born of the dead." That is to say, our Lord was the 
first to experience a resurrection in the full sense of the 



word, the first to experience a resurrection to perfection 

R5991 : page 344 

and eternal life. Although some before Him were temporally 

awakened, they relapsed again into death; for 

they were only partial illustrations of resurrection, to assure 

men of the Divine Power to accomplish it fully in 

the due time appointed of God. 

Verse 7 clearly teaches that at the time of our Lord's 
Second Advent the world will be far from converted to 
God; for "all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of 
Him." Some Scriptures taken disconnectedly seem to 
teach that the world will be converted before His return; 
but when God's Word and Plan are viewed as a whole, 
these will be found to favor the opposite view— that 
Christ comes before the conversion of the world and for 
the very purpose of converting all mankind; and that the 
glorified Church of the Gospel Age shall share with her 
Lord and Head in His Reign, which is God's appointed 
means of blessing the world. 

Christ and the glorified Church, made "partakers of the 
Divine nature," will be spirit beings, invisible to men. 
Our Lord's presence will be manifested to the world by 
exhibitions of power and great glory. He will not be 
visible to natural sight, but to the eyes of understanding, 
as these shall open to an appreciation of the great changes 
which earth's new Ruler shall effect. His presence and 
His righteous authority will be recognized in both the 
punishments and the blessings which will flow to mankind 
from His Reign. 

Our King will reveal Himself gradually. Some will 
discern the new Ruler sooner than will others. But ultimately 
"every eye shall see [Greek, horao, discern] Him." 
But "He cometh with clouds." And while the clouds of 
trouble hang heavy and dark, when the mountains— kingdoms 
of this world— are trembling and falling, when the 
earth— organized society— is being shaken and disintegrated, 
some will begin to realize that Jehovah's Anointed 
is taking to Himself His great power and is beginning 
His work of laying justice to the line and righteousness 
to the plummet. For He must reign until He shall have 
put down all authority and laws on earth which are contrary 
to those controlling in Heaven. 

WHAT THE BELOVED DISCIPLE SAW 

St. John's attention was first attracted by a trumpet-like 
voice of Christ from behind him. The fact that its 
location is mentioned implies that it has a symbolic meaning. 
It signifies that the beginning of this Message was 
not in St. John's day, nor in the future, but that the 
things revealed had already commenced and were already 
to some extent in the past. As some features of the 
Revelation show, the voice from behind went back to the 
time of our Lord's earthly ministry. 



Turning and looking, the Apostle saw in symbol what 
the Lord's people may now see with the eye of faith and 
understanding. He saw One like a son of man— like a 
man, like a priest, as implied by the clothes described- 
walking amongst seven golden candlesticks, caring for 
them, trimming the wicks, seeing to the supply of oil, etc. 
Thus our Lord Jesus, our glorified Master, although absent 
from us, has protected the interests of His Cause 
throughout the past eighteen centuries, and has directed 
respecting His people's affairs, especially inspecting and 
caring for the Church as a light-bearer, a candlestick. 
Alas, how poor the wicks have sometimes been! How 
feeble the light that has sometimes shone out into the 
darkness of this world! How much trimming has been 
necessary, and how much more may yet be required! 

In the Tabernacle, and subsequently in Solomon's 
Temple, the Golden Candlestick was placed by the Lord's 
direction— not seven candlesticks, but one with seven 
branches, representing the whole Church during this 
Gospel Age. In the Revelation the same candlestick, or 
Iampstand, is brought to our attention; but the parts are 
separated— the union, the relationship between them, being 
supplied by our Redeemer, the antitypical High 
Priest. The Iampstand symbolized the Lord's nominal 
people of this Gospel Age, including the members of His 
mystical Body. It holds forth the light of life, which 
shines in the darkness and which He directed should be 
let so shine that men might see our good works and 
glorify our Father in Heaven.— Matthew 5:16. 

Alas! The Master evidently found but few good 
works, found but little glorifying light shining out from 
His earthly representatives in many of the seven epochs 
of the history of the Church. This fact is indicated by 
His messages, chidings, encouragements, etc., given to 
each of these epoch-churches represented by the different 
candlesticks, or lampstands. It is to be noted that the 
candlestick, or Iampstand, represents the nominal Church 
of Christ, rather than the true Church. This is shown by 
the fact that in addressing each of these churches the 
Lord finds fault with the many and approves the faithful 
few, especially so in the last, the seventh, the Laodicean 
Church of our day. 

THE APPEARANCE OF CHRIST 

We are not to regard the word picture of Verses 13-16 
as a portrait of our Lord in glory; for it is merely symbolical. 
When we shall see Him in glory He will not look 
as here described. Nevertheless this symbolical picture 
has precious lessons for us, more valuable than an attempt 
to describe to our minds the appearance of our 
Lord as a Spirit Being, "dwelling in light which no man 
can approach unto," and which we cannot appreciate until 
we shall be changed to "be like Him and to see Him as 
He is."— 1 John 3:2; 1 Cor. 15:50-53. 

His head and His hair as white as wool and snow tell 



us of His wisdom. His splendor and His glory. His eyes 
like a flame of fire tell us in symbol that our Master is 
all-seeing, omniscient; that He is not deceived by outward 
forms and ceremonies; but that He can, and does, read 
every thought and intent of the heart. The contemplation 
of His glance should of itself purge and purify our hearts 
to the extent of our ability, to put far from us everything 
which would have His disapproval. 

Having described the head, St. John mentions the 
hands and the feet. The remainder of the body was 
covered with a garment reaching from the head to the 
feet. This may possibly represent the fact that the glory 
of Christ was manifested in His own person, in His own 
ministry, and in that of His Twelve Apostles, His representatives 
—St. Paul taking the place of Judas; and that 
with their death the body of Truth was almost veiled 
throughout the eighteen centuries intervening, until now, 
in the end of the Age, the Feet members of the Body of 
Christ will be illuminated by the Truth and will shine 
forth— not like the Head, but as polished brass. 

THE MASTER'S COMFORTING MESSAGE 

When we think of the great advantage which we of 
the present day possess, we are inclined to say, "What 
manner of persons ought we to be in all holiness of living 
and God-likeness!" We have shining upon us with almost 
burning brightness the focused rays of Divine inspiration 
and revelation from the past 6,000 years. How it should 
consume in us all the dross of selfishness! How it should 
purify us! How humble it should make us! Even in our 
flesh we should be polished, bright, luminous representatives 
of our glorious Lord and Head. 

The countenance of the majestic One present amongst 

R5991 : page 345 

the candlesticks is said to be like lightning. So great was 
the splendor that St. John fell as dead when he beheld it, 
just as Daniel did in the presence of the mighty One 
whom he saw, and just as Saul of Tarsus did before the 
majesty presented to him. (Daniel 10:4-1 1; Acts 9:3-9.) 
So it is symbolically with the Christian, when once he gets 
a glimpse of the glories of the Divine character. When 
once we get a true view of Him with whom we have to do, 
as the great Heart-searcher and Caretaker of His Church, 
we fall before Him, humbled to the dust, realizing that 
we are imperfect, that we cannot stand before our Master, 
that we are unworthy of His favor and blessing. 

But as our Lord touched St. John gently, raising him 
up, so He has spoken to us comfort, peace and love, assuring 
us that we have a High Priest that can be touched 
with a feeling of our infirmities. One who is able to sympathize 
and mercifully to assist. One who has bought us 
with His own precious blood, and who has accepted us and 
will number us as His Body members as long as we abide 



in Him, seeking in our hearts to know and to do His will. 
To us His comforting assurance is: 

(1) "Fear not." The same message the Father has 
sent us through the Prophet, saying, "Their fear of Me is 

not of Me, but is taught by the precepts of men." (Isaiah 29: 13.) 

This is one of the first lessons which we must 

learn. We cannot come into close sympathy with our Lord 

and be taught of Him respecting other features of His 

Plan until we learn to fear not, learn to have confidence 

in Him as the One "who loved us and bought us with 

His own precious blood," and whose purposes toward us 

continually are for our welfare and, if we submit ourselves 

to His guidance, will bring us off conquerors and more 

than conquerors. 

(2) "I am the First and the Last." We must recognize 
that our Lord is the One who was the beginning of 

the creation of God and the end of it, the One by whom 

are all things, the One who is next to the Father, His 

very Representative in everything pertaining to the affairs 

of the Universe. (Colossians 1:15; Revelation 3:14; John 1:1-3; 

1 Corinthians 8:6.) (3) We must recognize Him 

as the One who was dead, the One who really died for our 

sins, but who was as really raised out of death by the 

Father. (4) We must realize that He is alive for evermore, 

that death has no more dominion over Him, that 

the work is finished, that neither sacrifices of the Mass nor 

death in any sense or form ever will be needed. His work 

is perfect; and, as He cried on the Cross, "It is finished!" 

(5) We must recognize that He has the keys, the 
authority, the power over the tomb, to deliver from it all 
who are therein imprisoned. We must also realize that 
He has the key, the power over death, in order that those 
whom He liberates from the prison-house of death, like 
those who have not yet gone into the tomb, but who are 
under the death sentence, may all be ultimately delivered, 
set free from the dominion of Sin and Death, delivered 
into the full liberty of the Sons of God— righteousness 
and life everlasting.— Romans 8:21. 

"IN HIS RIGHT HAND SEVEN STARS" 

This One whom we thus know, thus recognize, as the 
Instructor and Caretaker of the candlesticks, we are also 
to recognize as having in His right hand— in His favor as 
well as His power— seven stars, the angels, the messengers, 
of the seven Churches. Apparently the stars represent 
special ministers, or servants of the Church. In 
Revelation 12:1 the Church is pictured as a Woman 
crowned with twelve stars. These stars evidently represent 
the Twelve Apostles as the special lights of the 
Church. Similarly, in the picture before us, the seven 
stars which the Lord holds in His right hand seem to represent 
special light-bearers in the Church— in each of its 
seven phases or stages of development. That they are in 
His right hand seems to teach us that these should be considered 
as in some special sense under the Master's 



guidance, protection and care in the interest of the 
Churches which they represented. 

It will be noticed that the messages to the various 
Churches are addressed to these stars, messengers, angels, 
as though our Lord would have us understand that the appropriate 
message for each appropriate epoch in the 
Church's experience would be sent by the Lord through a 
particular star, or messenger, whom He would especially 
commission as His representative. Our Lord Himself is 
represented by the great light of the sun; and His special 
messengers in the Church throughout the entire period of 
the Gospel Age are consistently enough represented as stars. 

The difference between the symbols of the star and the 
candlestick is manifest. The star light is the Heavenly 
light, the spiritual enlightenment or instruction. The lamp 
light is the earthly light, representing good works, obedience, 
etc., of those who nominally constitute the Lord's 
Church in the world, and who are exhorted not to put 
their light under a bushel, but upon a candlestick, and to 
let it so shine that it will glorify their Father in Heaven. 

No part of the description could more thoroughly convince 
us that the description of our Lord given here is a 
symbolic one than does the statement that out of His 
mouth proceeded a two-edged sword. As a symbolic picture, 
however, it is full of meaning, speaking to us of the 
Word of the Lord, the Sword of the Spirit, "sharper than 
any two-edged sword." (Ephesians 6:17; Hebrews 4:12.) 
It reminds us that our Lord's words are not one-sided, 
not directed merely against sin in one class, but that His 
word is sharp, cutting in every direction, that sin is reproved 
by Him as much when found in His most earnest 
followers as when found elsewhere. It assures us that 
none need attempt to pluck out the mote from his brother's 
eye without first getting rid of the beam in his own eye; 
and that if we do not show mercy to those who are our 
debtors we must not expect mercy from Him who has 
proposed to extend His mercy toward us. 

How heart-searching is God's Word when we understand 
it— not merely as a compendium of rules and regulations, 
but when we catch the spirit of it! Then we come 
to see that its requirement is love out of a pure heart; 
first, to the Heavenly Father; secondly, to our Lord and 
Head; thirdly, to all His brethren; fourthly, to the world 
in general, groaning and travailing in pain, waiting for 
the blessings of the coming Day of Christ; and fifthly, 
toward our enemies also, sympathetically realizing that 
they are warped, twisted and blinded through the deceitfulness 
of sin and through the machinations of the great 
Adversary.— 2 Corinthians 4:4. 



"Blessed Bible, precious Word! 
Boon most sacred from the Lord; 
Glory to His name be given. 
For this choicest gift from Heaven. 



"Tis a ray of purest light. 
Beaming through the depths of night; 
Brighter than ten thousand gems 
Of the costliest diadems. 

"Tis a fountain, pouring forth. 
Streams of life to gladden earth. 
Whence eternal blessings flow- 
Antidote for human woe. 

"Tis a mine, aye, deeper, too, 
Than can mortal ever go; 
Search we may for many years. 
Still some new, rich gem appears." 



R5992 : page 346 

"FAITHFUL UNTO DEATH" 

-DECEMBER 10.-REVELATION 2:1-17.- 

THE REVELATION A BOOK OF SYMBOLS-SEVEN SUCCESSIVE STAGES 
IN THE HISTORY OF THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH SYMBOLIZED 

BY "THE SEVEN CHURCHES WHICH ARE IN ASIA" 
-THE NAMES OF THE CHURCHES CHARACTERISTIC-THE 
GREAT FALLING AWAY-THE TRUE CHURCH CALLED 
"OVERCOMERS"-THE LORD'S RETURN DURING THE LAODICEAN 
PERIOD OF CHURCH HISTORY. 

"Be thou faithful unto death, and I will 
give thee the Crown of Life."— Verse 10. 

WHILE the messages given to the seven 

churches specified in the Revelation were 

doubtless applicable to them, they properly 

have a still wider application to the entire 

Gospel Church, the number seven representing 

completeness. The Book of Revelation 

is a book of symbols, which our Lord "sent 

and signified [told it in signs and symbols] 

by His angel unto His servant John." 

(Revelation 1:1.) Bible students know that 

the book abounds in symbols, or signs; and we are satisfied 

that these are the rule, and that the literal is the exception, 

being used only when unavoidable. 

To be in harmony, then, with the rest of the book, 
"the seven churches which are in Asia" must be symbolic; 
and as the book is chiefly history written beforehand, 
they must symbolize seven successive stages in the history 
of the Christian Church, covering the period between the 
First Advent and the Second Coming of Christ. The fulfilment, 
we think, proves the correctness of this position. 

In the first chapter we have a description of "One like 



unto a son of man," as seen in vision by the Apostle John. 
Some one or more of the features of this description 
would seem to be peculiarly appropriate to each of the 
successive stages of the Church; and in each case He 
who sends the message is thus described. The last part 
of each message is a promise to the "overcomers," and is 
also adapted to the different periods of Church history. 

To give a bird's-eye view of the arrangement, we would 
notice their chronological position. Ephesus covers the 
period during the lives of the Apostles; Smyrna, the time 
of the Pagan persecution, reaching to about 325 A.D., 
when Constantine became Emperor of Rome and declared 
in favor of Christianity. Pergamos embraces the transition 
period during which the Papacy had its rise; 
Thyatira, the space during which the true Church was in 
the wilderness, and the Apostate Church sat as a queen 
and lived deliciously with the kings of the earth. Sardis 
includes a short interval just before the Reformation; 
Philadelphia, the period from the Reformation until recent 
times; and Laodicea, the nominal Church of today. 

MESSAGE TO THE CHURCH OF EPHESUS 

The word Ephesus means first, desirable. During this 
period our Lord "holdeth the seven stars in His right 
hand," etc. (Chapter 1:20.) The messengers of the 
Churches— St. Paul, St. Peter, St. John, etc.— were so 
powerfully led and kept in the grasp of our Lord Jesus 
during this epoch that we accept their teachings as His, 
believing that their words were really His words. This 
stage of the Church is commended for its faithful, patient 
labor and for its discernment of Truth and true teachers. 
-Acts 20:28-30; 1 Cor. 11:19. 

It was characteristic of this period that "they forsook 
all and followed Him." They took joyfully the spoiling of 
their goods. They sold what they had and gave to those 
in want. Though often deprived of the bread of this 
present life, they not only had the Living Bread, but had 
the promise of "the tree of life which is in the midst of 
the Paradise of God." It will be remembered that all the 
trees in Eden were trees of life, but that the one in the 
midst of the Garden was then a forbidden tree, the disobedient 
eating of which brought death upon Adam and 
all his race. That tree in the midst of Paradise was 
called "the tree of the knowledge of good and evil"; and 
our Lord's promise in today's Study is that the overcomers 
of the Gospel Age shall have full liberty to paitake 
of that tree under most blessed and satisfactory conditions, 
when the knowledge will be of benefit to them 
under Divine approval, and will not then bring a curse. 

TO THE CHURCH OF SMYRNA 

Smyrna means bitter. Myrrh and Marah are kindred 
words. This stage of the Christian Church was the period 
of most bitter persecution, under the Roman Emperors 



from Nero to Diocletian. In His message to the Church 
of this epoch our Lord styles Himself "the First and the 
Last, which was dead and is alive." In no other sense or 
way could He be the First and the Last than as the only 
direct creation of the Father, through whom all else was 
created. Any other view would be in conflict with the 
Scriptures.— Revelation 3:14; Colossians 1:15; 1 Corinthians 8:6; 
John 1:1-3, Diaglott. 

"The Devil shall cast some of you into prison that ye 
may be tried, and ye shall have tribulation ten days." 
Thus the Lord informed His faithful servants of this 
period that theirs would be a time of great persecution. 
Pagan Rome, here symbolized as the Devil, has been the 
most devilish of all earthly governments, when viewed in 
the light of its bloody persecutions. The ten symbolic days 
refer to the last and most severe persecution under the 
Roman Emperors— that of the reign of Diocletian, A.D. 
303-3 13. Those who have read the history of this period 
can understand the depths of the words, "that ye may be 
tried." Some of the most sublime pictures of Christian 
endurance that the world has ever seen were enacted during 
the Smyrna period of the Church. The call was for 
faithfulness unto death; the promise was that the overcomers 
should "not be hurt of the Second Death," but 
should receive the Crown of Life— immortality. 

TO THE CHURCH OF PERGAMOS 

Pergamos means an earthly elevation. The Speaker is 
"He who hath the sharp Sword with two edges" [Greek, 
two-mouthed]— the Word of God. During this period, 
while the nominal Church was growing popular, the true 
Christians were tested and proved by the introduction and 
development of Pagan and Papal ideas. The Pagan 

R5993 : page 346 

priests, unwilling to lose their positions of honor and influence 

amongst the people, sought to bend their ideas to 

fit the new religion. Thus while nominally professing 

Christianity, they brought many of their former ideas 

with them into the Christian Church. These were eventually 

grafted upon the true stock— "the faith once delivered 

to the saints."— Jude 3. 

Thus gradually the Church was led into error, evil 
practises, and away from God. This is what is meant in 
Verse 14 by the allusion to Balaam and Balak. It will be 
remembered that Balaam, who had been a prophet of God, 
instructed King Balak how to tempt Israel to sin, and thus 
brought about what he could not accomplish by his own 
powers. (Numbers 23; 24; 31:16.) So these Pagan 
priests taught the Church to indulge in spiritual fornication, 
and thus brought upon her the withering blight of 
the wrath of God. 

The "doctrine of the Nicolaitans" seems to be the 
theory of lordship or headship in the Church. The strife 



as to who should be greatest existed amongst many of the 
patriarchs— fathers— of the prominent churches. At their 
councils there was a bitter fight for supremacy. The 

R5993 : page 347 

tendency was toward an earthly head, and of course many 
coveted the honor. The patriarchs of Jerusalem, Antioch, 
Constantinople and Rome were the most prominent. The 
first two dropped out of the conflict, but the strife continued 
for several hundred years between Constantinople 
and Rome. It was settled only by a division of the 
Church: the Eastern, or Greek Church, accepting the 
Patriarch of Constantinople for its head; and the Western, 
or Papal Church, acknowledging the Bishop— Pope 
or Father— of Rome. 

Many of the true followers of the Master in the 
churches denounced this attempt to disobey the direct command 
of Jesus, "Call no man father." (Matthew 23:9.) 

Of course, they received the promised persecution. (2 Timothy 1:12.) 
This class in Pergamos is commended by 
our Lord under the symbol of "Anti-pas, My faithful 
martyr." In the Greek, anti means against, and Papas 
signifies father. In this stage of the development of the 
Church those who sought to be popular received the emoluments 
of the Church; but the promise to the overcomers 
is that of pleasure and honor that shall be eternal. 

THE CHURCH OF THYATIRA 

Thyatira seems to mean "the sweet perfume of sacrifice." 
It was the period of Papal persecution. The virgin 
Church was enduring the hardships of the wilderness; 
while the apostate Church sat on the throne of her royal 
paramour. The message is sent by Him "who hath eyes 
like a flame of fire," to watch over His faithful ones as 
they wandered through the dark valleys or hid in the 
darker caves of earth; and "feet of hard brass," to walk 
by their side as they scaled the rugged mountains or 
wandered footsore and weary, seeking a place to plant 
the seeds of Truth. 

The message contains an allusion to a faithful old 
Prophet who fled for his life into the wilderness from 
the wrath of the idolatrous wife of a king. The picture is 
from the history of the Prophet Elijah. (1 Kings 18; 19.) 
Jezebel was the protector of the priests of Baal. Her 
husband was king, and she wielded his power for her 
own ends. The drouth of three and one-half years was 
evidently a type of the "time, times and a half"— 1260 
years— of the spiritual famine, "not of bread nor of 
water, but of hearing the words of the Lord."— Amos 8:11. 

THE LORD'S SECOND COMING 

Sardis is said to mean that which remains, as if it signified 
a useless remnant, something out of which life or 



virtue had gone. The nominal Church during this period 
had the appearance of being what it was not, having a 
form of godliness without its power. Sardis was the remains 
of the true Church, which had been driven into the 
wilderness; but when the persecution began to subside, 
her zeal also abated. Persecution has always developed 
the vigor of the Church. 

Many today have the Sardis characteristics. To such 
there is a fatal warning in Revelation 3:3. Seven times 
our Lord's Second Coming is described as being thief-like, 
stealthy. Only to those who are watching is the approach 
of a thief known. Those who are asleep will be awakened 
only after he has taken full possession, after his work of 
destruction has progressed. Although they may then 
arouse themselves, it is too late. They have been overtaken. 
Thus our Lord will be present, but invisible and 
unknown— except to the watchers— for some years after 
His arrival; and His presence will be recognized by the 
sleepers only as the noise of spoiling the Strong Man's 
House gradually increases. Then slowly will they realize 
what it is and what the outcome will be. 

The reason why many professing Christians cannot 
recognize our Lord's Parousia— presence— is that they are 
looking for a fleshly Christ, visible to the fleshly eye, and 
making an imposing demonstration which they cannot mistake. 
Failing to realize the fact that spiritual bodies cannot 
be seen by human eyes without a miracle, they cannot 
understand how He can be present while "all things continue 
as they were since the beginning of creation." (2 Peter 3:3,4.) 
Thus they are unable to understand "the 
signs of the times," revealing His return. 

THE CHURCH IN PHILADELPHIA 

Philadelphia means brotherly love, as is well known. 
This stage of the Church's history evidently began at the 
Reformation; and there are many still living who possess 
the characteristics described. 

There is considerable similarity between the work begun 
on Pentecost and that of Luther and his friends. The 
Reformation was, in a sense, the beginning of a new era, 
a dawning of light where all had been darkness, the 
separation of the true from the false, and a new start in 
the way of Truth. No doubt all the powers of Satan 
were exerted to close the door then opened; but "He that 
is true" had said, "which no man can shut." Compared 
with the mighty hosts of their enemies, the little band of 
Reformers had but "a little strength"; but they knew that 
they had the Truth, and they fully trusted the Giver. 
Thus the Master could say, "Thou hast kept My Word, 
and hast not denied My name." 

During the Philadelphian period, especially during the 
first and the last phases of it, the faithful have either been 
obliged to come out of the nominal temple or have been 
cast out for their straight testimony. The reward promised 
them is that they will be, not simply an unimportant part. 



but a vital one— a pillar in the true and eternal Temple— a 
part which cannot be removed while the structure exists. 
During their trial state their names were cast out as evil. 
They were branded as infidels and heretics. They were 
not recognized as children of God, as citizens of the 
Heavenly Country, as Christians. All this is to be reversed. 
"The Lord knoweth them that are His," and in 
due time will fully and eternally acknowledge them. 

THE NOMINAL CHURCH OF TODAY 

Laodicea is interpreted to mean a tried, or judged 
people. The description shows us that they were tried 
and found wanting. If we understand Christ's meaning 
in this message, it is sent particularly to those who profess 
His name, but deny the Truth which He Himself here 
presents. Let those who read this special message do so 
with special care. 

"The Beginning of the creation of God." "What think 
ye of Christ? Whose Son is He?" (Matthew 22:42.) 
This question has had many answers. More Bible and 
less hymn-book theology would have made the subject 
clearer to all. The doctrine of the trinity is totally opposed 
to Scripture, and has not even one reasonable text 
to support it when the well-known interpolation of 1 John 5:7 
is discarded and when John 1 : 1 is properly understood. 
We suggest that any reader who does not see this 
subject clearly should read carefully and prayerfully 
the 17th chapter of St. John's Gospel. 

The Message to the Laodicean stage of the Church 
pictures the nominal Church of today as our Lord sees 
her. In one sense she is not cold. She has much zeal, but 
not according to knowledge. She has organized her 
armies, developed her machinery and multiplied her 
stores; but yet the enemy does not fall before her. She 
claims that her principal object is to convert sinners, to 
bring forth spiritual children. The Prophet puts these 
words into the mouth of nominal Christians when they 

R5993 : page 348 

awake to a knowledge of the situation: "We have been 
with child, we have been in pain, we have as it were 
brought forth wind; we have not wrought any deliverance 
in the earth; neither have the inhabitants of the earth 
fallen." (Isaiah 26: 16-18.) This is said after they have 
realized the presence of the Lord. 

We should not look for light where little remains but 
the fading reflections of a former glory. The sickly hue 
which now appears is only the smoke illuminated by the 
piercing rays from the Hand which, high upon the wall, is 
writing, "MENE, MENE, TEKEL, UPHARSIN." (Daniel 5:25-28.) 
Unknown to the Laodicean Church, our Lord has 
returned. He has stood at the door and knocked. Had 
they been awake, they would have heard. Our Lord 
clearly foretold that He would come as a thief; but He 



did not tell at what hour. 

While the nominal church is still seemingly in power, 
while the old glory still hangs about her, while it is still 
respectable and honorable to be a church member, the 
Little Flock of Truth-seekers are despised and rejected. 
They are covered with reproach because they dare to point 
out the faults of a worldly church. They are looked down 
upon by her who sits as a proud queen, lifted up in order 
that she may have the greater fall.— Revelation 18:7,21. 



R5994 : page 348 

SOME ITEMS OF INTEREST 
THE WAR OBSESSION 

"Does it not strike you that a most dangerous worldwide 
psychological condition is being created by the war 
in Europe' 1 War is too rapidly becoming a fixed and normal 
condition; men and women are becoming too easily 
adapted to that condition. 

"The people of the warring powers, not alone the 
soldiers, but the stay-at-homes, are accepting death on the 
firing line as inevitable and as good a way as any to die. 
The prayers for peace have been superseded by a grim 
determination on both sides to fight to a finish; to continue 
the war as the PERMANENT business of the nation. 
In the meantime crops are being raised almost normal, 
business is being conducted as usual, and even social functions 
are being resumed. 

"The attitude of Europe is being reflected over here. 
While still persistently declaring our principles of peace. 
war in our heart of hearts does not appear near so horrible 
to us as it did three, two, or one year ago. Are we 
not being insidiously inoculated with the war germ? 

"We may be forced into war, no matter how we 
struggle against it, but as a decent. Christian people let 
us not accept it as other than a horrible catastrophe. 
Without this country to lead in persistent efforts for 
peace a complaisant mental attitude toward war may soon 
become chronic all over the world; it is almost so in 
Europe now." —Cleveland Press. 

"WITH THE SKIN OF MY TEETH" 

-JOB 19:20.- 

The following is a partial synopsis of the description of 
the teeth-membrane or skin, in "Tomes' Dental Anatomy," 
1904, Fourth edition, London. It shows that Job and the 
learned of his day were far from being monkey-men. Until 
lately Job's words were considered a joke by dentists as 
well as others. The Bible is a wonderful book. 



"Nasmyth's Membrane" 

"Under the names of Nasmyth's Membrane, Enamel, 
Cuticle, or persistent dental capsule, a structure is described 
about which much difference of opinion has been, 
and indeed still is, expressed. Over the enamel of the 
crown of a human or other mammalian tooth, the crown 
of which is not coated with a thick layer of cementum, 
there is an exceedingly thin membrane, the existence of 
which can only be demonstrated by the use of acids, which 
cause it to become detached from the surface of the 
enamel. When thus isolated it is found to form a continuous 
transparent sheet, upon which, by staining with 
Nitrate of Silver, a reticulated pattern may be brought out 
as though it were made of Epithelial cells. It is exceedingly 
thin, Kolliker attributing it to a thickness of only one 
twenty-thousandth of an inch; but, nevertheless, it is very 
indestructible, resisting the action of strong Nitric or 
Hydrochloric Acid and only swelling slightly when boiled 
in Caustic Potash." 



page 348 

HOLIDAY REMEMBRANCERS 

WE ARE publishing early this year, as usual, a 
list of our stock suitable for Holiday Gifts. 
This will enable the friends to send their 
orders in good time to avoid the later congestion 
of the mail and express service. 

Remember that our Gifts should always in 
some measure represent us as ambassadors of 
Christ: 

"Studies in the Scriptures." India paper 
edition, fine sealskin binding, gold edges, light, 
small, beautiful, per set, $9.80 in cloth carton. 

"Studies in the Scriptures." Morocco, over 
boards, gold edges, but on paper the same as the ordinary 
cloth edition, suitable for book-shelf, $6 (1L 5s) for six 
volumes, postpaid. 

"Studies," Volume I., with Pyramid Chapter added. This 
special edition is very suitable for presentation to uninterested 
friends. Many have had their interest awakened by the reading 
of the Pyramid Chapter. A picture of the Great Pyramid 
is stamped in gilt on the front cover. We recommend this 
Volume for gift purposes. Postpaid 50c. (2s Id). 

Daily Heavenly Manna. Cloth-bound edition, prepaid, 
60c. Prices on "Studies" and Manna to Colporteurs and to 
I.B.S.A. Classes in lots of 50 or more, charges collect, will 
be one-half of the above mentioned prepaid rates. 

"Poems of Dawn." Nearly three hundred very choice 
poems topically divided, the very thing each should have near 
him for a leisure moment. The value of these as spiritual 
stimulants is inestimable. They can be appreciated by all 



Christians, though of course especially by those possessing a 
knowledge of Present Truth. Postpaid in karatol, red edges, 
50c; leather-bound, gold edges, 75c. 

"In the Garden of the Lord." This little booklet is a 
choice poem from the pen of Sister Seibert. It contains sixteen 
colored illustrations, twenty-four pages. Postpaid 6c. 
(3rd) each; per dozen 65c. (2s 8d). 

Choice Motto Cards for home embellishment and spiritual 
refreshment: 

Packet Ma— Twelve mottoes, small and medium, postpaid 
50c. 

Number Mb— Fourteen medium and small cards, $1. 

Number Mc— Thirteen large, medium and small cards, $1. 

Number Md— Four large and medium cards, $1. 

Where $5 worth of these are sent to one address the saving 
in packing and expressage would be 60c, making the price 
$4.50. Order by number only. 

Postcards. Assorted mottoes and designs, 15c. (7 l/2d) 
per doz; two dozen, 25c. (Is l/2d); 100 for $1. 

Scripture Memorizing Curds. We have two different sets 
of these— No. 1 and No. 2. Colors of the cards indicate the 
topic. For instance, purple represents royalty and the Kingdom, 
garnet represents the redeeming blood, etc. On one 
side of the cards are texts appropriate to the color. On the 
reverse side of the card is the citation of where it is found. 
These can be used personally or with a company of friends. 
The design is to commit the text to memory and its citation. 
Many have found these very useful. Fifty cards to the pack, 
25c. (Is Id) per pack, postpaid. 

Write your letters and correct P. O. address very plainly; 
also give name of nearest express office and company. 

Write your orders on a separate sheet of paper from your 
letter. If answering a letter marked File A, File R, or otherwise, 
refer to it in the opening paragraph of your letter. 

By observing these simple requests, delay will be avoided. 

page 349 

"I.B.S.A." BIBLES, BIBLE STUDY HELPS, ETC. 

First in this list we mention the several volumes of 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" SERIES 
[SEE OPPOSITE PAGE] 

We commend also, as aids, the following publications (not all our own), 
which we supply at specially low prices because of the assistance they 
lend to the study of God's Word. We mention these somewhat in the 
order in which they seem to us to be desirable aids. 

OUR SPECIAL "I.B.S.A." BIBLE 

Hereafter to distinguish our own special edition from other Bibles, 
we will refer to it as the "I.B.S.A." Bible. This Bible is becoming 
more and more indispensable to all readers as they learn how to use it. 
The translation, of course, is not at all different from that of other Bibles 
of the Common Version. We specially recommend 



it for its smallness of size, lightness of 
weight, and good-sized print, and above all for 
the helps to Bible students and teachers bound 
with it; printed on India paper; excellent 
press work. Its special feature, distinguishing 
this Bible from all others, is 

BIBLE TEACHERS' MANUAL. 
Part I. 

Biblical Comments from Genesis to Revelation 
with references to the STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES and others of our publications 
showing the page where the text is more fully 
discussed and elaborated. We can scarcely 
imagine anything more helpful than these for 
Bible study. It is so easy to turn to the 
reference and ascertain if the matter has been 
treated and where and how. It represents 
four hundred and eighty-one pages of matter. 

Part II. 
INSTRUCTORS' GUIDE TEXTS. 

This is a topical arrangement of Bible subjects 
specially convenient for those who have 
opportunity for teaching others the Divine 
Plan of the Ages. Its various Topics are arranged 
under distinct headings and the various 
texts bearing upon the subjects are collated. 
With this help a novice has at his 
command, well-furnished, "the Sword of the 
Spirit." It is in condensed form, very convenient, 
consists of eighteen pages solid matter. 

Part III. 
BEREAN TOPICAL INDEX. 

The Berean Topical Index, alphabetically 
arranged, presents a large variety of subjects 
showing references to the STUDIES IN THE 
SCRIPTURES and others of our publications 
treating the same. This feature covers 
twenty-eight pages. 

PART IV. 
DIFFICULT TEXTS EXPLAINED. 
SPURIOUS PASSAGES NOTED. 

In this, specially difficult texts are brought 
to the attention and references given showing 
where they are treated in our publications. 
Following this is a full list of various interpolations 
and spurious passages of the Scriptures 
not in the original MSS., as proved by 
the oldest Greek MSS.— fifteen pages. 



These four features, representing five hundred 
and forty-two pages, are not to be found 
in any other Bibles on earth and, in our 
opinion, they are of almost priceless value. 
One of our interested readers if he could not 
procure another would not sell his copy for 
a hundred dollars— many of them surely 
would not take thousands for it. 

All of our "I.B.S.A." Bibles contain the 
above, and some of them, the numbers of which end with a nine, contain 
additionally Bagster's Bible Study Helps, including an alphabetical index 
of proper names and Bagster's Bible Concordance and Maps— a total of 
one hundred and eighty-six pages. 

We not only supply these Bibles at cost price, but, because of the 
large quantities ordered at a time, we are enabled to secure a cost price 
which is really phenomenal. The very low prices must not lead you to 
think that these are manufactured in any slipshod manner. They are 
first class in every particular. The prices are, many of them, less than 
one-half of what you pay for such books almost anywhere else. 

So great is the demand for these "I.B.S.A." Bibles that hereafter 
we purpose carrying no others in stock except pocket Bibles and large 
type Bibles for the aged. We will still, however, be pleased to serve 
anyone who desires other Bibles. We can procure for these wholesale 
rates, usually twenty-five per cent, off, plus postage. 

DESCRIPTION AND PRICES-"I.B.S.A." BIBLES 

No. 1918, $1.85, postage prepaid, is a beautiful book. It is small and 
light. Size 4 3/4 x 6 3/4 inches. It has minion type, red under gold edges, 
divinity circuit. French Seal. Looks like the genuine sealskin, but it is 
in reality good sheepskin. 

No. 1919, price $1.95, postage prepaid; the same book, the same 
Bible; the same every way, except the addition of Bagster Helps, Concordance, 
etc., making this size a trifle larger. 

No. 1928, price $2.85, postage prepaid. This is the same book exactly 
as No. 1918, except that it has genuine morocco binding; leather-lined. 

LITTLE LARGER, IONIC TYPE, SELF-PRONOUNCING 

No. 1939, price $2.25, postage prepaid. This is the same book as 
1919, the same binding and contents, but it has a coarser print and is a 
little larger book. Size, 5 1/2x7 1/2 inches. 

No. 1959, price $3.85, postage prepaid. This is the same book as 
1939, except that it has splendid morocco binding, is calf-lined and silk-sewed. 
Bibles similar in quality and finish are listed in many catalogues 
at $8. 

The sale of these books is not restricted to WATCH TOWER readers. 
They are valuable aids in Bible study and open to the public. 

BIBLE STUDY HELPS (BOUND SEPARATE). 

These are the same as in the latest "I.B.S.A." Bibles, described 
above. Full leather, divinity circuit, $1.15; Karatol, red edge, 60c, 
postpaid. Also in German (leather), $1.15; (cloth), 60c. 

Remit with order. We can secure such prices only by paying spot 
cash and must sell on the same terms. Insurance, 10c additional. 



Anyone ordering patent index on any of these Bibles should so state 
and should add twenty-five cents to the price. 

Should any desire other Bibles we will be pleased 
to supply publishers' catalogue, giving full description 
and prices. We are usually able to secure a 
discount of 25 per cent, on the publishers' list prices. 

THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT 

This Greek New Testament, with interlinear, word-for-word rendering, 
and a free-reading emphasized translation alongside, based upon the 
famous Vatican Manuscript, No. 1209, is a very valuable work. Originally 
published under the author's copyright by Fowler & Wells Co., New 
York City, it was sold by them at $4 in cloth and $5 in half-leather binding. 
For several years a friend, an earnest Bible student, desirous of 
assisting the readers of our Society's publications, has supplied them 
through us at a greatly reduced price; now he has purchased the copyright 
and plates from the Fowler & Wells Co., and presented the same 
to our Society as a gift that the poor of the Lord's flock may have this 
help in the study of the Word. 

REDUCED PRICE.-Hereafter we will have the Diaglott in leather binding 
only, divinity circuit, Bible paper, and have reduced the price to 
$2.00 (8s. 5d.), postpaid. We offer THE WATCH TOWER for a year as a 
premium, with each order for the Diaglott, if it is a new subscription. 

LEESER'S TRANSLATION OF THE OLD TESTAMENT 

This is the standard translation amongst English reading Hebrews, by 
one of their own rabbis. It is not perfect, but is a valuable aid in 
critical study of the Old Testament. Our special price, in leather binding, 

including postage, is $1.10. 

ANALYTICAL CONCORDANCE TO THE SCRIPTURES 

In English, Hebrew and Greek, by Prof. Young (Presbyterian). 1240 
pages. A valuable work for all critical students. We are not permitted 
by the publishers to cut their price, but we may and do give in addition, 
postage free, any two volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, cloth binding, 
with each Concordance. Postpaid, cloth binding, $6. 

SMITH'S BIBLE DICTIONARY 

This is one of the most desirable editions of Prof. Smith's work. It 
is a large volume of 1,020 pages. Cloth binding, $1.30, including postage. 

*DAILY HEAVENLY MANNA 
FOR THE HOUSEHOLD OF FAITH 

The demand for this publication increases year by year. 

Our present edition of the "Manna" contains the same texts and comments 
as all former editions. Every alternate leaf is blank-ruled for use 
as an autograph and birthday record. Its value increases as additional 
autographs of friends are secured. It is printed on fine bond paper. 

The following wholesale rates postpaid are granted to all WATCH 
TOWER subscribers: 
Purple cloth, gold embossed, gilt edges; English and Polish $0.60 



Dark blue cloth, silver embossed, German 60 

Leatherette, blue edges, Swedish and Norwegian 60 

Leatherette, genuine gold edges, Swedish and Norwegian 1.10 

Genuine Morocco, gold edges, English, Polish and Norwegian 2.00 

We hope this little book will find a place at every breakfast table, 
that spiritual refreshment may thus be enjoyed with the natural food. 

^SCENARIO OF CREATION DRAMA 

The ninety-six short, pithy lectures of the Creation Drama can be 
supplied in print as follows: 
IN ENGLISH AND FINNISH: 

De Luxe, gold edges, embossed, 400 illustrations $1.00 postpaid 

Cloth, burnished edges, embossed, 400 illustrations 65 " 

Paper in three booklets, complete; per set 25 " 

A Newspaper edition in 4 Parts 05 " 

IN GERMAN, SPANISH, ITALIAN, GREEK, POLISH, ARMENIAN: 

Cloth bound, complete 65 " 

Paper " " 25 " 

Newspaper edition, 3 Parts, 2c ea.; per set 05 " 

IN SWEDISH: Newspaper edition only, 2c ea.; per set 05 " 

MISCELLANEOUS 

Hymns of Dawn, with music (cloth) $ .35 

Hymns of Dawn, without music (flexible) 10 

Poems of Dawn (Karatol) 50 

Poems of Dawn (Leather) 75 

Bible Talks in Simple Language (half leather) 1.25 

Bible Talks in Simple Language (half leather) 1.25 

Memorizing Text-Cards ( 100 in pkg.— assortments, Nos. 1 and 2). 

per pkg 30 

Scriptural Post Cards (assorted), doz. 15c; per 100 1.00 

CHARTS (Blue Prints, soft cloth): 

Plan of the Ages, 5 ft. $1.85; 8 ft 2.50 

Chronology of the Bible, 7 1/2 ft 2.00 

Tabernacle of the Wilderness, 7 1/2 ft 2.00 

BINDERS for THE WATCH TOWER: 

Spring Back (holds 1 yr.) 60 

CROSS & CROWN PINS (Gold, with red enamel): 

5/8"-No. 1 Ladies' Style, No. 2 Gents', each 1.15 

l/2"-No. 3 Gents' Style, No. 4 Ladies', each 1.00 

5/8" celluloid, per doz., .25; each 03 

Missionary Envelopes, per 100 .30; per 1000 3.00 

Vow Bookmarks (paper) per 100 .25; (silk) each 05 

*Booklets (on Hell, Spiritism, Evolution, Tabernacle Shadows, Our 

Lord's Return 10 

♦Question Booklets on each Vol. of SCRIPTURE STUDIES and on 

THE TABERNACLE, each .07; per doz 84 

Report on Foreign Missions, each 05 

THE WATCH TOWER, (semi-monthly) per year 1.00 

The Divine Plan of the Ages (Za), WATCH TOWER form, ea 10 

What Say the Scriptures about Hell (Hz), WATCH TOWER form, ea 05 

Judge Rutherford's Defense of Pastor Russell, each 10c, per 100 8.00 

THE BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLY, per year 12 

Tracts in all languages FREE 



*Colporteurs and Class Secretaries may deduct one-half from above 
prices on MANNAS, BOOKLETS and SCENARIOS if shipment consists of 50 
or more volumes, charges collect. 



R5994 : page 350 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
WHOM THE LORD LOVES HE CHASTENS 

MY DEARLY BELOVED PASTOR:- 

As is expressed by so many dear friends writing you, we 
hesitate to intrude upon your consecrated time. We regret 
that too often during the past fourteen years we have needlessly 
done so. We now pray that God shall overrule all our 
mistakes for the good of His cause and our own spiritual 
advancement. 

We are now perplexed over some matters concerning 
what we should do in the Harvest work, and after praying 
over the matter, feel directed of the Lord to lay it before you, 
and abide by what you think best. We will try to be brief. 

(1) Reading and accepting Present Truth in 1902, I was 
very zealous for about one year to hand out tracts and tell 
the "good tidings." Finding that the people generally did not 
care to hear it and having a growing family to support, I 
lost my zeal, became interested in worldly affairs, with the 
result that after a season of measurable prosperity in which 
I failed, painfully, to contribute to God's cause as I should, 
I found myself a bankrupt and in debt in 1912. I accepted 
the chastisement as of the Lord, returned to my "first love," 
and was not rejected (what wonderful mercy!), putting my 
trust in Him for temporal welfare as well as spiritual. He 
has guided and guarded our interests to the extent that we 
have been able to provide things needful in an honorable way 
(farming). Our family of seven children are growing— our 
oldest, a girl of fifteen years, thoroughly consecrated, and 
two boys younger than she, thirteen and eleven years respectively, 
are manifesting a deep interest in God's Word. We 
are thus enabled to have the Bethel exercises each morning, 
with lessons from the SCRIPTURE STUDIES and TABERNACLE 
SHADOWS alternately every evening before retiring. We are 
at present somewhat isolated, except for one dear brother 
near us whom the Lord brought into the light through our 
humble ministry. We have no class connections except our 
own home. Our questions follow: 

(1) Opportunities are presenting themselves for giving 
public talks in small towns around us, which, when we have 
accepted them, seem to have stirred up an interest to the 
extent that the congregation increases and some are giving 
evidences of full acceptance of the Truth. There are brethren 
in large Classes who could and would as Elders do this work 



at a considerably greater expense than myself, owing to distance, 
etc. Since I have no Class direction should I call upon 
those brethren, or do this work myself— especially when going 
to a small place where we have no assurance of a good turnout? 

(2) If I continue to do this service should I report to 

the Bible House each meeting held, number in attendance, 
number manifesting interest, etc.? 

(3) We note that you advise that only such as are able 

to answer the late list of questions be considered as eligible 
to Eldership. We have sent in our answers to these questions, 
but have not heard as to what grade we made. We 
are sure since sending them in that we were not quite clear 
on one or two, at least. We kept a copy of the questions and 
are making a study of them, and find them very helpful. We 
also believe this is a timely test directed of God to provide 
thorough shepherds for His flock, and shall be glad to abide 
by the outcome of our examination. 

(4) Considering the fact that we have lessons each day 
in the week at home, would it be proper for my family to 
sacrifice my leadership to other work on Sundays? 

Praying every day for you, dear Brother, that you may 
receive strength, courage and wisdom from above to continue 
in the way until He shall say, "It is enough," and soliciting an 
interest in your prayers, 

I am sincerely your brother in hope, . 

OUR REPLY:— We rejoice with you that the Lord did not 
permit you to drift away from Him, but gave you experiences 
which directed you, and brought you important lessons. 

We quite approve your course of going forth every Sunday, 
or whenever convenient opportunity may afford, to 
neighboring villages and towns, to spread the knowledge of 
God's Word and of the Divine "Plan of the Ages." We are 
glad that you are thus engaged and that the Lord is granting 
you to see some fruit from your labors. We would encourage 
you to go on in the good work, believing that you will not be 
sacrificing the interests of your home so long as you continue 
the worship of the Lord and the study of His Word therein. 
A further suggestion we would make is that you introduce 
the reading matter to all who manifest any interest. It is our 
experience that, no matter who does the preaching, nor how 
much of it is done, very few will be brought to a satisfactory 
condition of knowledge or of character unless they read for 
themselves-STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, WATCH TOWER, etc. 

Since you are not identified with any Ecclesia, it would not 
be necessary for you to appeal to any. Authority to preach 
God's Word goes to whoever receives the Holy Spirit, in proportion 
as he may have talents for service. 

The V. D. M. questions have been sent out freely and 
many of them have been returned, but we have not yet had 
time to make an examination of them. Shortly we hope to 
appoint a Committee to examine all the papers and to pass 
upon them, and we will then be glad to notify each one in 
respect to the accuracy of his answers, as viewed by the 
Committee. 

May the Lord's blessing continue with you richly! 



TO PREPARE THE WAY 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Loving greetings to my beloved Pastor and Brother in the 
Lord, through whom the dear children of the Kingdom 
are constantly fed and nourished with meat in due season 
from the dear Lord's own table! 

Kindly pardon this intrusion upon your great magnanimity, 
and accept my sincere thanks for all you have been to, and 
done for, me and mine, by your unceasing labor of love. As 
the debt is so great, and I so very poor at reciprocity, I pray 
God, our Father, through His Son, our Redeemer and Lord, to 
cancel it, making such rewards perpetually as it richly merits. 
(Phil. 4: 19.) His grace is so wonderful and matchless! 

Had served many years as a church worker, but eventually 
sickening at its form of godliness, etc., slipped back into the 
field (world). About this time I married, and my wife has 
blessed me with great faithfulness and five children— one asleep. 

About this same time a dear friend of ours bought THE 
DIVINE PLAN OF THE AGES of a Colporteur (Sister Graham) 
and handed it to my wife for me to read it and give my 
opinion as to its merit, etc. 

At this time my business began to move me to and fro 
with my little home and increasing family, and the book was 
laid away. After ten years or so of roaming, sometimes 

doing well, but never satisfied, I met a dear Brother S . 

A little conversation made me feel he had something I wanted, 
and somehow I let him know it. He kindly invited me to 
discuss the matter and after a very few exchanges he quoted, 
"Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground," etc. It was 
with this text I received some light, and surely more light 
has been the watchword ever since! 

I should tell you here that we had been well warned to 

beware of our friend S 's religion, etc., and we had never 

heard of you, or MILLENNIAL DAWN; in fact, it was only 
when reading Volume III., after going through Volumes I. 
and II., that I got to know Pastor Russell and his authorship 
of the books, etc., the main reason for this, I think, being the 
fact that the chart and preface of Vol. I. were missing. 

Leaving Brother S 's that evening, some tracts were 

given me. When I got home and told my wife where I had 
been and spent the evening, both hands went up in horror, and 
the words, "You've done it now; I was always afraid you 
would! I have no more desire; ah, I have been warned! 
You'll be an infidel proper now!" etc., etc. 

But she was already grieved about my seeming lack of 
spiritual desire and non-churchianity, and very anxious for 
the children. Two days or so after this I sat down to take 
some of the "food," and a paragraph in the tract "Do You 
Know?" got me; it referred to the trouble, "world-wide, 
socialistic and anarchistic." I felt very strange and not 
anxious to take it in. The statement, "The downfall of all 
the kingdoms of the world" grieved me, but I had not yet 
noticed the statement, "To prepare the way for Messiah's 



Kingdom"— the Heavenly Kingdom. 

I did not like to see the disasters predicted, but when the 
above caught my eye I exclaimed. Thank God, whoever has 
penned this! Exuberant with this joy, my wife must see 
it. And as I read, you should have seen her face, "And will 
result in the downfall of all the kingdoms of the earth." She 
was troubled and said, "That's awful!" Yes, I said, but thank 
the Lord this author has something better for their place; 
listen: "To prepare the way for Messiah's Kingdom." 

She did not, however, embrace the Truth with me, but 
seemed to fight at every step, until she was brought to see 
plainly it is the Truth and that it is no use to fight the Truth. 
She was now hopeful, missing my society, and very, very 
lonely. One day, sitting at her knitting (I was making a few 
notes), she said, "If you can't speak, write something; it will 
be all right." Whereupon I wrote, "What do you think of 
consecration?" and passed it on. She replied, "A great deal." 
I was delighted. She symbolized shortly after, and our 

page 35 1 

life has since been fraught with abundant joy and satisfaction 
in the dear Lord, to whom be all the praise for evermore! 

Being tied by family duties, etc., we have not been able to 
render very much service in the Harvest work, but we do 
pray for the dear Lord's blessing continually on you and all 
"the dear colaborers at the Brooklyn Tabernacle, Bethel, and 
everywhere." 

We ask your loving prayers for us that we may be found 
faithful and joined with you and all His own to our living. 
loving Head in His Kingdom, in the sweet bye and bye. 

"Toil on, and in thy toil rejoice; 
For toil comes rest; for exile. Home; 
Soon thou shalt see Him face to face, 
And hear Him say, "Enough, well done!" 
Your brother in the Lord, T. R. HICKMAN. 



ONE USED HIS BRAINS-THE OTHER DID NOT 

DEARLY BELOVED PASTOR:- 

Greetings in the name of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ! 
I have been wanting to give you my testimony for some time; 
how I got the Truth, and what it has done for me. I had 
often heard the saying, "As a man soweth, so shall he also 
reap," and I was sowing bad thoughts in my heart, and reaping 
bad habits. 

My first start in the Christian life was in the fall of 1914, 
when I joined the "Knights of Malta." I got out of each 
Degree just enough of the Bible to make me want to know 
the rest; so I would go home and get my Bible and read 
the connections. It got so interesting to me that I started at 
Genesis and read everything to the end of Revelation. In 
that way I was getting rid of some of my bad thoughts, for 



some good thoughts. 

I was a great fellow for condemning the Roman Catholic 
religion. I was working with a Catholic friend at that time, 
and I asked him one day why he did not use his own brains 
instead of believing everything the priests told him. He 

R5995 : page 350 

asked what church I went to, and I told him that I was a 

Presbyterian, and he inquired why I was one. I told him, 

"Because my mother and father were." He asked, "Why 

don't you use your own brains?" I replied, "That is right; 

I am going to use them." He was telling all about St. Peter 

as being the first Pope, etc. So I bought a "Theological 

Dictionary" which gives the history and belief of all denominations. 

I asked our Heavenly Father to show me which was 

the right one. The first that I read was the history and belief 

of the Presbyterian Church. It did not take me long to 

find out that I did not believe what they taught. The more 

I read of the different beliefs the more disgusted I got. I 

saw your sermons in the Pittsburgh papers, but I did not 

read them very often, until one day I saw your sermon on, 

"Peter and the Kingdom Keys," and read it very carefully. 

I found that you proved from the Scriptures that St. Peter 

was not the first Pope. It gave me more zeal to read and 

study your sermons. The one, I believe, that got me into 

the Truth, was your sermon on "Christ Buried in the Flesh 

and Raised in the Spirit." I told my wife (who is also with 

me in the Truth), that I was going to send for a set of 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. But our Heavenly Father, seeing 

that my heart was ready for the Truth, did not give me a 

chance to send for them. He sent one of His messengers 

to my home with them. It was April 15th, 1915, and I have 

been making a close study of them ever since, and I thank 

my Heavenly Father for calling me "out of darkness into 

His marvelous light." I rejoice in trials and tribulations, 

because my love for our Heavenly Father casteth out fear. 

My wife and I had the great pleasure of hearing you talk 
at the Carnegie Hall, Pittsburgh, May 9th, 1915. The first 
time we attended a meeting in the Auditorium, Pittsburgh, 
was July 4th, 1915. Brother Kendall gave a talk on the Life 
of Christ, from Isaiah, 53d chapter. We made up our minds 
that from that time on we would follow you as you follow 
the Lord Jesus Christ. 

October 10, 1915, 1 sent nineteen letters which I received 
from the Brooklyn Tabernacle, to the Elders, Deacons and 
the Minister of the Presbyterian Church, notifying them 
why I was withdrawing and asked each one of them to come 
to my home and we would talk it over. None have come yet. 
Shortly after, I passed the minister on the street, but he did 
not recognize me. It was told me that he said he did not 
want to have anything to do with Pastor Russell or anybody 
that believed in his teachings. 

My wife and I consecrated ourselves to God during the 
October, 1915, Convention in Pittsburgh, and we symbolized 
our consecration by water baptism January 2d, 1916. We have 



been striving ever since to be overcomers by making the 
good fight, and guarding "the faith" to the best of our ability. 
We ask that you remember us in your prayers, that we may 
be faithful unto the end, when it will be said, "Well done, 
good and faithful servant, enter into the joys of thy Lord." 

We pray that our Heavenly Father will give you strength 
and wisdom so that you will be faithful unto death, and also 
all others who have made a Covenant with Him by sacrifice. 

With much Christian love, 

BROTHER AND SISTER HEADRICK.-England. 



A MINISTERIAL ATTEMPT TO "ANSWER" THE TRUTH 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Since your visit among us I have wondered if you would 
like to hear the results of our meeting. The effect on the 
entire city has been wonderful. Many thoughtful men heard 
you and have not minced matters in their open approbation 
of your sermon. The local papers did not report it and they 
came in for some criticism for failing to do so. 

On Sunday evening following your meeting two ministers 
attempted to "answer" you. They resorted to slander and 
falsehood, blindly wresting your points. Many who heard 
them after having heard you, have been drawing comparisons 
that are detrimental to these ministers' hold on their people. 

The pastors of one denomination have met to discuss the 
situation and to decide what to say to their congregations 
about you and your teachings. They admitted that the question 
everywhere is getting beyond their ability to answer. 

We are continuing our volunteering and canvassing, finding 
a kind of interest that will not much longer be put off 
without the Truth. 

The opposition is getting strong, but the Lord knows all 
about that! I thank Him always for this opportunity to 
serve Him. How kind He was to let me have this Light and 
His Robe of Righteousness to hide my blemishes as they become 
more perceptible! 

I thank Him for your visit here. It has been a greater 
blessing than we knew. May our Father bless you and 
send you back! 

In Jesus' Name, BUEBO ELLER. 



BRITISH CONDITIONS GROW SERIOUS 

A Brother in Great Britain writes:— 

"Women are now taking the places previously occupied 
by men, in nearly every trade. They are driving and collecting 
fares on the electric cars, motor cars, etc.; they are to 
be found at the railway depots emptying the wagons, behind 
the counters, in the banks, working the machines on the farms, 
and doing every other conceivable job which men have been 
in the habit of doing in the past. 



"Our nation is being weakened very considerably by the 
big battles that are now raging at the front. Thousands from 
lliis district wiped out daily. Il is a common occurrence to 
meet a mother who has lost all her sons— very often three 
or four— and in many cases the father also. 

"If ever there was a time to preach the Truth it is now. 
The nation is being broken down, and who can give comfort 
and joy to these dear hearts, now torn and sad, but 
ourselves? and we are doing, by the Lord's grace, all we can. 

"As a Church here, we are adding to our numbers daily; 
many very fine and noble characters are amongst those now 
coming along; and while the Lord continues to bless us, we 
remember you all. Often we find it easier to walk with the 
Lord when troubles abound on every side, while it is difficult 
to maintain our full devotion to the Lord when everything 
goes smoothly." 



CAREFULLY STUDIED VOW -THEN ACCEPTED IT 

DEAR PASTOR RUSSELL:- 

Soon after reading your views in the November 1 issue 
of THE WATCH TOWER I sat down to inform you, out of my 
own experience, what reasons a consecrated believer could 
have for not taking the Vow. After stating my reasons I 
decided to change the letter by leaving out one of them, so I 
re-wrote the letter, but decided to wait awhile before sending 
it in its final form. The result is, that after having 
carefully studied the Vow and my own heart, I have made 
the Vow my own, and thank God for it. 

I wonder if there are not others who would be led to 
take the Vow, if they should very carefully scrutinize their 
reasons for not taking it? Please record me as a keeper of 
the Vow and accept my deepest gratitude for having brought 
me to a closer study of my heart. 

May God's blessing continue with you in the work! 

Yours in His name, M. E. S.-N. C. 



page 353 

VOL. XXXVII DECEMBER 1 No. 23 
A. D. 1916-A.M. 6045 



CONTENTS 

Portrait of Pastor Russell .... 355 
His Biography 356 

His Teachings 356 

His Work 357 

Will and Testament of Charles Taze Russell 358 

An Editorial Committee of Five . . 358 

His Legacy of Love 359 

The Funeral Services 359 

The Floral Display 359 

Address at Morning Service .... 360 
Addresses at Afternoon Service . . . 360 

Pastor Russell's Last Days . . . 360 
View of Floral Designs on Temple Rostrum . 369 
Oration at Evening Service .... 373 

Pastor Russell's Sermon .... 374 

"Morning Cometh— A Night Also" . . 374 
Closing Scenes in New York and Pittsburgh 378 
Letters Expressing Sympathy and Loyalty . 378 

Confidence in Lord's Arrangement . . 380 
"All the Way My Savior Leads Me" . . . 384 

page 354 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS STREET, 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agenciesr-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



The Watch Tower Editorial Committee: 
This journal is published under the supervision of an 
Editorial Committee, at least three of whom must have 
read and have approved as Truth each and every article 
appearing in these columns. The names of the Editorial 
Committee now serving are: W.E. VAN AMBURGH, J.F. 
RUTHERFORD, H.C. ROCKWELL, F.H. ROBISON, R.H. HIRSH. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 



for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, POLISH AND DANO-NORWEGIAN 
EDITIONS. SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



SCRIPTURE STUDIES AND SCENARIOS-VARIOUS 

For the information of our readers we give below a list of 
the languages into which the various volumes of STUDIES IN 
THE SCRIPTURES have been translated. Most of these can be 
supplied from the head office at Brooklyn. 

Volume I. In English, German, Swedish, Dano-Norwegian, 
Italian, French, Greek, Hungarian, Spanish, Polish, 
Hollandish, Finnish, Arabic, Slovak, Rumanian, Armenian, 
Lettish, Chinese, Japanese and Korean. We have also the 
English Braille, American Braille and New York Point. 

Volume II. In English, German, Swedish, Finnish and 
Dano-Norwegian. 

Volume III. In English, German, Swedish, Finnish and 
Dano-Norwegian. 

Volume IV. In English, German, Swedish, Finnish and 
Dano-Norwegian. 

Volume V. In English, German, Swedish, Finnish and 
Dano-Norwegian. 

Volume VI. English, German, Swedish, Finnish, Greek. 

THE PHOTO-DRAMA SCENARIO is supplied in Spanish, Italian, 
Greek, Polish, Armenian, German, Finnish, Swedish and English, 
in one or more styles of binding. See WATCH TOWER, 
October 1, 1915, for prices and styles of binding. 



"ANGELICO" 

The Angelophone Company request us to advise that they are now 
prepared to fill all orders promptly, as per announcement in previous 
TOWER. ADDRESS ALL LETTERS and make REMITTANCES to 
the ANGELICO, 182-184 Fulton St., Brooklyn, N.Y. 



A GERMAN MEMORIAL NUMBER 

A Memorial issue of THE WATCH TOWER is being prepared in the 
German language and another in the Polish language; extra copies, 
5c each. 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR JANUARY 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
January follow: (1) 14; (2) 189; (3) 259; (4) 222; (5) 324; 
(6) 230; (7) 92; (8) 197; (9) 224; (10) 265; (1 1) 165; (12) 130; 
(13) 291; (14) 78; (15) 105; (16) 272; (17) 1; (18) 221; 
(19) 65; (20) 264; (21) 228; (22) 273; (23) 25; (24) 313; 
(25) 134; (26) 393; (27) 289; (28) 145; (29) 22; (30) 203; 
(31)32. 



"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 



THESE STUDIES ARE RECOMMENDED TO STUDENTS AS VERITABLE "BIBLE 
KEYS." PRICES ARE NET AND BARELY COVER COST OF PRODUCTION. 

SERIES I., "The Divine Plan of the Ages," gives an outline of the 
Divine Plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and 
restitution: 416 pages, in embossed cloth, 50c. (2s. Id.) Full Morocco, 
India paper edition, $ 1 .50 (6s. 3d.) 

SERIES II., "The Time is at Hand," treats of the manner and time 
of the Lord's Second Coming, considering the Bible Testimony on this 
subject: 432 pages, in embossed cloth, 50c. (2s. Id.) Full Morocco, 
India paper edition, $ 1 .50 (6s. 3d.) 

SERIES III., "Thy Kingdom Come," considers the "Time of the End," 
glorification of the Church and establishment of the Kingdom; it also 
contains a chapter on the Great Pyramid, showing its corroboration of the 
dates and other teachings of the Bible: 432 pages, in embossed cloth, 
50c. (2s. Id.) Full Morocco, India paper edition, $ 1 .50 (6s. 3d.) 

SERIES IV., "The Battle of Armageddon," shows that the dissolution 
of the present order of things is in progress, and that all the panaceas 
offered are valueless to avert the predicted end. It notes specially Our 
Lord's Great Prophecy of Matt. 24 and also Zech. 14:1-9: 720 pages, 
embossed cloth, 60c. (2s. 6d.) Full Morocco, India paper, $1.75 (7s. 3d.) 

SERIES V., "The Atonement Between God and Man," treats an all-important 
subject— the hub, the center around which all the features of 
Divine grace revolve: 596 pages in embossed cloth, 60c. (2s. 6d.) 
Full Morocco, India paper, $1.75 (7s. 3d.) 

SERIES VI., "The New Creation," deals with the Creative Week 
(Genesis 1, 2), and with the Church, God's "New Creation." It examines 
the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations and 
hopes appertaining to these: 816 pages, embossed cloth, 60c. (2s. 6d.) 
Full Morocco, India paper, $1.75 (7s. 3d.) 

IN MAROON KARATOL BINDING, pocket edition, red edges, same price 
as regular cloth edition. 

IN FULL LEATHER BINDING, stiff covers, same size as cloth edition, 
gilt edges, the set (6 vols.), $6.00 (Ice 5s.). 

The above prices include carriage charges. 

Prices on the above to Colporteurs and to I.B.S.A. Classes, in lots 
of 50 volumes or more, charges collect, one-half the above prices. 

Also published in foreign languages as follows: German, Swedish, 



Finnish and Dano-Norwegian, six vols.; French, Hollandish, Spanish, 
Italian, Hungarian, Polish, Arabic, Roumanian, Greek, Lettish, Slovak, 
Armenian, Ukrainian, Korean, Chinese and Japanese, one vol. each; 
bound in cloth, uniform with English edition, prices the same. 
For the Blind, in American Braille, English Braille and N.Y. Point. 



R5997 : page 356 

BIOGRAPHY 

CHARLES TAZE RUSSELL, known the world 

over as Pastor Russell, author, lecturer and 

minister of the Gospel, was born at Pittsburgh, 

Pa., February 16, 1852; died October 

31, 1916. He was the son of Joseph L. and 

Eliza Birney Russell, both of Scotch-Irish 

lineage. He was educated in the common 

schools and under private tutors. Author of 

"OBJECT AND MANNER OF OUR LORD'S RETURN," 

"FOOD FOR THINKING CHRISTIANS," 

"TABERNACLE SHADOWS," "THE DIVINE PLAN OF THE 

AGES," "THE TIME IS AT HAND," "THY KINGDOM COME," 

"THE BATTLE OF ARMAGEDDON," "THE ATONEMENT," "THE 

NEW CREATION," "WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES ABOUT 

HELL," "SPIRITISM," "OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS," "THE 

PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION," et cetera, et cetera. 

He was married in 1879 to Maria Frances Ackley. 
No children blessed this union. Seventeen years later 
they disagreed about the management of his journal and 
a separation followed. 

Reared under the influence of Christian parents, at an 
early age he became interested in theology, uniting himself 
with the Congregational Church, and became active 
in local mission work. The doctrine of eternal torment 
of all mankind except the few elect became so abhorrent 
to him that at the age of seventeen he was a skeptic. He 
said, "A God that would use His power to create human 
beings whom He foreknew and predestinated should be 
eternally tormented, could be neither wise, just nor loving; 
His standard would be lower than that of many 
men." He continued to believe, however, in the existence 
of God, but was not willing to accept the commonly understood 
teachings as God's revelation of Himself to man. 
He turned his attention to the investigation of heathen 
religions, only to find all of these unsatisfactory. 

HIS TEACHINGS 

Naturally of a reverential mind, desiring to worship 
and serve the true God, he reasoned, "All the creeds of 
Christendom claim to be founded on the Bible, and these 
are conflicting. Is it possible that the Bible has been 
misrepresented? It may not teach the terrible doctrine 
of eternal torment." Turning again to the Bible he determined 



to make a careful, systematic study of it without 
reference to creeds of men. As a result the remainder 
of his life was wholly devoted to teaching the Bible, 
writing and publishing religious books and papers, lecturing 
and proclaiming the message of Messiah's Kingdom. 
He was the greatest religious teacher since St. Paul, and 
did more than any other man of modern times to establish 
the faith of the people in the Scriptures. 

He was not the founder of a new religion, and never 
made such claim. He revived the great truths taught by 
Jesus and the Apostles, and turned the light of the twentieth 
century upon these. He made no claim of a special 
revelation from God, but held that it was God's due time 
for the Bible to be understood; and that, being fully consecrated 
to the Lord and to His service, he was permitted 
to understand it. Because he devoted himself to the development 
of the fruits and graces of the Holy Spirit, 
the promise of the Lord was fulfilled in him: "For if 
these things be in you and abound, they make you that 
ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge 
of our Lord Jesus Christ."— 2 Peter 1:5-8. 

He clearly taught and proved his teachings by the citation 
of Scriptural authority— that man does not possess 
an immortal soul, that he is a soul and is mortal; that the 
wages of sin is death— not eternal torment; that death 
came upon man as the just penalty for the violation of 
God's Law; that death means the destruction of man; that 
God, in His goodness, has provided the great Ransom-price 
whereby man may be delivered from the bondage of 
Sin and Death; that God's beloved Son, Jesus, became a 
man and grew to manhood's estate, was put to death as 
a man and raised again from the dead a spirit-being, possessing 
the Divine nature; that by His death and resurrection 
Christ Jesus provided and produced the Ransom-price 
for man's deliverance and restoration; that Jesus 
Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every man; 
that every man in God's due time must, therefore, have a 
fair trial for life, and to this end there shall be a resurrection 
of all the dead; that Jesus Christ ascended into 
Heaven and must come the second time; that the period of 
time elapsing between the First and the Second Coming of 
the Lord is devoted to the election of the members of the 
Body of Christ, taken from amongst men; that the requirements 
for election to that exalted position are, full 
faith in the shed blood of Jesus as the Ransom-price, a 
full consecration to do the Father's will, and a faithful 
continuance in obedience to the Father's will even unto 
death; that all who thus are consecrated and begotten of 
the Holy Spirit and are overcomers shall have part 
in the Chief Resurrection, and be exalted to positions in 
the Heavenly Kingdom of God and participate with Christ 
Jesus in His Millennial Reign for the blessing of all the 
families of the earth; that during the thousand-year 
reign of Christ all of the dead shall be awakened, and 
given a fair and impartial trial for life or death; that 
under said Reign the wilfully disobedient shall be everlastingly 



destroyed, while those obedient to the righteous 
rule of Christ shall be fully restored to human perfection 
of body, mind and character; that during this Millennial 
Reign the earth shall be brought to a state of Edenic 

R5998 : page 357 

Paradise and made fit as a place habitable for perfect 
man; that man, fully restored to perfection, will inhabit 
the beautiful earth in all the ages to come. 

HIS WORK 

Seeing that God has such a wonderful Plan for the 
blessing of mankind. Pastor Russell gave all of his power 
and energy to making known these great truths to the 
world. He never took a vacation; he worked until the 
day of his death. 

Like other Christians he was looking for the Second 
Coming of Christ. Between 1872-6 he discovered 
that the Scriptures clearly teach that the Lord would 
not return in a body of flesh, but would return as a spirit 
being, invisible to human eyes, and that His second 
presence was due in the autumn of 1874. This led to 
the publishing of a booklet entitled, "The Object and 
Manner of Our Lord's Return," which had a phenomenal 
circulation. 

Many students of the Bible throughout the United 
States and Canada responded to the information derived 
from that book, and his correspondence became voluminous. 
Realizing the necessity of keeping the Truth before 
the minds of those who had begun to investigate, in 1879 
he began the publication of THE WATCH TOWER AND 
HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE, and was its sole Editor to 
the time of his death. This journal is issued semi-monthly; 
it never publishes advertisements, but is devoted 
exclusively to religious topics. Among the English 
speaking people in the United States, Canada and Great 
Britain, its semi-monthly circulation is 45,000 copies. 
It is also published in German, French, Swedish, Dano-Norwegian 
and Polish, reaching a large number of subscribers 
in America and Europe. 

He was President of the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND 
TRACT SOCIETY from its organization in 1884 until his 
death. He was also President of the PEOPLES PULPIT 
ASSOCIATION, organized in 1909, and the INTERNATIONAL 
BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION, incorporated in London, in 
1913, both of the latter corporations being adjuncts to 
the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. Through 
these religious corporations, as well as by word of mouth, 
he promulgated the Gospel of Messiah's Kingdom. He 
was the author of the following publications, issued between 
the years 1881 and 1914, each having phenomenal 
circulation, as given below: 

FOOD FOR THINKING CHRISTIANS 1,450,000 



TABERNACLE SHADOWS 1,000,000 

DIVINE PLAN OF THE AGES 4,817,000 

THE TIME IS AT HAND 1,657,000 

THY KINGDOM COME 1,578,000 

BATTLE OF ARMAGEDDON 464,000 

THE ATONEMENT 445,000 

THE NEW CREATION 423,000 

WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES ABOUT HELL 3,000,000 

He was also the author of WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES 
ABOUT SPIRITISM, OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS, et cetera, 
et cetera. He was the author of the PHOTO-DRAMA OF 
CREATION, which had been exhibited prior to his death to 
more than nine million persons. He wrote and published 
the SCENARIO of the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION, which 
has had a very wide circulation. His publications were 
translated into thirty-five different languages. At the 
same time he was Pastor of more than 1.200 congregations 
of Bible Students, in different parts of the world. 
These he visited and taught as often as possible. 

He organized and conducted a Lecture Bureau which 
constantly employed seventy Bible lecturers, who traveled 
and delivered lectures on the Scriptures. He organized 
and managed an auxiliary lecture bureau of seven hundred 
men who gave a portion of their time to lecturing 
on Bible teachings. Each year he wrote practically all 
of the copy for the BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLY, the annual 
distribution of which amounted to approximately 
fifty million copies. 

His weekly sermons were handled by a newspaper 
syndicate. More than 2,000 newspapers, with a combined 
circulation of fifteen million readers, at one time published 
his discourses. All told, more than 4,000 newspapers 
published these sermons. 

The Continent, a publication whose editor often opposed 
Pastor Russell, once published the following significant 
statement concerning him: 

"His writings are said to have greater newspaper circulation 
every week than those of any other living man; 
a greater, doubtless, than the combined circulation of the 
writings of all the priests and preachers in North America; 
greater even than the work of Arthur Brisbane, 
Norman Hapgood, George Horace Lorimer, Dr. Frank 
Crane, Frederick Haskins, and a dozen other of the best 
known editors and syndicate writers put together." 

HARVEST WORK 

Pastor Russell adhered closely to the teachings of the 
Scriptures. He believed and taught that we are living 
in the time of the second presence of our Lord, and 
that His presence dates from 1874; that since that time 
we have been living in the "time of the end"— the "end 
of the Age," during which the Lord has been conducting 
His great Harvest work; that, in harmony with 
the Lord's own statement, this Harvest work is separating 



true Christians designated as "wheat," from 

merely professing Christians, designated as "tares," and 

gathering the true saints into the Kingdom of the Lord. 

It is here interesting to note that Jesus said, "Who then 

is a faithful and wise servant, whom his Lord hath made 

ruler over His Household, to give them meat in due season? 

Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord, when He 

cometh, shall find so doing! Verily I say unto you that 

He shall make him ruler over all His goods." Thousands 

of the readers of Pastor Russell's writings believe 

that he filled the office of "that faithful and wise servant," 

and that his great work was giving to the Household of 

Faith meat in due season. His modesty and humility 

precluded him from openly claiming this title, but he admitted 

as much in private conversation. For a more detailed 

account of his work, reference is made to THE 

WATCH TOWER of June 1st, 1916. 

In 1910 Pastor Russell visited Palestine and Russia. 
He there orally delivered lectures to thousands of orthodox 
Jews on the regathering of Jews to Palestine. In 
1911 he was one of a committee of seven who made a 
journey around the world and especially examined into 
the conditions of missionary work in Japan, China, Korea 
and India. On the same occasion he again visited the 
Jews in Palestine and Galatia, explaining to them that 
the prophecies teach that the Jews at an early date will 
again be established in Palestine. On his return to America 
he was given a great ovation at the New York City 
Hippodrome by thousands of Jews, his discourse on this 
occasion being published by Hebrew papers both in America 
and in Europe. 

During the 42 years of Pastor Russell's Christian work 
he never directly or indirectly solicited money. No collection 
was ever taken at any meeting addressed by him 
or by any of his associates. He had faith that the Lord 
would supply sufficient money to carry on His work; that 
the work was the Lord's, and not man's. The fact that 
voluntary contributions were liberally made by many persons 
throughout the world proved that his conclusions 
were correct. 

He devoted his private fortune entirely to the cause 
to which he gave his life. He received the nominal sum 
of $1 1.00 per month for his personal expenses. He died, 
leaving no estate whatsoever. 

Thus closed the career of a most remarkable man. 
He was loved most by those who knew him best. 



R5999 : page 358 

WILL AND TESTAMENT OF CHARLES TAZE RUSSELL 

Having at various times during past years donated to 
the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY all of my personal 
possessions except a small personal bank account of 



approximately two hundred dollars, in the Exchange National 
Bank of Pittsburgh, which will properly be paid over to my 
wife if she survives me, I have merely love and Christian 
good wishes to leave to all of the dear members of the Bible 
House Family— and all other dear colaborers in the Harvest 
work— yea, for all of the household of faith in every place 
who call upon the name of the Lord Jesus as their Redeemer. 

However, in view of the fact that in donating the journal, 
ZION'S WATCH TOWER, the OLD THEOLOGY QUARTERLY and 
the copyrights of the MILLENNIAL DAWN SCRIPTURE STUDIES 
Books and various other booklets, hymn-books, etc., to the 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, I did so with the 
explicit understanding that I should have full control of all 
the interests of these publications during my life time, and 
that after my decease they should be conducted according to 
my wishes. I now herewith set forth the said wishes— my 
will respecting the same— as follows: 

AN EDITORIAL COMMITTEE OF FIVE 

I direct that the entire editorial charge of ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER shall be in the hands of a committee of five brethren, 
whom I exhort to great carefulness and fidelity to the Truth. 
All articles appearing in the columns of ZION'S WATCH TOWER 
shall have the unqualified approval of at least three of the 
committee of five, and I urge that if any matter approved 
by three be known or supposed to be contrary to the views 
of one or both of the other members of the committee, such 
articles shall be held over for thought, prayer and discussion 
for three months before being published— that so far as possible 
the unity of the faith and the bonds of peace may be 
maintained in the Editorial management of the journal. 

The names of the Editorial Committee (with such changes 
as may from time to time occur) shall all be published in 
each number of the journal— but it shall not in any manner 
be indicated by whom the various articles appearing in the 
journal are written. It will be sufficient that the fact be 
recognized that the articles are approved by the majority of 
the committee. 

As the Society is already pledged to me that it will publish 
no other periodicals, it shall also be required that the 
Editorial Committee shall write for or be connected with 
no other publications in any manner or degree. My object 
in these requirements is to safeguard the committee and the 
journal from any spirit of ambition or pride or headship, 
and that the Truth may be recognized and appreciated for its 
own worth, and that the Lord may more particularly be recognized 
as the Head of the Church and the Fountain of Truth. 

Copies of my Sunday discourses published in the daily 
newspapers covering a period of several years have been 
preserved and may be used as editorial matter for The 
WATCH TOWER or not, as the committee may think best, but 
my name shall not be attached nor any indication whatever 
given respecting the authorship. 

Those named below as members of the Editorial Committee 
(subject to their acceptance) are supposed by me to 



be thoroughly loyal to the doctrines of the Scriptures— 
especially so to the doctrine of the Ransom— that there is no 
acceptance with God and no salvation to eternal life except 
through faith in Christ and obedience to His Word and its 
spirit. If any of the designated ones shall at any time find 
themselves out of harmony with this provision they will be 
violating their consciences and hence committing sin if they 
continue to remain members of this Editorial Committee- 
knowing that so to do would be contrary to the spirit and 
intention of this provision. 

The Editorial Committee is self-perpetuating, in that should 
one of these members die or resign, it will be the duty of 
the remainder to elect his successor, that the journal may 
never have an issue without a full Editorial Committee of 
five. I enjoin upon the committee named great caution in 
respect to the election of others to their number— that purity 
of life, clearness in the Truth, zeal for God, love for the 
brethren and faithfulness to the Redeemer shall be prominent 
characteristics of the one elected. In addition to the five 
named for the committee I have named five others from 
whom I prefer that selection should be made for any vacancies 
in the Editorial Committee, before going outside for a 
general selection— unless in the interim, between the making 
of this Will and the time of my death, something should 
occur which would seem to indicate these as less desirable 
or others more desirable for filling the vacancies mentioned. 
The names of the Editorial Committee are as follows: 
WILLIAM E. PAGE, 
WILLIAM E. VAN AMBURGH, 
HENRY CLAY ROCKWELL, 

E. W. BRENNEISEN, 

F. H. ROBISON. 

The names of the five whom I suggest as possibly amongst 
the most suitable from which to fill vacancies in the Editorial 
Committee are as follows: A. E. Burgess, Robert Hirsh, 
Isaac Hoskins, Geo. H. Fisher (Scranton), J. F. Rutherford, 
Dr. John Edgar. 

The following announcement shall appear in each issue of 
THE WATCH TOWER, followed by the names of the Editorial 
Committee: 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER EDITORIAL COMMITTEE 

This journal is published under the supervision of 
an Editorial Committee, at least three of whom must 
have read and have approved as TRUTH each and every 
article appearing in these columns. The names of the 
Committee now serving are: (names to follow.) 

As for compensation, I think it wise to maintain the Society's 
course of the past in respect to salaries— that none be 
paid; that merely reasonable expenses be allowed to those 
who serve the Society or its work in any manner. In harmony 
with the course of the Society, I suggest that the provision 
for the Editorial Committee, or the three that shall 
be actively engaged, shall consist of not more than a provision 
for their food and shelter and ten dollars per month. 



with such a moderate allowance for wife or children or 
others dependent upon them for support as the Society's 
Board of Directors shall consider proper, just, reasonable— 
that no provision be made for the laying up of money. 

I desire that the OLD THEOLOGY QUARTERLY continue to 
appear as at present, so far as the opportunities for distribution 
and the laws of the land will permit, and that its issues 
shall consist of reprints from the old issues of THE WATCH 
TOWER or extracts from my discourses, but that no name 
shall appear in connection with the matter unless the same 
is required by law. 

It is my wish that the same rules apply to the German, 
the French, the Italian, the Danish and the Swedish or any 
other foreign publications controlled or supported by the 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. 

I will that a copy of this paper be sent to each one whose 
name has appeared above as of the Editorial Committee or 
the list from whom others of that committee may be chosen 
to fill vacancies and also to each member of the Board of 
Directors of the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. 
This shall be done immediately on my death being reported, 
so that within a week, if possible, the persons named as of 
the Editorial Committee may be heard from, their communications 
being addressed to the Vice-President of the WATCH 
TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY-whoever may be holding 
that office at that time. The answers of those appointed shall 
be to the point, indicating their acceptance or rejection of 
the provisions and terms specified. A reasonable time shall 
be allowed for any one mentioned who may be absent from 
the city or from the country. Meantime the remainder of 
the committee of at least three shall proceed to act in their 
capacity as editors. It shall be the duty of the officers of 
the Society to provide the necessary arrangements for these 
members of the Editorial Committee and to assist them in 
their duties in every possible manner, in compliance with 
the engagements made with me bearing on this matter. 

I have already donated to the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND 
TRACT SOCIETY all my voting shares therein, putting the same 
in the hands of five Trustees, as follows: Sr. E. Louise Hamilton, 
Sr. Almeta M. Nation Robison, Sr. J. G. Herr, Sr. C. 
Tomlins, Sr. Alice G. James. 

R5999 : page 359 

These Trustees shall serve for life. In event of deaths 
or resignations successors shall be chosen by the WATCH 
TOWER SOCIETY Directors and Editorial Committee and the 
remaining Trustees after prayer for Divine guidance. 

I now provide for the impeachment and dismissal from 
the Editorial Committee of any member thereof found to be 
unworthy the position by reason of either doctrinal or moral 
laches, as follows: 

At least three of the Board must unite in bringing the impeachment 
charges, and the Board of Judgment in the matter 

shall consist of the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY'S 
trustees and the five trustees controlling my voting 



shares and the Editorial Committee, excepting the accused. 
Of these sixteen members at least thirteen must favor the 
impeachment and dismissal in order to effect the same. 

R6000 : page 359 



DIRECTIONS FOR FUNERAL 

I desire to be buried in the plot of ground owned by our 
Society, in the Rosemont United Cemetery, and all the details 
of arrangements respecting the funeral service I leave 
in the care of my sister, Mrs. M. M. Land, and her daughters, 
Alice and May, or such of them as may survive me, with 
the assistance and advice and cooperation of the brethren, 
as they may request the same. Instead of an ordinary funeral 
discourse, I request that they arrange to have a number of 
the brethren, accustomed to public speaking, make a few 
remarks each, that the service be very simple and inexpensive 
and that it be conducted in the Bible House Chapel or 
any other place that may be considered equally appropriate 
or more so. 

MY LEGACY OF LOVE 

To the dear "Bethel" family collectively and individually 
I leave my best wishes, in hoping for them of the Lord His 
blessing, which maketh rich and addeth no sorrow. The 
same I extend in a still broader sweep to all the family of 
the Lord in every place— especially to those rejoicing in the 
Harvest Truth. I entreat you all that you continue to 
progress and to grow in grace, in knowledge, and above all 
in love, the great fruit of the Spirit in its various diversified 
forms. I exhort to meekness, not only with the world, but 
with one another; to patience with one another and with all 
men, to gentleness with all, to brotherly kindness, to godliness, 
to purity. I remind you that all these things are 
necessary for us, necessary that we may attain the promised 
Kingdom, and that the Apostle has assured us that if we do 
these things we shall never fail, but that "so an entrance 
shall be ministered unto us abundantly into the everlasting 
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ." 

It is my wish that this my last Will and Testament be published 
in the issue of THE WATCH TOWER following my death. 

My hope for myself, as for all the dear Israel of God, 
is that soon we shall meet to part no more, in the First 
Resurrection, in the Master's presence, where there is fulness 
of joy forevermore. We shall be satisfied when we awake 
in His likeness— 

"Changed from glory unto glory." 

(Signed) CHARLES TAZE RUSSELL. 

PUBLISHED AND DECLARED IN THE PRESENCE OF THE WITNESSES 
WHOSE NAMES ARE ATTACHED: 

MAE F. LAND, 



M. ALMETA NATION, 
LAURA M. WHITEHOUSE. 

DONE AT ALLEGHENY, PA., JUNE TWENTY-NINE, NINETEEN HUNDRED 
AND SEVEN. 



R6000 : page 359 

THE FUNERAL SERVICES 

The remains of Pastor Russell— announcement of 
whose death was published in the last issue of THE WATCH 
TOWER— arrived in New York from the West on Friday 
morning, November 3, accompanied by his traveling secretary, 
Menta Sturgeon. 

When the body reached Chicago, a large number of 
friends had assembled at the station, and as it was necessary 
to transfer the casket from one depot to another, 
a long procession of automobiles bearing the sorrowing 
friends formed and followed through the city. The 
casket was opened during the delay here, and many took 
the last look at him whom they knew so well and loved 
so much. From Chicago the body was accompanied by 
a delegation, delegations from other cities joining en 
route to New York. 

The remains reached the Bethel Home on Saturday, 
where they were viewed by the Family and by members 
of the Congregation. On Sunday morning they were removed 
to The Temple and lay in state until 10 o'clock in 
the evening. Thousands saw them here for the last time. 

All day Saturday and Sunday representatives of congregations 
in many of the cities east of the Mississippi 
and in Canada arrived on almost every incoming train. 
The Temple was inadequate to accommodate them all. 
The lecture room below was opened for the overflow. 
Every inch of available space was occupied from the basement 
to and including the second balcony. 

Two services had been announced for The Temple- 
one to be held in the afternoon for the friends, the other 
for the public in the evening. But in view of the rapidly 
increasing numbers, the Committee of Arrangements 
provided an additional service, to be held on Sunday morning. 
The speaker was Brother Macmillan, whose remarks 
will be found elsewhere. 

The afternoon service, which had been especially announced 
for the friends, was opened with a solo, "Be 
Thou Faithful Unto Death." These words were especially 
impressive, because one of the most beautiful floral 
designs surrounding the casket bore a broad white ribbon 
on which were the words of this beautiful hymn. The 
other hymns were 23, "Blest be the tie that binds," so 
frequently used by the classes and by conventions when 
welcoming Brother Russell in their midst; and No. 273, 
"Sun of my soul, my Father dear," one of Brother Russell's 



favorite hymns. 

Each speaker, when he had completed his remarks 
at the side of the casket in the main Auditorium, proceeded 
to the lecture room below and repeated the same 
address to the friends crowding the smaller Auditorium. 
All of the addresses— seventeen in number— appear in this 
issue of THE WATCH TOWER. 

THE FLORAL DISPLAY 

Elsewhere in THE WATCH TOWER will be found a full-page 
view of the floral display on the rostrum. It was the 
finest we have ever seen on such an occasion. The scene 
surpassed description. The rostrum of The Temple was 
so completely occupied by plants, ferns, flowers and a most 
wonderful collection of appropriate floral designs as to 
leave barely room enough for the speakers and the remains 
of our beloved Pastor. Moreover, the entire facing 
of every balcony and box was artistically decorated with 
a great variety of ferns and flowers. 

At the foot of the casket was placed a broken pillar 
of flowers, fittingly representing that dear body which, 
like the Lord's body, had been broken in the service of 
the brethren; while at the head was a magnificent floral 
cross and crown, the cross symbolizing his share in the 
death of Christ, and the crown symbolizing the Crown of 
Glory, which we believe he now wears with our dear 
Lord in Heaven. 

The rostrum was not large enough to contain all the 
floral designs, nor was there space available in the interior 
of The Temple to display all the floral contributions. 
But however beautiful and numerous all these were, they 

R6000 : page 360 

but very imperfectly represented the degree of love and 
esteem in which our departed Pastor was held by all who 
knew him well. 

The Committee of Arrangements were of course desirous 
of following Brother Russell's suggestion in his 
Will, and to this end requested several brethren to speak 
at the services. Among these were A.H. MacMillan, 
Menta Sturgeon, W.E. Van Amburgh, P.S.L. Johnson, 
E.W.V. Kuehn, Toledo, O.; C.A. Wise, Indianapolis, 
Ind.; J.T.D. Pyles, Washington, D.C.; I.I. Margeson, 
Boston, Mass.; F.W. Manton, Toronto, Canada; C.B. 
Shull, Columbus, Ohio; G.C. Driscoll, Dayton, Ohio; Dr. 
L.W. Jones, Chicago, III.; D. Kihlgren, Springfield, 
Mass.; Dr. A.E. McCosh, Detroit, Mich.; C.J. Woodworth, 
Scranton, Pa.; George Draper, Wichita, Kansas; 
C.H. Anderson, Baltimore, Md.; W.L. Abbott, St. Paul, 
Minn.; and J.D. Ross, Truro, N.S. But to have carried 
out the program in its entirety would have consumed considerable 
more time, and as The Temple was so crowded 
that many were obliged to stand for hours, it was deemed 
wise to reduce the number of speakers. The addresses 



/ 



s 



m 



y 



4*y 




fit* 



i 




-*ft^ 




> 



< 






*^^ 




ii*HU£:V»' 



* 



fffi 






- 



A 



, 




4 »■ 



!»■!■ 



. 






of those at the three services follow in regular order: 



R6000 : page 360 

ADDRESS AT MORNING SERVICE 
BY A. H. MACMILLAN-NEW YORK 

I am satisfied that I am expressing the sentiments of all 
present when I say that if the English language contains 
words capable of describing our feelings at the present 
time, we have not learned them yet. We are happy and 
sad, confused and perplexed; yet the way is clear— and we 
are glad! Death invariably causes a gloom wherever its 
clammy hand appears; yet, as the Apostle Paul expresses 
it, "We sorrow not as those that have no hope." Our 
glorious hope buoys us up in this trial hour, and we are 
happy because we know our Beloved Pastor is even now 
with the Lord. Numerous questions crowd themselves into 
our minds: We wonder if the work will continue in the 
future as it has in the past; whether the waters of Jordan 
will be "smitten"; who will write the Seventh Volume; to 
whom shall we go with our perplexing trials and difficulties 
as individuals and as ecclesias? It is my purpose to attempt 
to answer briefly some of these questions by relating to you 
the arrangements made by our dear Pastor before his death. 

Following the Newport Convention in July, Brother Russell 
had a serious sick spell, during which illness he called 
me to the Study and spent three and a half hours outlining 
the work that he felt was yet to be done, and endeavoring 
to make plans to carry it on. He asked me then if I would 

R6001 : page 360 

like to come back to Brooklyn and help in the work of the 
Home and Tabernacle. I gave him my reply later, offering 
my services to do what I could to help him and the other 
friends there. He told me at that time that he realized 
his strength was rapidly ebbing away and that he would 
not be with us much longer. 

From that time on it seemed to be Brother Russell's purpose 
to place much more responsibility on the heads 
of the various departments in the Tabernacle and Bethel 
work. Just before he departed upon his last trip he did 
something he was never known to do before; viz., to write 
letters to the different friends in charge of the various departments 
of the work, outlining their duties to them. Upon 
his departure he asked me to ride with him in the taxi to 
the depot. On this ride he affectionately placed his hand on 
my knee and said, "What do you think of those letters I 
have written?" I replied that I considered superhuman 
wisdom directed him in writing them and that to my understanding 
the organization for the work here was complete. 
He said, "I am glad. Brother; for no one can work without 



an organization. Now that you have my plans before you, 
proceed and do your best." Later on he wrote a letter home 
numbering the tables in the dining room, and designating 
who would serve at the head of each table. Thus you see 
that everything that he thought could be done to organize 
matters, to the end that they might run smoothly, was done. 

Respecting the continuance of THE WATCH TOWER: An 
Editorial Staff of five brethren has been appointed, and 
sufficient matter prepared to last for an indefinite period, 
so that we can continue to read the Lord's message through 
our Pastor as published in THE WATCH TOWER, even though 
he is not present with us in the flesh. It appears clear 
now that the Lord left our Beloved Pastor with us to the end 
that he might, as did St. Paul in his day, "bear the Church 
in birth until Christ would be formed" in us; and now that 
we should be able to stand without an earthly leader, the 
Lord has removed the faithful one He placed over us. 

The work before us is great, but the Lord will give us 
the necessary grace and strength to perform it. The Prophet 
Zechariah clearly indicated this course when he said that the 
Lord would smite the man that was His fellow, even as He 
smote the Shepherd. As Jesus quoted a portion of this text 
and applied it to His own experiences, we believe the remainder 
of the text is being fulfilled now. When Jesus, 
the Shepherd, was smitten, the sheep were scattered abroad 
and were rent, torn and greatly perplexed until they were 
gathered at Pentecost and endued with power to go on with 
the work. We notice in this connection, however, that following 
the smiting of the Lord's "fellow," there would be 
no scattering of the sheep, but the reverse— the "Hand" or 
power of the great Jehovah God would rest upon the little 
ones left over.— Zech. 13:7. 

And now, dear friends, what are we to think about 
this matter? The Lord has taken away our earthly leader; 
and some faint-hearted workers may think the time has 
come to lay clown our harvesting instruments and wait until 
the Lord calls us home. This is not the time for slackers to 
be heard. This is a time for action— more determined action 
than ever before! Let us, by God's grace, resolve that we 
will take up the work where our Beloved Pastor left it, and 
with determined purpose keep high aloft the banner of Truth, 
until the waters of Jordan have been smitten and divided 
asunder, and the last member of the Elijah class has been 
taken to Heavenly glory. May the Lord help us all as we 
endeavor to serve Him! 



R6001 : page 360 

ADDRESSES AT AFTERNOON SERVICE 

PASTOR RUSSELL'S LAST DAYS-BY MENTA STURGEON-NEW YORK 

On Monday afternoon, October 16th, at five o'clock, 
Brother Russell left the Bethel Home for the last time. 



At the noon hour he informed the dearest family (to him) 
on earth that he expected to be absent from them for a 
short time, and expressed for them the hope that during 
his absence they might be happy and prosperous under the 
blessings of the Lord. He also said that he expected that 
he and the one accompanying him would enjoy themselves 
in the Lord's service. Then, while he and the family stood 
at their places, he offered a solemn prayer, beginning with 
the words: 

"O Lord, Thy promised grace impart. 

And fill each consecrated heart!" 
and quietly withdrew to his Study. There he dictated nine 
letters, giving instructions to various ones respecting their 
duties. At the appointed hour he went forth, never more 
to return, saying "goodby" to the friends in the hall as he 
passed out and started for the station. 

When the Lehigh Valley train pulled out of Jersey City 
at six o'clock p. m., it carried away our precious Brother 
on his last pilgrim journey, which was to end in Heaven. 
Having held public meetings at Providence and Fall River 
the day previous, he was tired to start with, and consequently 
did not dictate on the train that evening, as was 
his custom. In fact, he retired earlier than usual, saying 
"Good-night" as he did so. In the morning, in answer to 
the question as to how he rested, he gave his usual answer 

R6001 : page 361 

during his recent trips, "On both sides," meaning, of course, 
that he changed sides frequently during the night. 

He often told us of late that he scarcely slept at all, 
was awake every hour of the night, and thought pretty 
much day and night. He had the care of all the churches 
upon his heart, and his physical ailments would not permit 
much rest. He always ate sparingly, and would carefully 
note the effect of everything he ate or drank. Frequently 
would lie divide his portion with his companion, in order 
to economize. It was his invariable custom to return thanks 
before all meals, whether in hotels, on trains, or where not. 
He had a beautiful way of making the one who traveled with 
him feel at ease, and not consider himself merely as a servant, 
by handing him enough money at the beginning of the journey 
to cover all his incidental expenses during the trip. He 
would then arrange that we pay each other's expenses alternately; 
he paying all expenses for both one day, and his companion 
paying all expenses for both the next day, and so 
on during the entire trip. 

On Tuesday morning we passed over the line into Canada; 
and he wittily inquired, "Did you not feel the bridge bulge 
in the center as we crossed over?" Respecting Canada he 
said, "They will not molest us so long as we are just 
passing through; and as to visiting Canada, I have no desire 
to do so if they do not want me." On two previous occasions 
he had had severe trials in Hamilton, Ontario; but 
on this occasion he did not even recognize Hamilton as 
we passed through. We changed trains, and also our 



watches, at London; and ere long made our first stop, Detroit, 
on Tuesday afternoon. It was at this point that 
Brother Russell's trials began; and they grew steadily deeper 
and severer until the end of the way. He was physically weak 
and weary, yet listened patiently to a brother's grievances 
as he recited them, and then did what he could to reconcile 
two brethren. The chauffeur took us to the wrong place 
and consumed valuable time. Our street car connections 
were poorly made. A matter of the greatest importance in 
connection with the Harvest work fell flat. He was much 
disappointed and perplexed. 

DIFFICULTIES ON THE WAY 

Aboard the Pere Marquette en route for Lansing, Mich., 
he remarked, "We did not expect that we would be traveling 
together to Lansing when first we met"; and the listener 
was surprised to find that he well remembered our 
first meeting together years ago, in Allegheny. This was 
his way of showing his interest in and love for the one 
whom he had taken with him from Bethel to accompany 
him on this last journey. The public meeting at Lansing 
was well attended; but, for some reason, the interest 
waned and many left; so much so, that Brother Russell 
spoke of it afterwards, and seemed puzzled. At the railroad 
station he conversed with a dear brother on business 
matters until midnight, when he remarked that he would 
have to retire. 

The next morning, Wednesday, at seven o'clock we expected 
to be in Chicago, but found ourselves instead side-tracked 
at Kalamazoo, without any reliable information as 
to what to expect. The wreckage of a freight train during 
the night had caused the delay, we were informed, and a 
detour of fifty miles would be necessary to enable us to reach 
our destination. There was no dining car on the train, and 
neither could we secure anything to eat on account of uncertainties. 
It was at this point that a box of peanut butter 
sandwiches, which had been given to us by a thoughtful 
friend in Brooklyn, came in just right. It made our breakfast, 
and afterwards our lunch. Reaching Chicago some 
six and a half hours late, we found that we had missed 
our connections for Springfield and would consequently be 
unable to make the appointment for that place, even though 
we figured every possible way. It was at Chicago that his 
physical endurance was taxed to the limit. Circumstances 
made it necessary for us to walk several miles, until the 
writer was growing weary and was sure that Brother Russell 
must be worn out also, although no remarks of the 
kind passed between us. All of this occurred after a few 
hours' rest during the previous night and with but little to eat. 

It was in the Union Station at Chicago, while making 
preparations for leaving on the Wednesday evening train 

R6002: page 361 

for Kansas City via Springfield, that a lady from the South, 



who had been visiting with her daughter and her son in 

Chicago for some time, came up to Brother Russell, introduced 

herself as the daughter of a certain lady who had 

formerly lived in Allegheny, who was a believer in the 

Truth, and whose funeral Brother Russell had conducted. 

She explained that, while she was not "one of us" in the 

fullest sense, yet she believed, and was especially interested 

in the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION-so much so that she was 

writing a book on it, calling it The Golden Age; and she 

desired to have a copy of the SCENARIO. This SCENARIO was 

both promised and sent. Brother Russell, as usual, inquired 

respecting the consecration of herself and daughter, and they 

expressed themselves as seriously considering the matter. 

How many times have I heard him ask people on the trains, 
in the stations, hotels, everywhere, "Are you consecrated?" 
He nearly always brought this in. He had many opportunities; 
for people recognized him everywhere and desired 
to speak or have a few words with him. People on the 
train knew him— brakemen, porters, conductors and passengers. 
In the stations, hotels, on the streets, everywhere, he 
was recognized. Many a time people came to me on the train 
and inquired. "Is that not Pastor Russell? and would say. 
"I knew him by his picture in the paper," or "I heard him 
lecture at such and such a place." Sometimes they would 
inquire just after he had walked through the train, "Who 
is that distinguished gentleman with you'.'" In this way 
we were able to send out many First Volumes and other 
printed matter of the Society. 

LOSS OF BROTHER RUSSELL'S VALISE 

It was toward midnight when we reached Springfield, 
where tickets would have to be procured. Brother Russell 
sat up late and intended to stay up until we reached Springfield; 
but, responding to gentle persuasion, he left the matters 
to be attended to in my hands, and retired. It was a 
rainy, cold night; but still there were faithful friends waiting 
at the station in order to give him his mail and have a few 
words with him. They were satisfied when we explained 
the conditions to them, gave the writer Brother Russell's 
mail and sent much Christian love to him, which he much 
appreciated. The brother who substituted for Brother Russell 
at Springfield said that the friends had encountered 
less objection in preparing for the public lecture than at 
any previous time; and he attributed this to the good 
and thorough work done on a previous visit, when Brother 
Russell spoke at the State Fair. 

At Kansas City on Thursday morning we encountered 
so many difficulties in purchasing tickets for the West that 
it became necessary that I make a trip up into the city 
through the rain, and with such delay that Brother Russell 
did here what we had never before known him to do; 
viz., run to catch a train. We are saying these things to 
show how different this trip was from anything that had 
ever preceded it, and how his trials increased as he proceeded 
on his journey. We reached Wichita Thursday afternoon 



in time for an afternoon meeting; but it, with other 
work in Wichita, was more or less interfered with by the 
loss of Brother Russell's valise. The dear brother who 
took it in charge, in getting his auto ready, placed the valise 
on the foot-board, and in starting off, forgot to take it in 
with him, with the result that it fell off somewhere between 
the station and the place of meeting. This caused the writer 
to leave off taking notes of the discourse, and go back with 
the brother in an effort to locate the lost article. We did 
everything we could, to no avail, and finally inserted a 
notice in the newspaper offering a reward to anyone who 
would return the grip. 

We remained over the next day in the hope of getting 
it, and in the meantime made some necessary purchases of 
articles that Brother Russell would need on the journey. 
The public meeting was held at night, after which he was 
quite tired. The next morning he was later than usual 
in coming from his room; but after breakfast we worked 
together until noon on some documents and letters that 
he had previously dictated. It was here that a traveling 
salesman of fine appearance introduced himself to Brother 

R6002 : page 362 

Russell as interested in his writings. He proved to be the 
son of a prominent minister in Allegheny who, at one 
time, bitterly opposed Brother Russell and the work he 
was doing. This gentleman's wife was also interested; and 
we afterwards met her at the public meeting in Dallas, 
Texas. Having done everything we could to locate the missing 
valise, we finally gave up the search, and were shortly 
on the train en route for the Dallas Convention. 

EXPERIENCES AT DALLAS 

As we arrived at Fort Worth at an early hour, it was 
not convenient for the friends to meet us, and we took the 
Electric for Dallas. The State Fair at Dallas was in progress, 
and every hotel was crowded. On account of Brother 
Russell's physical condition we were obliged to leave the 
car before reaching Dallas; so that when we came in by 
foot, after walking some seven blocks through crowded 
streets, all connections with the brethren were broken. After 
some difficulty they found us. The hotels were all over-crowded; 
we were consequently taken to a private rooming 
house, where several of the brethren attending the Convention 
were located. There we remained Saturday and Sunday, 
until our departure for his next appointment. 

Brother Russell closed the Dallas Convention with a Love 
Feast and was much impressed with the earnestness and 
evident sincerity of the friends there. That night he spoke 
to the public for two and a half hours, during the course of 
which talk there was no little confusion on the rear of the 
stage by the coming and going of a theatrical troupe that was 
to play in the theater that night. One of the members of this 
troop recognized Pastor Russell as the speaker and asked 



permission to join in the closing song. He had a strong, 
mellow voice, and joined heartily in singing, "All hail the 
power of Jesus' name!" After a little rest at the nearest 
hotel, several of us walked to the station, and there had to 
work our way slowly through the jam as best we could, it 
taking us fully a half-hour to reach our train after arriving 
at the station. Boarding the train at Dallas that night, 
October 22d, Brother Russell was tired, and his head was 
aching. Some medicine was taken, and he retired. 

Upon arriving in Galveston the next morning, he was not 
well by any means; but the brethren having arranged for 
a morning meeting, he consented to speak to the friends 
at 1 1:30, following a discourse by Brother Sturgeon. It 
was at this meeting that he did something we never knew 
him to do before. He wrote on a piece of paper his text 
and one verse of a song, and told the friends that he 
had done so that he might make no mistake. This paper 
is now before us and reads: 

"WHEN YE SEE THESE THINGS begin to come to pass, 
then lift up your heads and rejoice, knowing that your 
deliverance draweth nigh." 

"Then let our songs abound. 

And every tear be dry; 

We're traveling through Immanuel's ground, 

To fairer prospects nigh." 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S LAST MEAL 

This discourse was taken down, and will be printed in 
due time. The last letters Brother Russell dictated were 
just before going to this meeting. After it was over the 
brethren gave him a drive down the Sea Wall Boulevard; 
and he seemed to enjoy the balmy sea breeze and the beautiful, 
rolling waters of the Gulf of Mexico. During the little 
outing on the Boulevard, a dear brother laid before Brother 
Russell his troubles and received advice. There were 
nine brethren who took dinner with us that day at the 
Hotel Galvez; and he answered their questions, and seemed 
to enjoy the fellowship and the meal. This proved to be 
the last meal that Brother Russell ate. Hereafter it was 
to be a little fruit juice, a swallow or two of a soft-boiled 
egg, or something like that. 

We were presently off for the public meeting in Galveston, 
which was held in a capacious, beautiful auditorium; 
but, it being Monday afternoon, not more than 500 were 
present. However, he had to work just as hard, and even 
harder, and was very tired at the close. Going by auto 
to the Post Office and then to the train, the friends were 
there to talk and ask questions until time for leaving, 
he, in the meantime, eating nothing. At 7:45 we were at 
Houston, and there were eager, earnest friends waiting for 
him, who accompanied him to a well-filled auditorium containing 
some 1,200 people, to whom he spoke for about two 
and a half hours, making a total of six hours talking on 
Monday, Oct. 23d. Was he tired? Was he worn and weary? 

Traveling all night then and reaching the home of Sister 



Frost Tuesday morning, it was not surprising to find him 
in much physical pain. His labors were telling on him more 
than ever. His overworked body began to break at its weakest 
point. Cystitis was becoming acute. We secured various 
things for him that morning— in fact, everything he wished, 
and he seemed to know exactly what to get and do. He 
worked faithfully on his case all morning; and although we 
had gone to see a doctor who was somewhat interested in 
the Truth and who would gladly have called to see him, 
yet it was not his wish. He appreciated the kind offer, 
but indicated that he would not need a physician's services. 
He had himself the best knowledge of the case to be had, 
was most skilful in its treatment, and had a servant at 
hand who would do readily and gladly anything he desired. 
This was all he wished. The choicest of fruit was placed 
just outside his door, but he did not touch it. 

R6003 : page 362 

Conditions were getting serious. Brother Russell signed a 
few letters we had written, gave us to understand that we 
were doing a more important work than we realized and 
then had us substitute for him at the 1 1 o'clock meeting at 
the Hall. Sister Frost generously placed her auto at our 
disposal, so that we could easily and quickly go to and fro. 
He went to dinner with us, talked pleasantly to everyone, 
and was as humorous as usual; but he ate nothing, although 
the dinner was excellent. After the meal we went upstairs 
together arm in arm to his room; and after talking for 
awhile, he asked us to take the consecration service at the 
Hall at 3 o'clock. This we did and returned immediately 
to his room. 

I then went to every telegraph office in town in search 
for a telegram which he felt sure would be here from 
Chicago, since we had not received it at Dallas. His valise 
had, however, been received at Dallas. A little girl, having 
found it in Wichita, had held it until she learned what to 
do with it, through the notice we had inserted in the newspaper. 
She received her reward, and was glad. Brother 
Russell was disappointed again and again at not receiving 
certain telegrams. Returning, we remained close to him the 
rest of the day, and in fact, was very close to him for the 
next week. One week thence he would be in glory. 

HIS LAST PUBLIC DISCOURSE 

The night was drawing on. I was seated on the low 
window sill close by his side, my hands rested upon his 
knee and my face was turned up toward his. Love like 
electricity was flowing from face to face and heart to heart. 
We talked in whispered tones; and he said during the quiet, 
lovely conversation, "Dear brother, please remain close tonight 
and be ready to pick up the thread of thought where 
I drop it." All this seemed very unusual, and yet was 
spoken in such a way as not to be disquieting. His companion 
was being deeply impressed, and watched his face. 



eyes and words as with an under-sight. He was meditative. 
He was responsive without saying a word. 

The evening lecture was given in the largest and best 
theater in San Antonio. It is indeed a beautiful structure. 
The dress circle below and the three balconies above were 
filled with earnest, intelligent faces. We have never seen a 
meeting more beautiful. The lecture on the subject of "The 
World on Fire" was begun under the most favorable conditions. 
You can picture it at your best, and you will not 
miss it far. 

When all was in readiness at 8:10, Brother Russell stepped 
to the front of the platform and began his last public discourse. 
The scene was most beautiful and impressive. I was 
seated at his right, behind the screen, and could see every 
motion he made. All went well for about forty-five minutes, 
when I thought I could see that he was going to leave the 
platform. Without any sign of suffering, with perfect self-poise, 
quietly did he walk off the rostrum, while I endeavored 

R6003 : page 363 

to walk on just as orderly and quietly, and, without a word 
of explanation, "picked up the thread where he had dropped 
it." I continued for about five minutes, when he returned, 
at which time it became my privilege to retire as quietly 
as did he, and resume my seat behind the curtain. My 
eyes were riveted upon him for another half hour, when 
he left again and I came on, endeavoring to clinch what he 
had taught them by the use of Elijah as a type. 

He returned the second time, after an absence of seven 
minutes, and proceeded with his discourse. He was telling 
the audience about the formation of the first creed at 
Nicaea, by the Bishops under the direction of the Roman 
Emperor Constantine, when he left again. The thread of 
history was easily gathered up and carried forward for 
about ten minutes, when the thought began to run through 
my mind, "I wonder if he wishes me to close the discourse?" 
Then in our dear teacher came, just in time to bring the 
whole discourse to a fitting close. It was a wonderful climax 
to all his public lectures. He seemed to me to stand in a 
halo of glory. Leading the great audience in singing, "All 
hail the power of Jesus' name," he prayed most impressively, 
and found me waiting for him as he came from the platform. 
He sat in the chair which I had been using; and 
while resting, a friend took several kodak pictures of him. 
They being the last, we hope they may be the best. 

EN ROUTE TO CALIFORNIA 

We were escorted to the train by the one who had entertained 
us in her home and supplied our every need, of 
whom it may be truly said, "She hath done what she could." 
She said that she was glad to break the alabaster box, and 
handed me money enough to secure a Pullman drawing-room 
from San Antonio to our western destination. Brother Russell 
at first refused this, thinking it was too much, but was 



afterwards induced to accept the kind offer, and well he 
did; for that night he was up thirty-six times in seven hours! 

It was just after leaving San Antonio that I had the 
privilege and pleasure of untying and removing his shoes 
for the first time. Hitherto he would not permit this, although 
I had several times made the offer; but now he 
acquiesced readily, and said, in his gracious manner, "Thank 
you!" The next morning he was a sick man, although he 
was not ready to admit it. He kept to his bed all day 
Wednesday. While he lay there in his berth, I took a seat 
on the couch, near him. I watched every move he made, 
stroked his head, and thought what a stupendous amount of 
work that brain had done! Taking his soft, gentle right 
hand and letting it rest in the palm of my left hand, I gently 
stroked it with my right; and thinking of his lecture at San 
Antonio the previous night and of the many times I had seen 
him use that hand so graciously when exposing the errors 
of the creeds of men as contrasted with the Word of God, 
I said to him, "That is the greatest creed-smashing hand I 
ever saw!" He replied that he did not think it would smash 
any more creeds. 

This led me to inquire, "Who will smite the River 
Jordan?" To this he responded, "Some one else can do that." 
"But how about the payment of the penny?" I asked. He 
hesitated for a moment and said, "I don't know." Brother 
Russell was evidently perplexed. We then talked about his 
physical condition. What he said about his sufferings was 
this: "I always thought I should have some severe sufferings 
before I finished my course, but thought when I had 
the trouble in Pittsburgh, that was it. But if the Lord wants 
to add this also, it is all right." 

During the course of this conversation he said, "What 
shall we do?" Prayerfully considering the matter, I said, 
"Well, Brother Russell, you seem to know your case better 
than anyone else could know, and you have thought of 
everything that can be done. Have I done everything that 
you can think of that I ought to do?" His answer will 
never be forgotten. His words were laden with comfort 
ocean-deep, when in a still, small voice he said, "Yes, you 
have; I do not know what I would do without you." 

Every move he made and every word he uttered only 
made me think the deeper, and yet I could hardly think of 
Brother Russell's life coming to a close. My thought was 
his thought, and the thought of all the friends, that he 
would probably be here until the last, and would be translated 
after the work is over. Having this in mind, I answered 
his question by saying, "Since we have done everything 
we know, and you are getting weaker all the time— your 
vitality is being drained while you are eating nothing to 
replenish it— I think that if we return to Brooklyn, you will 
find something there that will put you on your feet again." 
His reply to this suggestion was, "The Lord permitted us to 
make out this route." From this I inferred that he meant: 
The route that we had laid out, and according to which our 
whole schedule had been arranged, represented the will of 
the Lord for us; and we must therefore do our utmost 



in carrying it out. The writer's original thought about this 
route was, that after Brother Russell had had such a heavy, 
strenuous summer season on account of the many Conventions 
attended, it would be better to take the Mallory 
Line Steamer at New York and go all the way to Galveston 
by water; but his objection was that it was too round-about 
and would take too much time. 

DETAINED AT DEL RIO 

We were moving rapidly through southern Texas on 
the Southern Pacific and were approaching Del Rio when we 
learned that a bridge ahead of us had been burned during 
the night and that we would likely be held up for some 
time. Our train halted at Del Rio; and we found ourselves 
in the midst of an encampment of border soldiers. 
The soldiers were marching through the streets, the bands 
were playing, and much noise was made in every direction. 
In addition to this, three train loads of troopers were pulled 
in on the siding near us; and these men, not being permitted 
to leave the trains, were continually yelling and engaging 
in all kinds of frivolities and jokes. This continued 
all through that day and night. Besides, the weather was 
hot down there. But never one word of complaint did 
Brother Russell make. He did not even make mention of 
the soldiers and the noise. 

Del Rio being a town of some 10,000 inhabitants, we 
were able to get a few needful things there. At one time 
we suggested to Brother Russell that he let us go up into the 
town— get the leading doctor, and ascertain his idea of what 
would be the best thing to do in a case similar to his without 
letting him know for whom we were seeking the information; 
but this did not appeal to him to be the proper thing. 
The steward on the dining car knew Brother Russell, came 
in to see him, showed us many kindnesses, and offered to 
do anything he could. The diner was three Pullmans ahead 

R6004 : page 363 

of us. Consequently we had to walk that distance for every 
little thing needed. After one full day's delay we pulled 
out of Del Rio on Thursday morning, and were the first 
ones to pass over the rebuilt bridge. 

When our train began to go over the bridge, we hastened 
in to tell Brother Russell. We reached the drawing-room 
just as our car had come to the middle of the bridge. Upon 
our mentioning it to him, he sat up in bed and looked out 
the window. By that time we were over, whereupon we remarked, 
"Brother Russell, we have often heard you speak 
about the time when we shall pass over the river; and now, 
at last, we are over." A sweet smile came over his face, 
but he said not a word. We began to think that he might 
pass over, but surely not very soon. It was October, and 
it occurred to us that as we were delayed one day before 
passing over the river in southern Texas, so he might tarry 
with us one prophetic day and pass over by October, 1917. 



With these thoughts running through our mind, we were 
doing our best to serve our dear, patient, uncomplaining, 
appreciative Brother Russell in every way we could. It 
was difficult to give him a drink of water without spilling 
it except we first raised him. There was plenty to do night 
and day, and we esteemed it a great privilege. We often 
thought to be all the more faithful because of the dear 
friends at home. 

On Friday night, when we reached a junction point in 
California where we had to change trains. Brother Russell 
arose and dressed as usual, although, of course, he was 

R6004 : page 364 

very weak. This is just what we thought he would do 
when it came time for his next meeting; for he had often 
done so before. All day Saturday, under severe pain, in 
great weakness, with obstructions piling up before him every 
moment, he struggled with business propositions like a giant. 
We have never seen or heard of anything to equal his heroism. 
Friends had disappointed him, and he wondered if the 
Lord were not against him in some things. His trials thickened 
and deepened. Not a murmur or complaint did lie utter. 
He had promised the Lord that he would not, and he kept his 
promise. He was so great that I nearly always hesitated about 
drawing near to him. 

ON TO LOS ANGELES 

Our train was an hour or more late in arriving in Los 
Angeles on Sunday morning, October 29th, and we had had 
nothing to eat. The brethren were rejoiced to see us, but 
their countenances changed when they saw our dear Brother 
Russell. They saw that he was weak, but they knew not 
how sick he was. Besides, he would not yet admit that he 
was really sick. By ten o'clock we had reached the hotel, 
and I asked him if I could not get him something to eat. He 
said he was not hungry and asked me to suggest something. 
This I did. He consented to my getting something, but only 
tasted a little of it. Upon bringing it to him, he asked if I 
had had my breakfast; and when I answered, no, he wanted to 
know why. I told him that it was because I wanted him 
to have his first. He said he would not eat his until I 
had first had my breakfast. 

This was just like Brother Russell. He was always so 
considerate of others. Whenever he would ask me to do 
anything for him, lie would say "Please"; and when it was 
done he would invariably say, "Thank you." He was a 
wonder! Brother Homer Lee did what he could for Brother 
Russell while we were there and, upon our departure, gave 
me his best remedies, and hoped they would do him good. 
The brethren in Los Angeles were kind in every way. 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S LAST ADDRESS TO THE CHURCH 

When the time came for the meeting with the friends 



in the afternoon. Brother Russell arose and made ready to 
go, the brethren having come for him in their auto. It was 
4:30 Sunday afternoon when we left the hotel for the meeting, 
which was held in the same auditorium in which the 
Los Angeles Convention was held during the first part of 
September. It is a quiet and suitable hall. We do not know 
of any better or more appropriate place in which Brother 
Russell could have given his last message to the Church. He 
cautioned the brethren against exposing his physical condition 
by saying, "Don't give me away. Brethren." 

You know that our dear Brother was so considerate of 
the feelings of others that he never drew much on the sympathy 
of the friends— so considerate was he, that but few knew 
that he had been a physical sufferer for thirty years. On 
one occasion recently he sent word to the Bethel Family 
that he would not be down to breakfast; and afterwards 
he told me that it was on account of the family that he 
did not come— that they had such deep sympathy for him 
that he did not like to draw on their vitality. He had learned 
to lean on the Strong Arm alone! He did not need us 
particularly, but we needed him. 

We were on the alert to comply with his every wish; 
and therefore no one called attention to his condition, and 
in that sense did not "give him away." However, he gave 
himself away. To a keen observer his very presence spoke 
volumes. But more than that, when he stepped to the front 
of the platform to begin to speak, out of consideration for 
the splendid audience before him (for every seat was occupied) 
he said, "I regret that I am not able to speak with 
force or power," and then beckoned to the Chairman to 
remove the stand and bring a chair. As he sat down, he 
said, "Pardon me for sitting down, please." In deep humility, 
in great suffering and in the most solemn manner, he spoke 
for about forty-five minutes, and then answered questions for 
a short period. 

Finally he said, "I must say goodby to you all, and 
give you a text for your remembrance— Numbers 6:24-26: 
'The Lord bless thee and keep thee; the Lord make His 
face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee; the 
Lord lift up His countenance upon thee, and give thee 
peace.' May the Lord's blessing be with you richly; He 
has blessed the Los Angeles Class a great deal. Each one 
should desire to do his own share. No matter what others 
may do, each one do his share. Now sing Number One: 

"Abide, sweet Spirit, Heavenly Dove, 

With light and comfort from Above; 

Be Thou our guardian, Thou our Guide, 

O'er every thought and step preside.'" 

PRESERVE THIS SPIRIT IN YOUR MIDST 

Continuing, he said, "Isn't this a beautiful thought? Preserve 
this spirit in your midst. Have perfect confidence in 
the Lord, and you will be led aright. We were not brought 
into the Truth by any human catch-word, but by the Word 
of the Lord. We know that the Lord will bring out everything 



all right. I bid you all good by." Thus, at 6:05 p. m. 
Sunday, October 29th, when he left that platform, he had 
delivered his last address to the Church on this side of 
the veil, forever. Our hearts are bowed low! We humbly 
worship God, our Heavenly Father, at the feet of Jesus. We 
would prefer to keep silent; but for the Church's sake we 
will proceed: 

Several tried to speak to Brother Russell in the auto 
as we rode away, but they were too late. We were presently 
at the station; and when we stepped out, we left one 
behind. It was the privilege of Brother Sherman to be with 
us at the station and to do us many kindnesses. When 
Brother Russell signed his name to the railroad ticket at 
Kansas City, it was his last. It was now our privilege to 
sign his name for him. We went to the train while Brother 
Sherman went to the nearest drug store to make a purchase 
for him. He returned at 6:30 and we said goodby. 
Santa Fe train No. 10 pulled out; we entered the drawing-room 
of car Roseisle; and in shutting to and locking the door, 
we shut him in and shut others out forever. Thenceforth 
Gethsemane! Victory! Glory! 

THE RETURN JOURNEY BEGUN 

He had me place various articles that he would need 
during the night in convenient places— under the covers, under 
his pillows, on the window-sills, so that he could reach 
them without disturbing me. We did everything just as he 
directed, were glad to do so, and told him so. He said, "Thank 
you; I have you do some things because you are so willing." 
It was my pleasure to be the nurse while he was 
both physician and patient; and when the patient— how true 
the name!— no longer needed the services of either the 
physician or the nurse, the nurse became the undertaker 
and did those last sad and solemn rites which lie had seen 
others do before. I was careful to inquire, "Is everything 
all right. Brother Russell?" He assured me that it 
was, thanked me, asked me to take my rest, indicated how 
he would call in case he needed me, bade me good night, and 
turned on his left side with his face toward the window. 

We do not know how long it was afterwards when we 
were aroused from slumber by his knocking and calling us 
by name— it was probably a couple of hours. But we went 
to him quickly, did what was required, heard him say again 
"Thank you," and again lay down. This time, however, we 
did so with the thought that we would not sleep so soundly. 
In another hour he knocked and called again; and we were 
at his side, and soon discovered that another chill was coming 
on. He had had his first one two nights before. We put 
five Pullman blankets upon him and tucked them in close 
on every side; but still he shook. We gave him what was 
required, and was glad when the rigors ceased. We remained 
by his side, lying down at times on the couch beside him. 

PREPARATIONS FOR DEATH 



Toward morning he had me make a robe for convenience 
sake by pinning a sheet inside of a blanket, wrapping him 
in it like a robe and fastening it under his chin. He stood 
up on the floor for this purpose, and then lay down on the 
couch instead of returning to his berth. I therefore sat on 
his bed while he lay before me. After several hours his 
robe proved to be rather inconvenient, because the sheet 

R6005 : page 365 

and blanket could not be kept together. It was then that he 
stood again and said, "Please make me a Roman toga." 

I did not understand what he meant, but did not like to 
have him repeat, because he was so weak. His voice had become 
so weak that he had to repeat nearly everything he said. 
I had said to him at several times, "Dear Brother Russell, I 
do not like to ask you to repeat anything (It had always 
been my custom to listen to him so closely in all his dictation 
as not to require any repetition); but your voice is so 
weak that one can scarcely hear you." He would always repeat 
until at last the repetition would do no good, after 
which he made signs. Finally the signs failed. 

I said, "Brother Russell, I do not understand what you 
mean." He said, "I will show you." He had me take a 
clean sheet and turn it down twelve inches from the top; 
and then a second one the same. Placing his left hand on 
his right shoulder, he said, "Fasten them together here." Having 
in my pocket a paper of safety-pins which I had recently 
purchased, it was easy for me to hold the sheets together 
on his right shoulder and at the same time reach into my 
pocket and get a safety-pin. The sheets being fastened with 
the pin, as he had directed, he said, "Now fasten them together 
on the other shoulder." This I did. There he stood, 
one sheet extending from his neck to his feet in front and 
the other in the back, fastened together on his two shoulders, 
and folded together at the edges. He stood erect before me 
for a moment without saying a word, then lay down on the 
couch on his back, closed his eyes, and lay there before 
me as in a shroud, a perfect picture of death. 

I sat on the side of the bed watching him, beholding 
him, and the thought of death went through my mind. It 
was difficult for me to get the thought into my head that 
Brother Russell was going to die. I could not exactly believe 
it, even now. It all seemed so foreign to what we 
had expected. However, I know now that the Lord was 
gradually teaching us both from the time we had left San 
Antonio until now that Brother Russell's end was drawing 
on apace. How much Brother Russell may have understood 
or meant by these movements we may not surely know. They 
were at least the wisest things that could be done in his 
case; but to us they mean far more, and we believe that 
the Lord so arranged. The toga was worn by Roman officials 
and sometimes by priests, and sometimes symbolized 
victory and peace, and at other times that the one wearing 
it had fulfilled his vows. To the writer's mind all these 
things are meant. He had fulfilled his vows! he had gained 



the victory! he was at peace! Thenceforth there was laid 
up for him a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord would 
shortly place upon his noble brow. 

CONCERNING THE SEVENTH VOLUME 

With those scenes before me and with thoughts of the 
end running through my mind, it was only natural for me 
to say to myself. Had you not better ask Brother Russell 
concerning some things? It was in this mood and in this 
connection that we inquired respecting the Seventh Volume, 
and received his answer, "Some one else can write that." 
We were satisfied. He had spoken concerning the smiting 
of the Jordan, the payment of the Penny and the writing 
of the Seventh Volume; and this was enough. There was 
nothing left to doubt or fear. We believe that he said 
everything that he desired to say, and that the Lord gave 
through him all that He wished the Church to have respecting 
these great, vital and important matters. Brother 
Russell seemed to have no desire, neither did there seem 
to be any need, to say and do a lot of little things at the 
close of his life that had been left undone. He had finished 
his course. His labors were o'er. He was ready to be offered. 

We were solemnly busy throughout the day (Monday), 
so much so that we had no time for either dinner or supper. 
When night drew on, he was in his berth; and I lay down 
on the couch, with clothes on, to rest awhile. I was just 
about to sink into sleep when I thought I heard the words, 
"Brother Sturgeon." As I came to, the experiences of Samuel 
came into my mind. I leaned over him and said, "Brother 
Russell, did you call me?" He answered "Yes," and gave 
me some little thing to do, after which I lay down the 
second time. Ere long I thought I heard my name called 
again. I inquired as before, bent over close to him 
and heard him whisper, "I am trying to find something for 
you to do." From this I inferred, "Brother Russell wants 
me to stay awake tonight"; and it proved to be even so. 

DEATH DRAWING NEAR 

I kept doing many little, necessary things in harmony 
with his words or signs until another chill (the third one) 
came on. I folded blanket after blanket over him, tucked 
them in close to him; but still he shook. I therefore lay on 
him and pressed my face to his until I felt the warmth returning 
to his body. The fact that this was the third chill 
in four nights deepened the impression in my mind that the 
end was drawing near. 

About midnight a great change came over him. He no 
longer cared for any of his medicine, and did not even seem 
to thirst for water as heretofore. Some things almost ceased. 
His pain settled deeper in. He could no longer lie straight 
in bed as formerly. He must sit up; and when he would 
lie down, he would double together, and his head would 
rest straight toward the window and free from the pillows. 
In this posture he would be quiet for awhile until his mouth 



would fill from his stomach, and he would signal to be 
raised. Being relieved of this, he would request to be lowered 
for comfort, until, to prevent strangulation, he would be 
raised again. This prevented it, and proper attention given, 
he would lie down again to get relief from pain. 

This continued for seven hours with increased frequency 
and weakness. When he could no longer make his wishes 
known by words, he would do so by signs. When lying 
across the bed and desiring to be raised, he would lift his 
right hand and arm in such a way that my head would fit 
in the curvature of his arm and he could cling to my neck, 
while my left arm could fit around his neck, and thus elevate 
him to a sitting posture. This continued until the thought 
arose in my mind as to who would become exhausted first. 
I thought of the friends at home, of the many interested 
friends everywhere. I looked to the Lord, and steeled myself, 
saying, "I will stay with him to the finish." 

In the early morning he surrendered. He was exhausted; 
and I could now lay him straight in bed with his head on 
the pillow in its accustomed place, and he could at last rest. 
The calm after the storm had come. He was now to die 
gradually, regularly, peacefully; and I was to stand by watching 
him, loving him, and expressing my affection for him 
by gently stroking his hair and his beard and rubbing his 
head, his face, his hands, and his feet. I did not seem 
to be able to do enough for him, now that he had passed 
beyond a certain line. 

THE LAST HOURS 

Several times on Monday I raised him up in bed, sat 
behind him so as to brace him; and his head would lean 
against mine. Once he whispered, "Have you anything to 
suggest?" I had; for I wished him to return direct to Galveston 
and take the steamer for New York, or else go 
through by train without stopping at Topeka, Tulsa or 
Lincoln. He answered, "Sufficient unto the day is the evil 
thereof," by which I understood him to mean that Topeka 
and other places would take care of themselves when we 
got to them, and that we need not consider them as yet. It 
was then that I asked him respecting the Seventh Volume, 
and afterwards sat meditating what to suggest. After a 
period of perfect silence I thought I would say something 
to him about dying and certain matters connected therewith, 
but I hesitated and hardly knew how to begin. He was sitting 
up in bed and I put my arm around his neck and said, 
"Brother Russell, you are a very sick man." His lip quivered; 
we lowered him, and turned away to weep. I had gone far 
enough in that direction. I knew not to attempt that again. 
It was evident that neither he nor I could stand it, and 
that nothing more could be done. 

The most wonderful thing about this most wonderful 
man was that, during all his sufferings, trials, inconveniences 
and perplexities, he spoke not a word of complaint'. 

R6005 : page 366 



he heaved not a sigh; he uttered not a moan; he shed not 
a tear. He had resolved that he would not murmur nor 
complain, and he kept his resolution to the end. He literally 
died in doing the Father's will, and thus fulfilled his vow. 
"Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord from henceforth." 

BROTHER RUSSELL'S DEATH 

We watched by his side all Tuesday morning with but 
little to do except to watch and pray. Noticing that this 
was the last day of October, we concluded that he would 
died before midnight, and consequently wrote out the following 
telegram to the friends in Brooklyn: "Before October 
closes our dearly Beloved Brother Russell will be with the 
Lord in glory. We are alone in Car Roseisle on Santa Fe 
train No. 10, due in Kansas City 7:35 Wednesday morning, 
and he is dying like a hero. After embalming will come 
home with his remains, or else go direct to Pittsburgh." We 
called in the Pullman conductor and also the porter and 
said, "We want you to see how a great man of God can 
die." The sight deeply impressed them, especially the porter. 

R6006 : page 366 

I called in the regular conductor, and telegraphed for a 
physician to board the train at Panhandle; and he did. He 
saw the condition, recognized the correctness of the diagnosis 
and conclusion, gave me his name, and was off before the 
train got under headway. 

At one o'clock all were dismissed from the room, the door 
was locked, and we quietly watched over him until he breathed 
his last. We had observed the approaching signs of death 
before calling in the trainmen. These continued until the 
finger nails became discolored, the cold perspiration settled 
upon that noble forehead, his hands and feet grew cold, 
his face indicated a break, he drew his feet up in the bed 
like Jacob of old, his quiet breathing became less frequent, 
his drooping eyelids opened like the petals of a flower and 
disclosed those eyes— those wonderful eyes! in all their magnificence 
—that we will never forget. Presently he breathed no 
more; we pressed our lips upon his noble brow, and knew 
that he had gone to be forever with and like the Lord, whom 
he loved so well. 

"Dear Lord, oh, use me as the Angel in Gethsemane! 

Oh, fill me with Thy Holy Spirit of Divinest love! 

Oh, make me sympathetic, wise, that every anguished heart 

May come, nor seek in vain for consolation from Thy Word, 

And strengthened, comforted, go forth to prison or to death. 

To suffer patiently the cruel mockings of the tongue; 

To bear the cross unto the bitter end, and then to calmly say, 

'Tis finished,' and with faith unwavering pass beneath 'the veil!'" 



R6006 : page 366 

ONE OF GOD'S NOBLEMEN 
BY W. E. VAN AMBURGH-NEW YORK 

The pages of history record many of mankind who have 
left conspicuous footprints upon the sands of time. Some 
have been great within the boundaries of their local communities. 
Some have reached out to the national borders. 
Others have leaped all national bounds and exerted a 
world-wide influence. Some have gained greatness because 
of positions of influence; others by their ability to command 
conquering armies or otherwise sway the destinies 
of nations; some by noble deeds; others by their ability to 
inspire their fellowmen to nobler lives and ambitions. 
Some have been born to great positions; and some have 
seemingly been forced into greatness by the exigencies of 
time or conditions; others, inspired by love and zeal for 
God, have laid down their lives willing sacrifices upon the 
altar of devotion. 

The world is quick to applaud the conquering hero and 
the prince of finance, but slow to recognize the true 
worth of the daily smouldering sacrifices of those who heed 
the Master's admonition, "Be thou faithful unto death." It 
is left to other generations to enshrine the real heroes; as 
in the case of our Lord and His disciples; and we believe 
the same will be true of Pastor Russell. Contemporaries 
too often misunderstand, misjudge, severely criticize and 
persecute. How true this has been of all of God's noblemen 
of the past! But God promises that all such as worship 
Him in the beauty of holiness in the midst of persecutions 
shall shine as the sun in the Kingdom of their 
Father— when their true greatness shall be revealed. How 
glad we are that God is taking cognizance of all sacrifices 
of love in His behalf! 

Today we are paying our last loving tribute to the 
memory of one of God's noblest men. His life will speak 
for itself, when fully understood by succeeding generations. 

I desire to add a brief personal testimony. For over 
twenty years. I was personally acquainted with our beloved 
Pastor, and for over fifteen years closely associated 
with him in business and otherwise; so I speak from personal 
knowledge and close observation. I first learned of 
him through his writings, and was drawn closer to the 
Lord by his logical exegesis of the Scriptures. It may seem 
strange, but 'tis true I scarcely noticed the writer. He 
was hidden behind the message. Later I became acquainted 
with him personally, and was closely drawn to 
him when I perceived the spirit that actuated him— the loving, 
loyal, consecrated heart, seeking to follow his God, 
seeking daily to do good unto his fellowmen, to the best 
of his ability, and seeking to assist them to a clearer perception 
of the true character of our God. 

That he was misunderstood by many of his fellowmen 
mattered little to him, so long as he kept his heart right 



with God and had His approval. I never met a man who in 

my estimation endeavored more earnestly to live close to 

God, or fought harder to keep his body under. His influence 

upon others has been written in the hearts and lives 

of thousands all over the world whom he has assisted to a 

closer walk with God and a fuller consecration to the Lord 

and His Word. His SCRIPTURE STUDIES and his other expositions 

led me to see more of the Wisdom, the Justice, 

the Love and the Power of God than I had ever recognized 

before, and helped me to serve Him more intelligently 

than I had been able to do previously, although since 

childhood I had earnestly sought to do God's will to the 

best of my ability. As I saw with increasing clearness the 

Prize of the High Calling of God in Christ Jesus, I was 

led to consecrate to my Savior every ability I possessed 

and to seek further understanding. This consecration was 

made intelligently to my Lord, and I have ever endeavored 

to carry it out faithfully. 

I would like now, as a further expression of my appreciation, 
to renew that consecration publicly. There may be 
others here also who have been assisted to a far better 
understanding of God's great Plan and His love for mankind 
through the ministries of our dear Pastor. (Thousands 
have so indicated.) Would you also like to make 
this an occasion for renewal of your consecration? My 
consecration was to no one but the Lord. I recognized our 
beloved Brother as a servant of God— and a highly honored 
one. But my consecration was to God. This great world-wide 
work is not the work of one person. It is far too 
great for that. It is God's work and it changes not. God 
has used many servants in the past and He will doubtless 
use many in the future. Our consecration is not to a man, 
or to a man's work, but to do the will of God, as He shall 
reveal it unto us through His Word and providential leadings. 
God is still at the helm, and His work will continue 
in harmony with His Plan. Arrangements have been made 
for the carrying on of this work more earnestly than ever. 
It will be conducted along the same lines of full loyalty to 
the Word of God and love for the brethren, and it is for 
us to determine whether we shall be among its supporters 
and beneficiaries. 

The speaker then asked, "How many would like here to 
renew their consecration to God, and to indicate it by rising?" 
Almost the entire audience, which packed the building, 
rose to their feet. A most impressive moment followed. 
The speaker's face was raised to Heaven; and silently the 
audience followed the words: 

"Our Father, which art in Heaven, who canst look into 
the inner recesses of our hearts. Thou who dost 
not need the expression of our lips, to Thee, at this time, 

R6006 : page 367 

we desire to renew our Covenant made with Thee by 
Sacrifice. 
"We consecrate afresh to Thee and to Thy service our 



every ability— our talents, and our opportunities— to be 
used as Thou in Thy wisdom mayst grant us understanding 
through Thy Holy Word and Thy daily leadings. 

"May we realize more and more the great privilege of 
being considered by Thee an acceptable sacrifice, through 
the atoning merit of Thy well-beloved Son, our Lord and 
Savior Jesus Christ. 

"And may the inspiration of the love of God, which 
constraineth us, and the Prize of the High Calling of God, 
in Christ Jesus, spur us to greater devotion to Thy cause 
and assist us to endure more faithfully than ever before, 
and to reflect in our every thought, word and deed Thy 
glorious character!" 



R6006 : page 367 

PASTOR RUSSELL'S RELATION TO THE PILGRIMS 
BY PAUL S. L. JOHNSON-COLUMBUS 

I am now standing at the bier of one whom, since the 
days of the Apostle Paul, God has more widely used in His 
service than He has any other person. I am standing at 
the bier of one who has been to me a brother and a friend, 
having done me more good than all other people that have 
ever come into touch with me. I am standing at the bier 
of one whom I have loved more than I ever loved any 
other human being. I am standing at the bier of one of whom 
I have the assurance of faith that he is now in glory with 
our adorable Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. One can realize, 
therefore, how hard it is to control one's feelings under 
circumstances like these. 

I have been asked to speak of the relation of Pastor 
Russell to the Pilgrims. He had two relations to them— 
an official and a personal relation. His official relation to 
the Pilgrims can be understood when we recognize the 
office to which the Lord was pleased to call him, i.e., to be 
the special channel for giving the "meat in due season," 
as well as for arranging and directing the work of the 

R6007 : page 367 

Household of Faith. The Pilgrims, therefore, were related 
to him as fellow-servants of the same God. Therefore 
as God's representatives, and also in a sense as Brother 
Russell's representatives, they traveled throughout the 
world preaching the "Glad Tidings." Just as Moses was 
given as his colaborers the Seventy to whom God gave 
the Spirit that he had put upon Moses, because the work 
was too much for Moses to perform alone, so our Heavenly 
Father was pleased to give to this devoted servant of 
His colaborers to assist him in the labor of dispensing 
meat to the whole Church; for this work was too great for 
him alone to perform. Therefore the Pilgrims were to 



bear part of the burden and toil that were his. They, 

therefore, in a certain sense represent him. In writing to 

them he at times reminded them that he loved to think 

and speak of them as being in a certain sense his representatives, 

though recognizing them primarily as the 

Lord's representatives. 

It was this office, therefore, that gave him a close and 
directing relation to the Pilgrims. He was eminently fitted 
by nature, by grace, and by experience to fill the demands 
of this place. He had a giant intellect with marvelous 
perceptive faculties, remarkable memory and clear, deep 
and true reasoning powers, combined with an exceptional 
knowledge of human nature and with tactful aggressiveness. 
These gave him great executive ability, which, of 
course, eminently fitted him to direct the work of the Pilgrims. 
Our Heavenly Father endowed him with a natural 
disposition, especially in his religious capacities, that very 
few of the fallen human race have had. Under careful cultivation 
of the Holy Spirit these natural capacities were 
developed in a most remarkable degree into a character 
that had and combined all the qualities necessary to discharge 
the duties, responsibilities and privileges of his official 
relation to the Pilgrims. 

His experience as a Pilgrim fitted him all the better to 
exercise properly and profitably the functions of this part 
of his office. Therefore his relation to the Pilgrims officially 
was that of directing their work. It was God's will that he 
should be the human agent whom God would use to select 
the Pilgrims. In the selection of these servants no arbitrariness 
nor partiality was used. His will was fully submitted 
to the Father's will as to how their selection should 
be conducted. He subjected the Pilgrims to the three tests 
demanded by God's Word as proper to be placed upon 
public servants of God. First of all he required of them 
that, in addition to a full consecration, they have a large 
degree of loving zeal, deep humility, exemplary meekness 
and an accurate knowledge of God's Word. He further 
required that they have in a large degree the talents necessary 
for teaching and preaching the Word of God clearly, 
acceptably and winsomely to responsive hearts. Lastly he 
required their providential situation to be such as would 
enable them in harmony with the Word to assume the duties, 
responsibilities and privileges of the Pilgrim service. 
When these three things met in an individual. Brother 
Russell was very glad to arrange for his having a part in 
the Pilgrim service. His methods in selecting such were 
quite unique; e.g., unobserved, he listened to a Brother, 
whom he did not know, explain the chart to several of 
the friends. The explanation was so clear that he inquired 
who that Brother was. Finding out his name he 
entered into correspondence with him, inviting him to 
enter the Pilgrim service. Those who were to be given 
the privilege of this office were subjected by him to certain 
tests that would demonstrate the possession or lack of 
meekness, humility, zeal, clearness in presenting the Truth, 
and a large measure of love and self-control. 



His instructions to the Pilgrims were very simple. He 
believed that few instructions were better than many. A 
Pilgrim, on starting out asked him, "Brother, have you 
some word of instruction, encouragement or caution to 
give to me that will prove helpful to me in the service?" 
He answered, "No; Brother." Then thinking a while he 
said, "Yes; Brother, I have. Be full of loving zeal and 
deep humility, and everything will be well." He was wont 
to say, 'If you are in any difficulty or if you have a problem 
which you cannot solve, remember you always have 
an open ear and a willing hand here." 

He allowed as much liberty to the Pilgrims as the good 
of the Cause and themselves warranted. He allowed them 
to choose their subjects and to use their way of presenting 
the message, not wishing to interfere with their individuality, 
believing the Lord was directing with respect to 
each one. Only such restrictions were made as were necessary 
for the profit of the Cause and its participants. 
Whenever correction was necessary it was given in a remarkably 
sweet form. One of the Pilgrims asked for too 
frequent vacations, alleging that he needed more time for 
study. Brother Russell, feeling that the Brother should 
have had more zeal, suggested that the Brother take a 
year's time off from the Pilgrim service for study. The 
Brother, catching the Pastor's meaning, immediately declared, 
"Brother, that would be a loss of too much time. 
I will go right on." 

He was always on the alert to encourage others; and 
no Pilgrim left his presence without being encouraged, if 
he was in an encourageable condition of heart and mind. 
When correction was needed, it was given with the greatest 
tact and leniency, allowances being made for good intentions. 
Whenever he had any changes to make, promotions 
or demotions in the service, they were made not from 
personal reasons, but because of the principles in the 
Heavenly Father's Word. His course was that of completely 
sinking his will into the Lord's will and of searching 
to find out what that will was in relation to each Pilgrim, 
that he might be able the better to help him in the 
good work. Whenever a dismissal from the work had been 
arranged for, it was done in the most tactful and quiet way, 
that others would not need to realize the reason, nor the 
Pilgrim experience unnecessary pain. The person was in a 

R6007 : page 368 

very gentle and loving way invited to enter some other 
field of activity, to the glory of God and his own profit. 

His attitude toward the Pilgrim work was one full of 
encouragement to the Pilgrims. One of his greatest services 
to them was his example of faithful service. This influenced 
them in many ways, even in tone and gesture. 
Undoubtedly the Pilgrims will remember with joy the 
thought that as his first Harvest work was that of a Pilgrim, 
so his last Harvest labor was Pilgrim work. 

But we are not to think that his official relation to the 



Pilgrims was all there was in his relation to them. He was 

not an official simply, nor one that no one could approach. 

He was a most lovable and considerate person, always 

inviting confidence. In addition to his official relation he 

sustained a many-sided personal relation to the Pilgrims. 

First of all, he was like a faithful father to them. Not 

having natural children, he was blessed by the Lord in begetting 

many spiritual children with the Truth; even as 

the Apostle Paul said he did in the case of many. Brother 

Russell introduced many people into the Lord's family, 

and not a few of the Pilgrims were among these. A Pilgrim 

recently remarked, "I never consciously had a father, 

until I entered the Pilgrim service and came in direct contact 

with Brother Russell." 

He was not only a father, but also an elder Brother 
to the Pilgrims, always ready to stand side by side with 
them. Therefore he was not regarded solely with the 
feeling that people should have for a father. As elder 
Brother, he inspired the Pilgrims with confidence in, together 
with respect for, himself. He was, furthermore, a 
true friend. He did not whimfully take one up today and 
drop him tomorrow. He was faithful to his friends with a 
loyalty based upon the good Word of God. Every Pilgrim 
recognized that he could depend upon the friendship of this 
beloved servant. He was an affectionate companion. 

Our dear Brother Sturgeon told us a little while ago 
how he showed his comradeship to the last. He was also 
a most sympathetic comforter. Any one in distress, especially 
spiritual distress, seeking comfort, would find in 
him an attentive ear, a sympathizing heart, a cheering 
word and an encouraging thought. By nature he was very 
richly endowed with sympathy and by grace this was 
more highly developed than the majority of his other 
qualities. This enabled him to enter into the feelings of so 
many when they came to him with the things that pressed 
them sorely. This made him a sympathizing comforter. 

Furthermore, this good servant of God was an optimistic 
well-wisher. He always put the best construction on 
everything. He gave each one credit for good intentions. 
His desires and expectations were that these beloved colaborers 
of his might have a glorious entrance into the 
blessed Kingdom into which we feel sure that he has entered, 
who was called by the Lord not only "wise," but 
also "faithful." He was a cheerful helper. Nothing pleased 
him more than to serve others. He was continually thinking 
and planning how he could help by counsel, by example, 
and by deeds. Every rightly disposed person who 
came in contact with him was refreshed and encouraged. 
He was always thinking, not of himself, but of others. That 
is why his death was so glorious. He had thought that he 
would probably pass away as a martyr. In many respects 
his death has been more glorious than a martyr's; for to 
him was given the privilege not to allow a large measure 
of his life to be taken from him by violence, but to use up 
every ounce of his strength in service, for he died in the 
harness. Such a death was best for him. God will decide 



what kind of a death is best for each. 

[Addressing the remains, the speaker said: O servant of 
the Lord, in prophetic type God called thee Eldad, beloved 

R6008 : page 368 

of God. Beloved of God wast thou while in the flesh, art 
now in the spirit, and to all eternity shalt be. Thou hast 
been also beloved of God's people, art now and shall forever 
be. Therefore we name thee Ameldad, Beloved of 
God's people.] 

We can no longer pray for our Brother, as we have, day by 
day, "God bless our beloved Pastor." But, Beloved, we 
can pray with respect to him that God bless his memory. 
He is beyond the need of our prayers; but oh. Beloved, 
let us not leave a vacancy in our prayers where we were 
wont to pray, "God bless our beloved Pastor." Let us, in 
that place, pray "God bless the memory of our beloved 
Brother Russell." Who among us will join with the 
speaker in the resolution daily to pray with respect to him, 
God bless the memory of our beloved Brother? Oh, let the 
Israel of God everywhere daily pray GOD BLESS HIS MEMORY! 



R6008 : page 368 

"GOD FIRST-SELF LAST" 
BY G.C. DRISCOLL-DAYTON 

No greater honor could come to me than to stand here 
as the delegate of the Dayton, Ohio, Ecclesia, who have 
elected our dear Brother annually for many years as their 
beloved Pastor, whom we recognized as a special servant 
of God. He was doing a special work at this time, 
and we certainly learned to love him. For years I have 
been intimately associated with our dear Pastor as his publicity 
representative and for the Society. It has been my 
special privilege to arrange with newspapers in various 
countries for the publication of his sermons, and also to 
interview editors throughout the world in respect to his 
personal work; and, dear friends, as one who knew him intimately. 
I am glad to be here to say that he was nothing 
if not a thorough-going, conscientious, sincere Christian, 
whose greatest endeavor was to serve the Lord, the Truth 
and the brethren. 

I know that he has been assailed many times unjustly; 
and it was my special privilege often for at least seven 
years to defend his character. When his sermons were 
first syndicated, Brother Russell refused to permit his portrait 
to be used in connection with them. He was very 
modest in that respect. He felt that he was entitled to 
the privacy of his own picture; that it should not be paraded 
before the public. But the newspaper editors, who 
were glad to get his sermons, could not be ignored; and 
the demand was uniform that they should have it, that 



they should be privileged to publish it in connection with 
his sermon. Brother Russell finally gave his consent; 
for he came to the conclusion that by the publication of 
his picture, he would get a wider reading for his Message, 
the Message of God, the Message regarding the Kingdom. 
For this reason, and this alone, he gave his consent. 

As for the picture, there has been no man in this age 
to equal our dear Brother. He was an outstanding figure in 
a crowd. No matter whether he was seated in a train or 
in a street car or was walking on the street, people would 
stop and turn around to get a second look. Many a time 
I have heard people say that he looked like the Lord, if 
ever a man did. His very appearance widened his influence 
for the glory of God. As his influence grew, the opposition 
also grew, and they learned to hate that picture 
because he stood for something different from what they 
did. I remember one preacher stating that he could not 
pick up a paper to read the news without having Pastor 
Russell stare him in the face. 

POSSIBLY MORE THAN IN THE PAST 

Now, my friends, this was all distasteful to our dear 
Brother. But the Message of the Kingdom was thus 
brought before the people, and he had evidences day by 
day, many times over, that the people were receiving a 
blessing. In that way he received a blessing also; and the 
use of his portrait gave the Message of the Love of God 
wider use in various ways. 

Now that this noble face is soon to be covered to be 
seen no more, we can confidently say, "This mortal has 
put on immortality." This wonderful character was sown 
in weakness, but we are sure that it was raised in power. 
He has served us in many ways. His picture has also 
served us in many ways in the past; and I am sure if we 
give the cooperation which we now shall have the opportunity 
to give, by the Lord's grace, we can still use his 
personality and his picture possibly more than in the past. 



R6008 : page 370 
"BLESSED ARE YE WHEN MEN SHALL REVILE YOU" 
BY FRANK W. M ANTON-TORONTO 

Unexpectedly I have the honor of representing the Toronto, 
Ont., Ecclesia here this afternoon in paying the last 
tribute of esteem to the memory of our Beloved Pastor. 
Three hundred or more of the Toronto Ecclesia, together 
with many sympathizers, are rejoicing today in the fact 
that our Beloved has triumphantly finished his course. 

But we have no apologies to make for sadness. We 
remind you of our Lord, when at Bethany at the tomb of 
Lazarus; we read that even "Jesus wept." 



Under the circumstances you will pardon a personal 
reference. About nine years ago I was brought into contact 
with the Truth, and accepted it in a measure, as most 
of us do at first, reservedly. I was prepared to meet our 
Beloved Pastor on his first visit to Toronto after my contact 
with the Truth with some degree of prejudice. We 
had heard so much about "Brother Russell" that we had 
considered it in a large measure a form of hero worship; 
and not being a hero-worshiper, I received him with these 
thoughts in view. 

Being invited to dine with him at the hotel with other 
friends, I was on the alert to find, if possible, some flaw; 
but, to my great surprise, I never met a character in every 
way so beyond reproach. 

Immediately after dinner, having to take the car for the 
public meeting, I endeavored to carry his hand-bag, but he 
was too quick for me. Before that day was over my prejudice 
had melted as the hoar frost before the morning sun. 

Another incident which impressed me happened some 
years ago. Sitting at my desk one day, I received a telegram: 
"Will you serve as Chairman at my Ottawa meeting?" 
I thought. Now I have found him in a mistake! 
He had never heard me speak in public, because I had 
never attempted to do so. I did not reply to the telegram 
for several days, meantime counseling with my wife. 

I overcame my hesitation and wired back, "Yes." After 
the telegram had gone and the end of the week had come, 
and it was time for me to go, my wife pointed out that 
there was something in Brother Russell's telegram that I 
had overlooked. I tried to ignore that fact, but after the 
discourse in Ottawa, when our Beloved Pastor was bowing 
himself off the platform, he lifted his hands and said, 
"Mr. F.W. Manton, of Toronto, will lecture in the Family 
Theater here next Sunday afternoon." 

Dear friends, I was not an Elder, I had never spoken 
in public, and I thought, I have him now; he has again 
made a mistake! I struggled with my feelings during the 
following week— almost struggled myself out of the Truth. 
Dear friends, he did not make a mistake in the Lord's 
sight, I am sure; I am striving to do my best in His service, 
and if it had not been for our dear Pastor's keen 
insight, I might never have had this privilege. 

The third and most vivid impression was made upon 
me by our Pastor recently. You were all moved to indignation, 
no doubt, when you learned that the gates of Canada 
were unjustly closed to our dear Pastor. I had the 
honor of standing with him in the Toronto Union Depot 
when word was received that he would not be allowed to 
address further public meetings in Canada. 

The righteous indignation of those present there was 
stirred; we wanted to demand what right the authorities 
had to shut out a Christian gentleman who had in no way 
dishonored himself or his cause, and who had every right 
to speak. He merely said, "I will not go where I am not 
wanted. If they want me, I will come." There was not 
the least note of resentment in his words. We were rebuked. 



by his example, for our resentment. We had been 
tempted to reclaim the life-rights which we had laid down 
in sacrifice; we were not citizens of that country, but of 
the Heavenly one! 

Especially would I bring to the notice of the Elders 
of the various Ecclesias at this time the beautiful picture of 

R6009 : page 370 

"The Sheep in the Storm"— how they are huddled together, 
head to head, for safety and protection. Let us 
keep this in mind. It was the first thought that came to 
me when I fully realized that our Beloved Brother had 
passed beyond the Veil. The next thought was of joy, 
born of the assurance that he is now part of the glorified 
Body of The Christ, and beyond the reach of his enemies! 
"Blessed are ye when men shall revile you and persecute 
you, and say all manner of evil against you falsely 
for My sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is 
your reward in Heaven." 



R6009 : page 370 

SORROW AND JOY COMMINGLED 
BY J.T.D. PYLES-WASHINGTON, D.C. 

In the city of Washington, whence I came, there are 
many sad hearts today, on account of the loss sustained 
in the death of our Beloved Pastor. Not only several 
hundred Bible Students, who diligently search the Scriptures, 
aided by his writings, but many thousands of others, 
recognizing the grandeur of his character, mingle their 
tears together. Sorrow and joy are mixed; for we are 
mindful that he has finished his course, that he was faithful, 
and therefore must now have the promised reward. 

I have known Brother Russell intimately for twenty 
years. He has many times been a guest at my home, and 
I have also been a guest at his home. I was privileged to be 
associated with him for four months in a tour around the 
world; I lived with him, day and night, under varied circumstances; 
he was a gentleman, aye, more, a Christian, 
a highly developed Christian; in fact the most highly developed 
Christian I ever knew, a noble representative of 
our Lord. I loved him in life, I honor him now in death, 
and pay tribute to his memory. 

His STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES will continue to make 
luminous the Bible. The Associated Bible Students 
throughout the earth will continue to look to Brooklyn 
as heretofore, thankful to our Lord for the wise provision 
our Beloved Pastor has made for the perpetuation of the 
work. Confidence and loyalty will be manifested by all true 
children of God; for the Truth is just as precious to us 
today as ever it was. It came from our Heavenly Father 



through our Lord Jesus, and was made plain by his servant, 
our dear Brother Russell, whom we all highly esteemed 
in love for his works' sake. 



R6009 : page 370 

"HE BEING DEAD-YET SPEAKETH" 
BY C.A. WISE-INDIANAPOLIS 

We bring to you on this momentous occasion, the love 
and sympathy of the Church at Indianapolis, many of 
whom have known and loved our Beloved Pastor, and for 
years have been loyal to him— their teacher and friend. 
Now that he has been taken away, we have resolved to 
stand shoulder to shoulder and to hold high the banner 
of our King, whom our Pastor so dearly loved. 

Twenty-five years ago it was my privilege to meet for 
the first time the few Bible Students who met yearly in 
Allegheny at the Memorial season. There at the home of 
our Brother we were privileged to meet him who has now 
sacrificed his life for the Truth he so dearly loved. 

As years passed, we became more closely associated with 
him, and as we were enabled to see in him that wonderful, 
Christ-like character which has been a source of great 
blessing to many, our love and respect for him increased. 
We have never been disappointed in him. 

As our studies in the Word of God progressed, perplexing 
questions continually arose. These we were privileged 
to take to him; and like the disciples of old our own 
hearts burned within us as we listened to his clear and 
beautiful unfolding of the Word of God. We thus learned 
that we were sitting at the feet of a man of God, and also 
the greatest Bible scholar since the days of the Apostles. 

His kind, loving words and noble deeds will live on; 
and "he, being dead, yet speaketh." 



R6009: page 371 

MUST LOYALLY COOPERATE 

BY DR. L.W. JONES-CHICAGO 

No greater honor could be accorded me at the present 
time than to be here to speak a few words of tribute to 
the memory of our dear Brother. My relationship to him 
has been different in some respects, perhaps, from that of 
any other individual; for I have been closely associated 
with him for a great while. Many a time I have stood on 
the platform and introduced him to various audiences in 
this country and abroad. I am glad to be here at this time 
to say a few words. 



For ten years my work in connection with the Convention 
Reports has brought me in close contact with 
Brother Russell and the work of the Society in general. 
Our understanding has been thorough on this matter. 
Then, too, I have traveled extensively with him as his 
secretary on various trips, particularly in connection with 
the world tour in 1912, when for nearly four months we 
were closely associated. Many times Brother Russell discussed 
with me his personal and private affairs, as well as the 
work in hand; and I desire to say that his one aim was to 
seek to do the will of God, and in it all he recognized 
that the work he was doing was not his, but Jehovah's. 

When the friends in Chicago learned through the 
newspaper reports that Brother Russell's death had taken 
place, they could not believe their ears and eyes, and repeatedly 
called me up to verify the reports. As soon as 
we told them, "Yes, it is true that our dear Pastor has gone 
beyond," immediately they would say, "Brother, now we must 
keep close together. We must put our shoulders to the wheel. 
We must loyally cooperate." It did me much good to see the 
faith of the brethren and know that they would stand loyal to 
the Truth. Therefore at this time I voice the sentiments not 
only of the Chicago Church as a whole, but of the various 
Classes in the vicinity of Chicago, numbering about twelve 
or fifteen. Their determination is to stand loyal and faithful 
to the new organization and to cooperate with it in 
every possible way. They realize that our dear Pastor 
has opened before us the Scriptures, and has made them 
so plain that everything necessary for the making of our 
calling and election sure, has been laid before the faithful 
and loyal, that we may press on to a glorious consummation, 
even unto death, as he did. It is our determination 
to be more loyal, more faithful, that we may promulgate 
this glorious Gospel— "glad tidings of joy"— in this Harvest 
work which he so grandly started, which he so faithfully 
carried on until the great God whom he served said, 
"Enough, come up higher!" 



R6009: page 371 

LEFT THE STORE-HOUSE FULL 

BY INGRAM MARGESON-BOSTON 

The Boston Class of Bible Students were greatly 
shocked when the news came over the wire telling of our 
beloved Pastor's death, or home-going. We felt such a 
sadness and loneliness; yet our hearts rejoiced to know 
that our dearly beloved Brother had been changed from 
the human to the Divine nature; that his has been the 
blessed privilege of entering into the presence of the King 
of Kings, even into Heaven itself. Yes; how blessed! He 
has gone to be forever with the Lord. We keenly feel our 
loss. He whom God had been pleased to use as our light-bringer 



and comforter can no longer give personal words 
of comfort and advice. Yet, by Divine Providence, so 
much has come to us from his pen we feel the store-house 
has been left filled with food; and our desire is to partake 
of this provision, doing our part in telling out the Gospel 
message, which is good tidings of great joy, and which 

R6010: page 371 

shall, thank God, in due time be known by all people. 

A special meeting of the Boston Church was called almost 
immediately, and from four to five hundred quickly 
came together. Resolutions were unanimously passed, expressing 
our sincere Christian love and sympathy for all 
the bereaved ones throughout the world, and in a special 
way to the dear Bethel Family and Tabernacle workers. 
All were commended to God for His special care and blessing. 
The words of the Apostle comfort us: "My God 
shall supply all of your need, according to His riches in 
glory by Christ Jesus." 

As a personal testimony, I wish to state that it has been 
my privilege to travel with our dear Brother Russell for 
days, weeks and months at a time, both in America and 
during his journey around the world. My greatest impressions 
were, how implicitly he trusted the Lord in 
everything! Whether on train, steamboat or at hotel, before 
taking up the day's work, he would kneel and ask 
God's blessing and help. We shall never forget his ceaseless 
and untiring love for all the Church, ever trying to 
enlighten and comfort them, even laying down his life 
for the brethren when his body was worn and racked with 
pain. He would never murmur nor complain, but would 
say, "We have it so much easier than did the Apostles and 
our dear Lord." WHAT AN EXAMPLE HE HAS LEFT US! Truly 
he has earned the victor's Crown! 



R6010: page 371 

MOULDED THOUGHT OF MILLIONS 
BY A.I. RITCHIE-NEW YORK 

Our Pastor was very dear to the Bethel Family. He was 
a loving, yet just head over the Home, and all the members 
of the Family had ready access to him with their perplexities 
and troubles. It was interesting to notice how almost all 
went away from these interviews smiling, as if all difficulties 
had been cleared up. He seemed almost intuitively to understand; 
and was always sympathetic and tender, even when he 
himself was suffering great pain. 

When I read his DIVINE PLAN OF THE AGES in 1888, it 
answered all my questions; and as I continued to read my 
love and admiration for him increased, though I never met 
him until 1905. My later years of close association with him 



were a constant inspiration to me. The better I knew him, 
the better I loved him. He was the best man I ever saw, and 
I never expect to see his equal. There is none like him. 

He entered so fully into our lives that there might be 
a danger of thinking of him as belonging peculiarly to the 
Bethel Family, or to the New York Ecclesia, or at least to 
the Bible Students of America. But he was broader than 
all these; he was loved and respected by Bible Students and 
Truth seekers the world over. He was also respected and 
loved by devout Jews in almost every part of the world, and 
helped much to revive their faith in their Bible promises. 

Besides all this I am convinced that he did more to mould 
public thought— especially in the religious world— than all 
other contemporary religious leaders. Very few now believe 
the doctrine of eternal torment; thanks to his efforts! He 
brought many other religious truths to light. 



R6010: page 371 

OPENED OUR EYES OF UNDERSTANDING 
BROTHER C.J. WOODWORTH-SCRANTON 

Our dear Redeemer taught us that "man shall not live 
by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of 
the mouth of God." The words that our Redeemer 
Himself spoke were especially precious to our Brother, so 
that the Lord's slightest word or act spoke volumes to 
him. One little point he explained in reference to the man 
whose eyes the Lord opened. The Lord spat upon the 
ground; and out of the clay and the spittle He made an 
ointment, with which He anointed the eyes of the blind 
man. Then the man washed in the pool of Siloam, and 
returned seeing. 

Brother Russell calls our attention to the fact that this 
illustrates how the Spirit of the Lord, coming out of His 
mouth, comes down and mixes with the clay of earth; and 
thus that clay, if plastic enough, can be applied for the 
opening of the spiritual eyes of those that were born blind. 

R6010: page 372 

And so today, all over the world, throughout the countless 
ages of eternity, men and women can rejoice that Jesus our 
Savior and Redeemer used this clay lying before us here 
to bring us out of the kingdom of darkness and into the 
Kingdom of God's dear Son. Praise His name for the blessings 
brought to us through our dear Pastor! 



R6010: page 372 

"REPRESENTED ALL THAT WAS NOBLEST, HOLIEST, BEST" 



BY D. KIHLGREN-MASS. 

The Ecclesia at Springfield, Easthampton and Holyoke, 
Mass., wish me to express to you their heartfelt sympathy 
and Christian love. 

Our beloved Pastor's death has aroused in our hearts 
all that is noblest, holiest, best. We rejoice unselfishly 
that his labors are over, and that he has entered into his 
rest and reward. We sorrow as we feel keenly the loss 
of his faithful ministry. We sympathize with one another 
in our bereavement, and especially with those closest to 
him in his labors. We feel an increased concern for the 
continuance of the work he was God's instrument in carrying 
forward. We are resolved that by God's grace we 
shall be inspired by our Beloved Brother's life and teachings 
to greater faithfulness. 

It was my privilege to know our Pastor upwards of 
twenty years, and his personal example was perhaps even 
more inspiring than his teachings. He never worried, was 
never impatient. His peace of mind was wonderful. 

Our Beloved Pastor took a genuine, personal interest 
in all of the Lord's people. He rejoiced in their progress, 
and treasured their interesting experiences in his wonderful 
memory. To illustrate: When on the way home from 
a one-day convention he asked one of our number: "Is old 

Brother K living yet?" "Yes." "Kindly give him 

my Christian greetings and tell him that I remember the 
testimony he gave in Allegheny some twenty years ago." 

Brethren, our beloved brother has left us a noble example. 
Shall we not follow him, as he followed Christ? 
Shall we not lay down our lives for the brethren, as he 
did? By God's grace we will! May our end be as his! 



R6010: page 372 

RENEWAL OF CONSECRATION DAILY 
BY DR. E.A. McCOSH-DETROIT 

I esteem it an honor to be here on this occasion. I 
wish to convey to you from the Detroit Church their 
greeting and their desire to let you know that they will 
be loyal to the memory of our dear Pastor. 

It was my privilege to know our dear Brother personally; 
and I wish to state one thing with regard to him 
that possibly not all know. For years he suffered with a 
peculiar ailment, which rendered him very, very weak at 
times; and he could hardly go on with his discourses for 
pain. We can better appreciate the wonderful character 
of our beloved Pastor when we know that he was usually 
under stress and pain. I prescribed for him at one 
lime: but when two years after. I asked him if he had 
taken the medicine, he remarked, "Dear Brother, I have 



not had time." 

If our beloved Pastor, now glorified, has shown us such 
a wonderful example of cheerfulness and long suffering 
it behooves us to follow faithfully in his steps. The action 
of the Detroit Class, taken at the testimony meeting Wednesday, 

R6011 : page 372 

was in the nature of a renewal of their consecration, 

and they determined to renew it daily to the cause 

for which our loving Pastor so loyally laid down his life. 

We wish to assure those whom the Pastor has left in 
charge of the Society's affairs of our loyalty and of our 
resolution to be good soldiers of Jesus Christ at all times. 
When a vacancy comes to the ranks, let us press together 
the harder, shoulder to shoulder, and close it up as best 
we can. Let us crystallize our character, so that we may 
be able to endure all things, for God will cause the wrath 
of man to praise Him and will prepare us for His presence 
by means of reproaches and persecutions, which probably 
await us. 



R6011 : page 372 

BURY OUR SORROW IN SERVICE 
BY C.B. SHULL-COLUMBUS 

As a representative of the Columbus, Ohio, Ecclesia, 
I bring you their fervent Christian love and an expression 
of mutual joy and sorrow. We rejoice in thinking of the 
transcendent happiness our Beloved Pastor is now realizing 
in its fullness, because of his faithfulness even unto 
death; and we resolve by God's grace to bury our sorrow 
in the service of those who are yet hungering and thirsting 
for His true Message. 

I feel that I am voicing the sentiment of the Columbus 
Class when I assure you that we are determined, with Divine 
help, to carry on the work which our Beloved Pastor 
has left with us, and we wish to cooperate to the fullest 
extent with Headquarters in the further smiting of Jordan. 

How glad I shall be to tell the dear friends at home 
of the wonderful manifestation of the Spirit of Christ 
which I have witnessed here— how well you have all 
learned your lessons in this most wonderful School in the 
world, with a real, kingly priest as teacher! 

What an exemplar of our Lord Jesus Christ we had in 
our Beloved Pastor! But God has called him Home; and 
it now remains for each of us to demonstrate to the Lord 
how well we have learned our lessons. 

On one occasion our Beloved Pastor was telling me 
of the order and system at Bethel. He said, "Business 
men were glad to employ clerks who received their training 
in my stores years ago, and I am now wondering. 



Will others be asking for our help because of the wonderful 
privileges enjoyed in this training School?" 

May God help us to respond heartily to the call and be 
faithful even unto death! 



R6011 : page 372 

REJOICING IN OUR PASTOR'S VICTORY 
BY E.W.V. KUEHN-TOLEDO 

I deem it a privilege and an honor on this occasion to 
offer a tribute of love and esteem in memory of our departed 
Brother and Pastor. The grandest, noblest character of our 
day, whose life has been, and ever will continue to be, an 
inspiration for us to follow him, as he followed Christ. 

To have known and understood him, as was my privilege 
for twenty-seven years, and of late years most intimately, 
was to love and respect him for his noble Christian qualities. 

Like the Apostle Paul's, the laying down of his life in 
the Master's service must have sent up a very rich perfume, 
and his sacrifice a sweet odor to God. 

Eminently chosen of the Lord (Matthew 24:45) to serve 
the "Household of Faith with meat in due season," and 
elsewhere (Ezekiel 9:2,1 1) described as the "man in linen 
with the writer's ink horn at his side," HE HAS DONE AS HE 
WAS COMMANDED, finished the work given him to do, and 
has entered upon his reward, leaving us who remain a noble 
legacy of privilege in continuing the Society's work. 

In this connection I voice the sentiment of the Toledo 
(Ohio) Class as expressed in a telegram forwarded to the 
Society on November 1st, as follows: "Greetings! Scriptural 
consolation; sympathy. We loved our dear Pastor, and 
keenly feel our loss, but realize our Father doeth all things 
well. We rejoice in our dear Pastor's victory. His faithful 
loyalty is an inspiration; and we are determined to cooperate 
with you in the Kingdom Work with renewed energy." 



R6011 : page 373 

ORATION AT EVENING SERVICE 

BY J.F. RUTHERFORD 

Charles Taze Russell was loyal to God, loyal to Christ 
Jesus, loyal to the cause of Messiah's Kingdom. He was loyal 
to the core— yea, loyal even unto death. God has declared 
in His Word that loving loyalty to Him is the price of greatest 
riches. Pastor Russell has received his great reward. 
It is a wonderful thing to receive the approval of God, the 
great and mighty Creator of the Universe, the all-wise, all-powerful 
and all-loving One. In His Book, the Bible, God 



has made favorable mention of certain men; and in every 
instance that favorable mention has been because of their 
loving loyalty to Him and His cause of righteousness. When 
God's record concerning the Church is fully written, the people 
will find that Charles Taze Russell not only has received 
favorable mention from God, but has been born in Zion— a 
member of the Royal Family of Heaven. (Psalm 87:6.) The 
Psalmist has assured us that this is especially true of those 
who are faithful unto death. What a wonderful privilege 
it will be for the world to have the real truth concerning 
martyrs to the cause of righteousness! 

We who have come into closer contact with Pastor Russell, 
and who knew him as he was, are privileged by the Lord 
to know these things in advance of the world. Happy is 
our lot to thus be favored of God. 

Lives of great men stand as monuments in the earth. 
Silently they beckon to those who are hurrying on in the 
mad rush of human affairs, and say, "Stop and learn wisdom." 

The greatest man that has lived since the Apostle Paul 
has passed from the earth. We have come aside this evening 
from the busy rush of this great city to pay tribute to the 
memory of Pastor Russell. Let us in calmness and sobriety 
seek to know why this man was great, why we say with 
such assurance that he had the approval of God. 

God's laws are fixed and unchangeable. To all of His 
intelligent creatures he says, "Obey My Laws, and receive 
My approval and blessing. Take a different course, and 
you will fail to receive My blessing." Pastor Russell walked 
with the Lord in harmony with His law. 

PASTOR RUSSELL'S SEARCH FOR TRUTH 

Nearly 65 years ago, a child was born in Allegheny 
County, Pennsylvania. His parents christened him Charles 
Taze Russell. His parents loved God and sought to obey 
Him. The parental influence was good for Charles. They 
trained the small twig; and it grew in the direction of the 
Lord. Early he became a Christian. 

But like other good, honest, conscientious Christian men 
and women, his parents had been taught the man-made 
creeds of the Church Nominal. Young Charles was taught 
that God is great and good, yet that He had made all men 
inherently immortal, and had provided a lake of fire and 
brimstone in which he would eternally torment all except a 
few whom He had predestinated should be saved. The honest 
heart of the lad revolted against such a horrible thing; 
and he in substance said, "I cannot believe that there is a 
just and wise God who would do such a thing to a poor, 
unfortunate human being." Forthwith he forsook the religion 
of the creeds; but while he was investigating other religions, 
his mind was turning to the Lord in an inquiring 
manner. Then he said, "I will study the Bible, and see 
whether or not it teaches that God has such an arrangement." 

True to his inborn character, he honestly and prayerfully 
searched the Scriptures. To his astonishment and joy he 
found that the Bible is God's great Word of Truth; that 



God has a great Plan of Salvation, provided by Him before 
the foundation of the world, which shall ultimately result 
in the blessing of human-kind. From the Bible he learned 
that God created the father of the human race— Adam, the 
first man— a perfect being, gave unto him a perfect wife, 
placed him in a perfect home under perfect conditions, and 
advised him that obedience to the Divine law would enable 
man to maintain this condition of perfection; that Adam 
violated the law of God and was sentenced to death; that 
he was then driven from his perfect home into the unfinished 
earth; that God permitted him to live for 930 years after he 
had been sentenced to death; that while undergoing this sentence, 
Adam for the first time exercised his power and authority 
to beget children; that by the law of heredity all of his 
children were born in sin and shapen in iniquity, and hence 
all came under the effects of the just penalty that had come 
upon the father— "that as by one man sin entered into the 
world, and death by sin, so death has passed upon all men, 
for all are sinners"; that ultimately the whole human race 

R6012: page 373 

would perish from the earth (death meaning destruction;) 
that man is a soul; that he does not possess one; that the 
soul consists of the body and the breath of life— the life 
principle— and these being separated, the soul is dead. 

HIS SEARCH REWARDED 

Then he learned that God had lovingly provided a Plan 
of Redemption of man from this condition of death— that 
God so loved the world that He gave His Only-Begotten 
Son, that whosoever would believe in Him should not perish, 
but have life everlasting— that Jesus, having a pre-human 
existence as a spirit being, was made human and grew to 
manhood's estate, in order that He, by the grace of God, 
might give His own perfect life whereby the purchase price 
would be provided for the redemption of Adam and all his 
race— that He died upon the cross and provided this price- 
that He was raised from the dead, no longer a man, but now 
Divine, and that He ascended into Heaven, there to use the 
merit of His human sacrifice according to the will of God 
—for the blessing of mankind. 

Furthermore, he learned from the Scriptures that the Lord 
Jesus would return and establish a Kingdom for the blessing 
of mankind; that in the interim between His resurrection 
and His Second Coming, God has been and is holding an 
election for the purpose of selecting from amongst men those 
who shall be associated with Christ Jesus as members of the 
Royal Family, and who, together with their Head and Master, 
will be the instrument through which Jehovah will bless all 
human-kind with the privileges of life, health and happiness; 
that the terms of this election are that everyone who desires 
to run for such a Prize must believe on the Lord Jesus 
Christ and consecrate his life— his all— to the service of the 
Lord; that those who would prove faithful, true and loyal 



unto death would participate in the First or Chief Resurrection, 
and be made kings and priests unto God and unto 
Christ and reign with Christ for the blessing of mankind. 

This wonderful story of the love of God thrilled the heart 
of young Russell. He readily and joyfully consecrated his 
all to the service of the Lord, and continued faithful in that 
service even unto death. 

Charles Taze Russell loved his fellow-men. Seeing the 
great truths contained in the Bible, he said, "I must preach 
these to my fellow-creatures; I must use all my power to 
lead the people out of darkness, that they may see the love 
of God." Vehemently he declared, "If the Bible does teach 
that eternal torture is the fate of all except the saints, it 
should be preached— yea, thundered from the house-tops 
weekly, daily, hourly; if it does not so teach, the fact should 
be made known, and the foul stain dishonoring God's holy 
name removed." 

With a strong physique, a fertile brain, and a brave heart, 
wholly devoted to the Lord, he consecrated and used all of 
his power to teach man the great Message of Messiah's Kingdom 
and the blessings which it will bring to the world. 

Early in his manhood he possessed a fortune of no mean 
size. He spent it all that the minds of men might be enlightened 
and their hearts made glad. Early in his battle 
for righteousness he spent, out of his own private fortune, 
forty thousand dollars in this great city of New York for 
the publication and free distribution of a booklet setting forth 
clearly the Truth concerning the doctrine of the Hell of the 
Bible, that all might learn that Jehovah is a God of Love. 

Other Christian people, sadly aware of the fact that they 
were not receiving spiritual food in the various churches to 
which they had attached themselves, had the eyes of their understanding 
opened by reading their Bibles in the light of the 
explanation thereof given by Charles Taze Russell. Gladly 
they began to support him and the righteous work in which 
he was engaged. Without solicitation or invitation, they joyfully 
brought forth their money and said, "What can we 

R6012: page 374 

do to have part in this glorious work which you have begun?" 

More than thirty years ago, a congregation of Christian 
people formed at Pittsburgh, Pa., selected Charles Taze Russell 
as their Pastor; and he served that congregation continuously 
as Pastor to the end, being able, however, to visit 
them only occasionally since the removal of the WATCH TOWER 
BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY headquarters to Brooklyn several 
years ago. He wrote and published a series of books— 
STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES-in six volumes, which turned 
a great flood of light upon God's Word. Millions of these 
have gone into the homes of men throughout the earth, 
bringing gladness to their hearts. For more than thirty 
years he edited and published a semi-monthly journal, THE 
WATCH TOWER AND HERALD OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE, wholly devoted 
to the cause of Messiah's Kingdom. Be it known that 
this is the only publication on earth that has ever announced 



the presence of our Lord. The Lord Jesus promised that 
at His Second Coming, which should be invisible to human 
eyes. He would have one wise and faithful servant whom He 
would make ruler over all His goods to give meat to the 
Household of Faith in due season. Christians throughout the 
world who are familiar with the work of Pastor Russell 
readily recognize that he has long been that wise and faithful 
servant of the Lord. 

The work grew to great proportions; and desiring that it 
might be conducted in a systematic manner and perpetuated 
after his death, he organized the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND 
TRACT SOCIETY— a corporation, the charter of which was written 
by his own hand and is admitted, by men who know, to 
be a most remarkable document. Through this channel he has 
promulgated the message of Messiah's Kingdom to all the 
nations of the earth. Branches of this Society have been 
established and are maintained in the countries of Great 
Britain, Germany, Finland, Norway, Sweden, Denmark, 
Switzerland, France, South Africa, Australia, and in many 
other parts of the world. His publications have been translated 
into 34 different languages, and millions of copies have 
been supplied free to the people by means of money joyfully 
contributed by those with him who love the Lord and 
His cause of righteousness and who are looking with joy 
to the establishment of His Kingdom. 

Pastor Russell traveled and preached to the people throughout 
the world. He was elected Pastor of the Congregation 
at this Temple, and of the Brooklyn Tabernacle, of the London 
Tabernacle, of the Temple Congregation at Washington, 
D.C., the Congregation at Pittsburgh, the Auditorium Congregation 
at Chicago, the Congregation at St. Louis, Los 
Angeles, and those in many other parts of the world. These 
he visited at regular intervals, to encourage and comfort and 
help them. During the past few years his sermons have not 
only been heard from the platform, but have been published 
in approximately four thousand papers; and in practically 
every home of the United States and Canada Pastor Russell 
is known. He did a greater work for the cause of Messiah's 
Kingdom than did any other man that ever lived on the earth. 

HIS DYING HOURS 

A few weeks ago he started on a trip to the Pacific Coast, 
preaching every evening, and traveling throughout the remainder 
of the night and of the day. His last sermon he 
preached to the Congregation at Los Angeles; and being too 
weak to stand, he sat throughout the discourse. He left Los 
Angeles Sunday evening on his return to Brooklyn, and 
rapidly grew weaker. Seven hours before his death, addressing 
his traveling companion. Brother Menta Sturgeon, he said, 
"Make me a Roman toga." Using the bed sheets. Brother 
Sturgeon made a toga, which Brother Russell put on himself. 
He stood erect for a moment, and then lying down on the 
couch in his Pullman drawing room, closed his eyes, thus in 
symbolic language speaking of death. A great deal of the 
Bible is written in symbolic language, and it was quite appropriate 



that he should speak his last message in symbols. It 
is interesting here to know what a Roman toga symbolizes: 
Augustus' Poet Laureate, said, "It is by the toga that the 
royal nation is recognized." The word toga means a covering 
garment (white robe). It was the official robe of higher 
magistrates, priests and of persons discharging vows, and was 
worn on special occasions, such as celebrating a triumph. 

We are reminded of the last experiences of the Apostle 
Paul, who traveled with his beloved companion Timothy, 
whom he called his son— not a natural son, but, as St. Paul 
stated, he had begotten this young man in the spirit. Likewise 
Pastor Russell begot Brother Sturgeon in the spirit, in 
that he brought Brother Sturgeon to a knowledge of the 
Divine Plan. Shortly before St. Paul's death he wrote, "I 
am now ready to be offered up, and the time of my departure 
is at hand; I have fought a good fight, I have finished my 
course, I have kept the faith; henceforth there is laid up for 
me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord, the Righteous 
Judge, shall give me at that Day; and not to me only, but 
unto all them also that love His appearing." (2 Timothy 4:6-8.) 
Our dear Brother Russell not only loved the appearing 
of the Lord Jesus, but above all men on the earth he 
declared the presence of the Master. Brother Russell was a 
very modest man and never exalted himself. It was exceedingly 
difficult to get him to speak of himself. He chose, therefore, 
a symbol which we could afterwards interpret to speak 
practically the same thing spoken by the Apostle Paul. By 
wearing the toga Brother Russell in effect said, "I have 
fought the good fight; I have triumphed and shall be received 
as a member of the Royal Family of Heaven." 

What a wonderful example and inspiration for the other 
members of the Body of Christ this side the veil to earnestly 
strive to receive the approval of the Lord! 

This evening we see here lying, silent in death, the body 

R6013 : page 374 

which he so faithfully used to the last. But he is not dead! 
St. Paul wrote, "Behold, I show you a mystery: We shall not 
all sleep, but we shall all be changed, in a moment, in the 
twinkling of an eye." (1 Cor. 15:51,52.) God's Word points 
out that the resurrection of the saints would take place at 
the presence of the Lord and before the inauguration of His 
Kingdom; and the Scriptures clearly teach that this resurrection 
is now in progress; that our dear Brother and 
Pastor sleeps not in death, but was instantaneously changed 
from the human to the Divine nature, and is now forever 
with the Lord— glorious reward for a true and faithful servant. 

It has been announced that he was to speak in this Temple 
tonight. God had directed otherwise! Brother Russell had 
prepared a sermon to preach to you, and I am sure you will 
be glad to hear it. The lips of the body he used on earth 
are silent, but his words yet are spoken. By God's grace it 
is my privilege here to be used, and to speak forth to you 
the message which he left. My friends, give heed, if you 
please, while I read this message to the Church and to the 



world. Behold, how appropriate the subject: 
PASTOR RUSSELL'S SERMON 
"THE MORNING COMETH AND A NIGHT ALSO" 

THE NIGHT WAS LONG-ITS SORROWS AND TEARS WERE MANY 
-GOD'S PROMISES ALONE ILLUMINATED IT-THE MORNING HERE 
AT LAST-A WONDERFUL DAWNING-THE DAY TO BE STILL MORE 
WONDERFUL-PROOFS ALL ABOUT US CONSIDERED-A BRIEF NIGHT 

OF TROUBLE SETTLING DOWN-ALREADY BEGUN IN EUROPE- 
AFTER IT A GLORIOUS SUNBURST. 

"Watchman, what of the night?. ..The morning cometh, 
and a night also."— Isaiah 21:1 1,12. 

"The literature of the world shows that intelligent 
men have refused to believe that the Divine Purpose in 
the creation of our earth has yet been attained. Continually 
we find references to 'the Morning of the New 
Day,' to the 'Golden Age,' etc., etc. Yet not to the longings 
of men's hearts, but to the promises of our God, do 
we look for real instruction on this subject. The Bible 
most emphatically declares that the entire period of human 
history thus far has been a night time. 

"The Prophet David explains, 'Weeping may endure 
for a Night, but joy cometh in the Morning.' (Psalm 30:5.) 
Thus prophetically we are assured that there will 
be a Morning whose glory, brightness and blessings will 
fully compensate for all the dark shadows of the Night 
time past. Our text is another prophecy along the same 
line. The message of the Lord is, 'The Morning cometh.' 
St. Paul writes that up to his time the world had 
been under a reign of Sin and Death, not under a Reign 

R6013 : page 375 

of Righteousness and Life. (Romans 5:21.) He points 
out also that the Day of the Lord will come, and will 
come gradually, stealthily, taking the world unawares— 
'as a thief in the night.'— 1 Thessalonians 5:1-6. 

"All of the Apostles assure us that it is not God's 
purpose to permit the reign of Sin and Death to continue 
forever. They tell us that the Divine Program is that 
Messiah, in the Father's appointed time, will take to Himself 
His great power and reign King of kings and Lord 
of lords— putting down sin and every evil thing, uplifting 
humanity and granting a Divine blessing where for six 
thousand years there has been a Divine curse. The Bible 
writers explain that this does not signify a change in the 
Divine Purpose, but that God had planned this thing in 
Himself from before the foundation of the world; and 
that although He had permitted Sin to enter and Death 
to reign. He had made fullest provision for the Redeemer 
to die for our sins and eventually to become the Restorer 
and Life-giver to Adam and his race— to as many of 



them as will accept everlasting life on the Divine terms. 

"The Apostles tell us that during the 'night time,' 
since Jesus' death, God has been doing a special work- 
selecting from mankind a special class, a saintly few— 
'the Church of the First-borns, whose names are written 
in Heaven.' These are not taken from any one nation 
or denomination. This 'little flock,' to whom it is the 
Father's good pleasure to give the Kingdom (Luke 12:32), 
is composed of all the saintly followers of Jesus, who 
walk in His steps in the narrow way during this Gospel 
Age. Their experiences are to qualify them for association 
with their Redeemer in His Messianic Kingdom. 
Their trials, their obedience and their sufferings for 
righteousness' sake are to work out for these a far more 
exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Suffering with 
the Master for the Truth's sake in the present life, they 
are to share His glory, honor and immortality in the life 
to come. They are to be His joint-heirs in His Kingdom. 
-Galatians 3:29; 2 Timothy 2: 1 1, 1 2. 

THE KINGDOM SUNRISE NEARING 

"Amongst the Lord's people even, few yet understand 
that Jesus distinctly teaches that the 'Sun of Righteousness,' 
which will arise with healing in His beams and 
whose light will constitute the New Day, will be composed 
of the Church of Christ glorified— changed from human to 
Divine nature by participation in the First Resurrection. 
Our Lord Jesus tells this in the parable of the Wheat and 
the Tares. He declares that in the end of this Gospel 
Age all of the wheat class will be gathered into the 
Heavenly Garner, and that 'then shall the righteous 
shine forth as the SUN in the Kingdom of their Father.' 
(Matthew 13:43.) We must not think, however that this 
signifies the Church without the Redeemer, but must remember 
that Jesus is 'the Head over the Church which is 
His Body.'— Ephesians 1:22,23. 

"How wonderful, how beautiful, how appropriate are 
the word-pictures of the Bible! No one but the Lord 
knew of the great Divine Plan. No one but Him, therefore, 
could give these pictures of its development. In 
various terms and figures of speech the Bible attempts 
to give us a little glimpse of the glorious conditions of 
that Day. The New Day and the Kingdom will be 'the 
desire of all people.' In that Day the righteous will 
flourish, and evil-doers will be cut off from life. During 
that thousand-year Day of Messiah's Kingdom, Satan is 
to be bound, 'that he may deceive the nations no more.' 
(Revelation 20:2,3.) Landlordism will come to an end; 
for 'they shall not build and another inhabit; they shall 
not plant and another eat the fruit thereof,' but 'shall 
long enjoy the work of their hands.'— Isaiah 65:22. 

"The earth is to yield her increase. (Psalm 67:6.) 
Streams are to come forth in the desert; the solitary 
places are to be made glad. The entire earth is to become 
like the Garden of Eden. It is God's footstool, and 



He declares that He will make it glorious. It is not to 
be burned up with literal fire, as once we supposed. It 
is to 'abide forever.' (Ecclesiastes 1:4; Psalm 104:5.) 
'He formed it not in vain; He formed it to be inhabited.' 
-Isaiah 45:18; 66:1; 60:13; 35:1,7. 

WONDERFUL FOREGLEAMS OF LIGHT 

"The most wonderful thing that the Bible tells us 
respecting that New Day is that it will bring great intelligence 
and enlightenment to every creature. The light 
of the knowledge of the glory of God shall fill the whole 
earth as the waters cover the face of the great deep. 
(Isaiah 1 1:9; Habakkuk 2: 14.) 'And they shall teach 
no more every man his neighbor, and every man his 
brother, saying. Know the Lord; for they shall all know 
Me, from the least of them unto the greatest, saith the 
Lord.' (Jeremiah 3 1 :34.) Ultimately every knee shall 
bow and every tongue shall confess, to the glory of God. 
-Philippians 2: 1 1 ; Isaiah 45:23. 

"What an enthusing prospect the Bible holds out before 
the Church and before as many of the world as can 
exercise a measure of faith to believe! The world indeed 
sees to some extent that great blessings are coming; 
but just what these are and how they are to come mankind 
know not; for 'the world by wisdom knows not God.' 
(1 Corinthians 1:21.) The worldly wise have rejected the 
Bible, and do not trust it as a Revelation from God. 
Thus the wise are caught in their own craftiness. (1 Corinthians 3:19.) 
Their boasted wisdom ensnares them 
and blinds them to the Divine Revelation. 

"Nevertheless, some of our greatest thinkers— Mr. 
Edison and others— are rapidly seeing that the world is 
just on the verge of the most wonderful inventions and 
knowledge, which will transform the face of the earth 
and the people thereof. They are corroborating the Bible 
unwittingly; for they believe it not and know not the 
character of its messages. 

THE DAWNING BEGUN IN A.D. 1874 

"Let us not stop now to discuss the darkness of the 
Night and its weeping. Let us awake, and take note of 
the fact that the dawning of the New Age is already 
here. For the past forty-two years we have been in it 
and enjoying many of its blessings. But those blessings 
came so stealthily— 'like a thief in the night'— that few 
recognize their import. Some few have been calling attention 
to the fact that we have been in the Millennial 
dawn ever since 1 874. 

"Bible chronology quite clearly teaches that the six 
thousand years since Adam's creation have ended— six 
great Days of a thousand years each, mentioned by St. 
Peter— 'a Day with the Lord is as a thousand years.' 
(2 Peter 3:8.) Now the great Seventh Day, also a thousand 
years long, has commenced. We have been enjoying 



its dawning. It is to be a grand Day! What wonder if 
the dawning be remarkable! 
"It may surprise some to be told that the past forty-two 

R6014: page 375 

years mean more to the world in increase of education, 
increase of wealth, increase of all manner of labor-saving 
inventions and conveniences, increase of safeguards and 
protections for human life, than did all the six thousand 
years which preceded them— many times over. The world 
has probably created a thousand times as much wealth 
during these forty-two years as during the entire six 
thousand years preceding. Yet these changes have come 
so gradually that few have noticed them. 

FULFILMENT OF PROPHECY EVERYWHERE 

"Forty-two years ago man labored from sun to sun; 
today we are rapidly approaching an eight-hour day. 
Forty-two years ago nearly all the labor of the world 
was done with sweat of face; today it is nearly all accomplished 
by machinery. Forty-two years ago the sewing-machine 
was just reaching perfection; today it is 
everywhere indispensable. So with the thousand household 
conveniences. So with nearly all of our sanitary 
and plumbing arrangements. So with farming implements. 
Reapers and binders, mowers, automobiles, gas 
engines, etc., etc., all belong to these forty-two years. In 
our cities the modern conveniences are wonderful. Solomon 
in all his glory never even dreamed of such things 
as the poorest human being in America may enjoy! 

"Prophecies respecting streams in the desert and the 
wilderness blossoming as the rose are having fulfilment— 
not miraculously, but in harmony with the Divine order 
of an increased intelligence amongst men. Artesian wells 
are being drilled, irrigating canals constructed, not only 
in the Western part of the United States and Canada, but 
also in far-off Mesopotamia. The results are marvelous. 
Land previously not worth fencing is valued at $500 per 
acre today. The increase of knowledge has been supplemented 
by governmental arrangements for the distribution 
of that knowledge amongst the people. The soils 
of various localities are being analyzed at public expense; 
and the tillers of the soil are given knowledge as respects 
what kind of fertilizers are required to bring 
satisfactory results. 

R6014: page 376 

"Under these conditions it does not surprise us to know 
that as much as 156 bushels of corn have been raised to 
one acre, and that 600 bushels of potatoes and over are 
not an uncommon record. Is not the Bible being fulfilled? 
Who can dispute these facts? What do they 
signify? We answer that they exactly corroborate the 



Divine declaration which describes our day: Many shall 
run to and fro; knowledge shall be increased; the wise 
of God's people shall understand; and 'there shall be a 
Time of Trouble such as never was since there was a 
nation.'-Daniel 12:4,10,1; Matthew 24:21. 

INCREASE OF WORLD-WIDE DISCONTENT 

"We are in the Morning of our text. Ah, what a 
glorious Morning! How changed the human conditions 
from those of our grandfathers! How thankful the whole 
world should be! Paeans of praise should be rising 
from all the people of the favored lands of civilization; 
and helping hands should be outstretched to carry the 
same blessings to heathen lands. But is it so? Are the 
people happy and rejoicing? Are they appreciative of 
the New Day?— of the gifts of Divine Providence? 

"No! In proportion as the blessings of God have 
come, the discontent of humanity has increased; and unbelief, 
not only in respect to the Bible as the Divine 
Revelation, but in many instances in respect to the very 
existence of an intelligent Creator. Notwithstanding the 
great increase in the world's wealth, and the fact that 
there are some noble souls who are using their share of 
the wealth in a praiseworthy manner, nevertheless the 
general operation of the law of selfishness prevails; and 
all the legislation which has been enacted, or can be 
enacted, fails to restrain the giant institutions— corporations 
—of our day, fails to hinder them from exploiting 
the masses in the interests of the comparatively few. 

"Did God know all these things? What will He do 
about them? Will He bring in the Millennial blessings, 
and risk that men shall take for granted that they have 
won the secrets of nature by their own wisdom and perseverance, 
and forget God entirely? Will they become 
more discontented? Would a Millennium of discontent 
be advantageous? What will God do about it? 

THE DARK NIGHT ALREADY SETTLING 

"According to the Bible, God foreknew the conditions 
of our day as we are now reviewing them; and in 
our text He gives a key to the situation— elsewhere in 
the Scriptures made very plain. Through the Prophet, 
God tells of the dark Night coming— after the Morning 
Dawn had been well ushered in— a dark storm-cloud 
just at sunrise. This dark hour is described in the 
prophecy of Daniel, and also in that of our Lord Jesus, 
to be 'a Time of Trouble, such as never was since there 
was a nation.' 

"Bible students see this great Time of Trouble already 
beginning in the letting loose of the winds of strife in 
Europe. In the light of the Bible they perceive that the 
result of this present war will be the great weakening of 
the nations— of the governments of the earth— and increased 
knowledge and discontent amongst the people. 



"The next phase of the Trouble, according to the 
Bible, is to be the 'great earthquake, such as was not since 
men were upon the earth, so mighty an earthquake, and so 
great.' (Revelation 16:18.) This is not a literal earthquake, 
but a symbolic one— revolution. Then the third 
phase of the calamity— the darkest of all— will be the 
symbolic fire of anarchy, which will utterly destroy our 
present civilization. Then, in the midst of that most 
awful Time of Trouble, Messiah, the great King, will 
take His great power and will exercise it, with the result 
that the raging waves of the sea of human passion will 
all be quieted, the fires of anarchy will all be extinguished, 
and the Reign of Righteousness and Peace will begin. 

MESSIAH WILL "MAKE ALL THINGS NEW" 

"Cannot we see the wisdom of the great Creator's 
Program? He has determined to permit mankind to convince 
themselves of their own impotency, of their need 
of a God, and of the fact that there is a God, and that 
His glorious purposes for humanity are revealed in His 
Word. Ah, it is no wonder that the Bible speaks of that 
revelation of the Lord as the 'still small voice of God,' 
speaking to mankind through Messiah's Kingdom! No 
wonder the Lord declares that 'then He will turn to the 
people a pure Message, that they may all call upon the 
name of the Lord, to serve Him with one consent'! 

"St. Peter gives us a vivid picture of the New Order 
of things in Messiah's Kingdom. He says, 'The Day of 
the Lord will come as a thief in the night; in which 
the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the 
elements shall melt with fervent heat; the earth also, and 
the works that are therein, shall be burned up;. ..the 
heavens, being on fire, shall be dissolved. ...Nevertheless 
we, according to His promise, look for new heavens 
and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness.'— 
2 Peter 3: 10,12,13. 

"The 'new heavens' will be the glorified Church, consisting 
of Jesus the Head and His Bride class, selected 
from the world during the past eighteen centuries. The 
'new earth' will be the new social order under the control 
of the new heavens. There will be no patching of 
present institutions, but a clean sweep of them by the fire 
of Divine wrath preceding the establishment of the New 
Order, wherein only that which is righteous, just, equitable, 
true, will be recognized. 

"We rejoice that such glorious things are coming- 
even though the world must necessarily reach them 
through the tribulation of the Time of Trouble. Happy 
are those whose eyes and ears of understanding are open 
now, and who are in such heart relationship with the 
Lord that He can make known to them in advance something 
of the riches of His grace, and show them how 
the coming troubles will work out blessings for the human 
family." 



PASTOR RUSSELL'S CHARACTER 

In this dark hour upon the nations let the peoples of 
the earth hear this message and heed it as one from the 
Lord. For forty years Pastor Russell has set forth in his 
writings that this dark hour would come soon. He reached 
this conclusion based upon the Word of the Lord. Behold, 
it is fully confirmed by the events we see. Let the Christian 
people of the earth, therefore, awake to the importance 
of the hour and heed the message-"THE KINGDOM OF 
HEAVEN IS AT HAND!" 

"Arise and shine; for thy light is come and the 
glory of the Lord is arisen upon thee."— Isaiah 60: 1. 

Enemies? Yes; he had some— God pity them! Jesus 
had enemies who relentlessly persecuted Him. I would not 
mar this occasion by reference to the enemies of Pastor 
Russell, but I know that he would be glad for me to speak 
anything that would help to open the eyes of understanding 
of those who are blinded to God's purposes. Blind prejudice, 
based upon false accusations of enemies, has tended 
to keep some in the dark. 

Truly it can be said that Pastor Russell's character was 
and is without blemish. He was the cleanest, purest and 
best man I ever knew. His enemies sought to make him 
of no reputation. By insinuation— the most cruel of 
weapons— they sought to destroy his power and influence, 
and hence his work. They utterly failed. I feel constrained, 
under the circumstances, to read to you a paper signed 
by Pastor Russell. 

In the year 1911 he was starting on a trip around the 
world. At that time the fiery darts from the enemy were 
coming thick and fast. He wrote out this instrument, made 
oath to it, and placed it in my hands, saying, "You may 

R6015 : page 376 

make it as public as your judgment dictates." It reads: 

"In view of my soon departure for a foreign shore, 
and in view of the increasing virulence and threats of my 
enemies, and under the assumption that they may await 
my absence to make a fresh attack, by advice of my 
counsel I make under oath the following sweeping statement; 
namely, 

"THAT I never was guilty of immorality toward any 
person. 

"FURTHERMORE, I never cohabited with any person at 
any time and, 

"FURTHER, I have never desired so to do. 

"WITNESS my hand and seal to this declaration this 
Twenty-Eighth day of Sept., 191 1, at Brooklyn, N.Y. 

(Signed) CHARLES T. RUSSELL. 

"Subscribed and sworn to before me this 3d day of 
October, 1911. C.H. MERRITT, 

"Commissioner of deeds for the City of New York." 

[Seal.] 



R6015: page 377 

But persecutions only stirred him to greater efforts in 
the cause of the King of kings, knowing, as he did, that 
such persecutions are evidences that the night is drawing 
on when no man can work. Without murmur or complaint, 
early and late, in winter and in summer, in heat and 
in cold, in season and out of season, amidst storms and in 
sunshine, as a mighty giant he fought on to the goal, never 
faltering or looking back. Truly, he died a hero, and died 
in the harness! "Precious in the sight of the Lord is the 
death of His saints." Truly at the close of his earthly career, 
as such a hero, he could say: 

"I have fought my way through; 

I have finished the work 

Thou didst give me to do." 
Silently listening we hear the response from the Throne 
of the Lord and Master: 

"Well and faithfully done; 

Enter into My joy and sit 

Down on My Throne!" 
Is his work finished? Ah, no indeed! Of such faithful 
ones who die during the presence of the Lord the 
Great Master said, "Blessed are the dead which die in the 
Lord from henceforth; yea, saith the Spirit, that they may 
rest from their labors; and their works do follow them."— 
Revelation 14:13. 

THE PRESENCE OF THE LORD 

The work that Pastor Russell did was not his work 
alone, but it was and is the Lord's work. It was Jesus who 
said that at His coming He would gird Himself and cause 
His servants to sit down at meat; and that He would come 
forth and serve them.— Luke 12:37. 

For forty years the Lord has been present, feeding 
those who have been hungering and thirsting for righteousness. 
For forty years Pastor Russell— that faithful 
servant of the Lord— has set forth clear and unmistakable 
evidence of the presence of the Master. He nailed the banner 
of Christ's presence on the title page of THE WATCH 
TOWER; and it shall never come down until the Kingdom 
is known in the earth. The flood of Present Truth has been 
rising for more than forty years, and it is rising higher and 
higher. As well might the enemies of the Truth seek with 
a common broom to sweep back the waves of the mighty 
Atlantic as to try to suppress the flood of Truth that is 
rising now. In spite of all the opposition that can be 
brought to bear, it will continue to rise until, as the Prophet 
declares, "the knowledge of the glory of the Lord 
shall fill the whole earth as the waters fill the deep"; until 
such time as it will not be necessary for any man to teach 
his neighbor, saying. Know ye the Lord; for all shall know 
Him, from the least unto the greatest."— Isa. 1 1:9; Jer. 31:34. 

The thousands of Christian men and women in the 
earth today who have fought by the side of Pastor Russell 



have not been blindly following him. They have followed 
the Lord; they have followed Pastor Russell only as he 
followed the Lord. Recognizing him as the special servant 
of the Lord, they have fought by his side as his 
brethren, looking to Jesus, the Captain of their salvation; 
and having thus started in the fight, they will fight on until 
every one of the Kingdom class has gained the victory. 

A PERSONAL TRIBUTE TO THE PASTOR 

I cannot pass this moment without paying a personal 
tribute to Pastor Russell. He was my friend, and a true 
friend indeed. It is written, "A true friend loves you all 
the time." I loved him; I know he loved me. Long before 
I knew Pastor Russell, he had done much for me. 
While I was engaged in the law practice in the Middle 
West, there came into my office one day a lady, bearing 
some books in her arms. She was modest, gentle and kind. 
I thought she was poor, and that it was my privilege and 
duty to help her. I found that she was rich in faith in 
God. I bought the books and afterwards read them. Up 
to that time 1 knew nothing about the Bible: 1 had never 
heard of Pastor Russell. I did not even know that he was 
the author of the books at the time I read them; but I 
know that the wonderfully sweet, harmonious explanation 
of the Plan of God thrilled my heart and changed the 
course of my life from doubt to joy. 

Why should not I love him? I know that he loved me. 
A little incident illustrates this: Several years ago he 
requested me to go on a mission of importance. After 
talking with him I said, "Brother Russell, I feel that I cannot 
do it." He answered, "Yes you can, by the Lord's 
grace." I said, "I am willing to try." "Go on," he replied, 
"and I will pray God to give you the wisdom." "I went"; and 
having succeeded far beyond my expectations I returned 
and gave him a report. Seated in his study, as I went 
over the report in detail, his face lighted up with joy; and 
like a loving father he rose and put his arms around me, 
drew me to him and kissed me, saying, "Brother, 
I love you very much." I have walked with him; I have 
talked with him; I have eaten with him; I have slept with 
him; I have been with him through trials and triumphs; 
I have seen him in storm and in sunshine. Amidst all of 
these I have marked his complete joy in the Lord, his 
magnanimous heart, and his absolute loyalty and devotion 
to the Lord and to His cause. Gentle, kind, fearless and 
affectionate, magnanimous, sincere and filled with the 
spirit of the Lord, he was a giant of power in the world. 
I count it the greatest honor that I have known to have 
had Pastor Russell for my true and loyal friend, and that 
I have been privileged to be associated with him. 

I will relate to you an incident that throws some light 
on his sweet relationship with the Lord. For more than 
a year prior to his death he suffered a great deal of physical 
pain, yet never did he murmur. His great desire was 
to have the approval of the Lord and Master. He spoke 



the Master's name in loving terms, and his face lighted 
when he mentioned the Lord. A few weeks prior to this 
last illness, speaking to one whom he loved very dearly 
and in whom lie had great confidence, he said. "I have had 
such a longing desire to be embraced by the Lord Jesus, 
to think of myself as the woman, or bride, and to have the 
Master press me to His bosom. I have prayed earnestly 
to the Lord that I might experience this sweet relationship, 
and He has given me this assurance that I do enjoy 
that sweet relationship." Truly the Lord loved him much! 
Truly for him to live was for Christ to live! 

God's Book is written for those who are loyal to Him. 
His promises are to such. Among these sweet promises 
are the words of the Master: "Be thou faithful unto death, 
and I will give thee the Crown of Life." "These shall be 
kings and priests unto God and unto Christ and shall reign 
with Him." Long ago God caused the Sweet Singer to 
record in His holy Book, concerning the faithful and loyal 
followers of Christ Jesus, these sweet words: 

"The king shall joy in Thy strength, O Lord: and in Thy 
salvation how greatly shall he rejoice. Thou hast given him his 
heart's desire, and hast not withholden the request of his lips. 
Selah. For Thou preventest him with the blessings of goodness; 
Thou settest a crown of pure gold on his head. He asked life 
of Thee, and Thou gavest it him, even length of days forever 
and ever. His glory is great in Thy salvation; honour and 
majesty hast thou laid upon him, for Thou hast made him most 
blessed forever; Thou hast made him exceeding glad with Thy 
countenance."— Psalm 21:1-6. 

Truly these words fittingly apply to our beloved Brother 
and Pastor! 

Charles Taze Russell, thou hast, by the Lord, been 
crowned a king; and through the everlasting ages thy 
name shall be known amongst the people, and thy enemies 
shall come and worship at thy feet. 

We take the last view of this piece of clay that so faithfully 
bore the banner of the King. He has been a true, 
loyal, faithful ambassador of Christ. Thanks be to God, he 
has entered into his everlasting reward. The greatest desire 
of our lives is that we, together with him, may soon 
be forever with the Lord and participate in blessing all 
the families of the earth. God help us, as we here renew 
our consecration, to keep it faithfully to the end. 

We sorrow not for him who has gone, because we know 
he has entered into his everlasting joy. For him we rejoice; 
but we sorrow for ourselves. Yet trusting in the 
Lord we will continue to fight the good fight of faith. 

R6016 : page 378 

EXHORTATION TO FAITHFULNESS 

My beloved brethren— we who are here, and all who 
are in the earth— what shall we do? Shall we slacken our 



zeal for the cause of our Lord and King? No! By His 

grace we will increase our zeal and energy, to finish our 

course with joy. We will not fear nor falter, but will stand 

shoulder to shoulder, contending for the faith, rejoicing 

in our privilege of proclaiming the Message of His Kingdom. 

He has promised, "I will never leave thee nor forsake 

thee." "Faithful is He that calleth, who also will do 

it." Then why should we for one moment doubt the outcome 

of His work and His cause! True, the enemy of 

death has taken from us at a time when we did not expect 

it, our beloved Brother; and for this cause we are bowed 

down. Yel we are not dismayed, we are not discouraged. 

Let us lift up our heads and rejoice, for surely our deliverance 

draweth nigh! "THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN IS AT HAND!' 

Today we are beholding the death throes of the nations 
of earth; we are standing at the portals of the Golden 
Age. Everyone who has accepted the Truth of God's 
Plan, in the love of the Truth, and who holds fast in that 
spirit, will win. Let everyone look well to his Armor. 
Let us gird up the loins of our minds, be sober and hope 
to the end. He who has led us thus far will lead us on. 
Remember, he who is faithful unto death shall receive the 
Crown of Life. 

United in the sacred and holy bonds of Heavenly love, 
as we journey the remainder of this race course, may we 
in sincerity and with understanding sing: 
"Blest be the tie that binds 

Our hearts in Christian love; 
The fellowship of kindred minds 
Is like to that above. 

"Our glorious hope revives 

Our courage every day. 
While each with expectation strives 

To run the Heavenly way." 



R6016 : page 378 
CLOSING SCENES IN NEW YORK AND PITTSBURGH 

The evening oration, the reading of Brother Russell's 
sermon which he himself had prepared to deliver in the 
Temple that evening, and the sweet strains of several 
hymns were still fresh in the minds of the vast audience 
when the pall-bearers carried forth from The Temple the 
casket containing the remains of our dear Brother Russell. 
Accompanying the body to Pittsburgh were two Pullman 
cars loaded with devoted and faithful friends, who were 
met by hundreds of loved ones at that place. 

The large auditorium of the Carnegie Library in Allegheny 
was packed at two o'clock the following afternoon, 
when the fourth part of the funeral services began under 
the direction of Dr. W.E. Spill, representing the Pittsburgh 
congregation. Love and deep interest were written 



upon every face in this vast audience also. Every available 
space on the platform was used to display the rich 
floral offerings of every description sent by Bible Students 
and friends from various sections of the country. 

The blending of the voices composing the double quartette 
in their rendition of sweet Christian hymns was the 
means of conveying blessings of comfort and encouragement 
to many sorrowing hearts. After the reading of the 
Holy Scriptures by Brother R.E. Bricker, also of the 
Pittsburgh Ecclesia, Dr. W.E. Spill delivered an address. 
He was followed by Brother Sturgeon, after which, while 
the congregation was taking its final view of the face of 
that noble Christian lying before them, the choir sang the 
last song given out by Brother Russell during his recent 
visit to Los Angeles: 

"Abide sweet Spirit, Heavenly Dove, 
With light and comfort from Above; 
Be Thou our Guardian, Thou our Guide, 
O'er every thought and step preside." 

The funeral cortege consisted of 101 automobiles and 
a train of several trolley cars. The beautiful Rosemont 
Cemetery was reached at dusk, where a company of five 
hundred friends were gathered on the hillside to witness 
the last sad rites in connection with the placing of our 
loved one in the grave. An avenue lined with flowers 
was formed, through which came the mourners with bared 
heads, bearing solemnly the casket containing the remains 
of our Pastor. The walls of the grave were lined with 
ferns and white chrysanthemums. At the foot of the 
grave was a floral design inlaid with colors of gold, which 
silently expressed the belief that the victorious Christian 
soldier, whose body lay before us, had gone home, and 
was now a partaker of the Divine nature. 

While the bier rested upon the supports over the open 
grave, prayer was offered, and the casket was lowered to 
its last resting place, during which the choir impressively 
sang the beautiful words of Hymn No. 98. 

It was fitting that while our Beloved had gone to be 
forever with the Lord and like Him, his remains should 
rest near the scenes of his earlier days, where the Harvest 
work began, and where the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
which contributed much to his fame, were written and 
first circulated. 



R6016 : page 378 

LETTERS EXPRESSING SYMPATHY AND LOYALTY 

[The Harvest Work, of which Pastor Russell was the leading 
spirit in the world for more than forty years, was and is the Lord's 
work. The friends everywhere recognize this. The great number of 
letters daily received from all parts of the land, since Brother Russell's 
death, clearly manifest the loyalty of the dear brethren to the cause 
of Messiah's Kingdom and evidence their determination to press forward 



along the mark for the Prize of the High Calling. The Society greatly 
appreciates these assurances of full cooperation in the Lord's work. 
What a great incentive to renewed zeal, courage and faithfulness! We 
give a few samples of these letters below. Others will be published 
from time to time in THE WATCH TOWER as space will permit:] 

AT THE GRAVE SIDE 

DEAR BRETHREN IN CHRIST:- 

Upon a hillside, sloping towards the south, we gathered 
round about upon that hallowed ground to pay our last sad 
tribute to the one we loved, the greatest man on earth in 
these last days— and great because he was approved of God! 
How ineffable the beauty of the scene! So peaceful and so 
still! The gently rolling hills, far as the eye can reach, reminding 
us that, "As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, 
so the Lord is round about His people from henceforth, 
even forever." A violet mist creeps softly through the 
valleys at our feet, and faintly dims the City's distant lights. 

The sacred silence is broken only by the singing of our 
choir, like angel voices floating out upon the evening air: 
"How vain is all beneath the skies! 
How transient every earthly bliss! 
How slender all the fondest ties 
That bind us to a world like this!" 
Above the purple haze, and low within the western sky, the 
last faint, crimson glow of sunset slowly pales into the silvery 
whiteness that precedes the night. And lo! the evening 
star! How like a star was our beloved! And how he shed 
the rays of Truth divine into the darkness of our minds and 
changed that darkness to "His marvelous light!" 
"The evening cloud, the morning dew. 

The withering grass, the fading flower. 
Of earthly hopes are emblems true. 
The glory of a passing hour." 
How exquisitely expressive of all about us! The withered 
grass beneath our feet, the fading flowers upon the upturned 
earth, and here and there the bare, brown trees, a few crisp 
leaves still faintly fluttering on their boughs. Their fruit has 
all been gathered, and they speak to us of harvest soon to end. 
"In this is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit." Did 
our beloved Pastor bear much fruit? Ah, yes! How much, 
he now may know as he hath never fully known before! 
"But, though earth's fairest blossoms die. 

And all beneath the skies is vain, 
There is a brighter age now nigh. 

Beyond the reach of care and pain." 

R6016 : page 379 

And standing there, our hearts rejoiced with joy unspeakable 
that in His infinite love and mercy the Lord had not permitted 
that most precious clay to suffer violence, but, "Like 
as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that 
fear Him," and He saved us from the anguish which might 
have been greater than we could bear! Yet he suffered— 



how greatly God only knows, for he never murmured or complained; 
but he suffered not by hands of wicked men, and so 
we rendered thanks to God! 

"Then let the hope of joys to come 

Dispel our cares, and chase our fears. 
Since God is ours, we're traveling home. 
Though passing through a vale of tears!" 
With eyelids closed, and sorrowing hearts, we bowed our 
heads in final prayer with one who also loved and labored 
with him to the end. 

R6017 : page 379 

And then in silent little groups the friends departed from 
the scene, and as we climbed the hill to reach the road, the 
moon shone full upon us. Ah, yes! The full moon of God's 
favor, and our hearts cried out, "How long, O God, until the 
night shall come, that night wherein no man can work!" 

One last and lingering look upon the scene recalled to mind 
that wonderful picture, "The Return from Calvary," with 
its three crosses faintly outlined on the evening sky, and the 
sorrowful women wending their way towards Jerusalem. 

And now it had grown strangely dark, no object was discernible 
on either side the road, as we, the Lord's still faithful 
followers of these later days, were swiftly borne towards the 
city of our beloved leader's birth. 

How wondrously appropriate all had been! The suggestion 
of the Harvest soon to end, the ingathering of the ripened 
fruits, the softly falling twilight, like a curtain dropped 
upon the scene, and now the darkness and loneliness of the 
flock of sheep whose faithful shepherd had been "smitten!" 

How necessary now to walk still more "by faith" in the 
Great Shepherd of us all, the One who is "too wise to err, too 
good to be unkind;" "who doeth all things well." Be brave, 
be strong, weep not, have faith in God! 

"It is the LORD, let Him do what seemeth Him good!" 

Thus. 
"Faith can firmly trust Him, 
Come what may!" 

GERTRUDE W. SEIBERT. 



REGULARLY ELECTED PASTOR 34 YEARS 

We, the Pittsburgh Congregation of Associated Bible Students, 
deeply mourn the death of our Beloved Pastor, who 
has lovingly and faithfully served us for so many years. In 
loving consideration of his high honor and noble Christian 
character, his untiring labors on behalf of the Lord's people 
both here and elsewhere, his many noble sacrifices and patient 
endurance of much persecution on behalf of the Lord's Truth, 
his devoted faithfulness to the Lord and to the Lord's Word 
under every condition of trial; therefore, be it resolved. 

That this Congregation bear witness to Christians everywhere 
of our deep appreciation of the patient watchcare, the 



wise counsel, and the helpful and loving guidance of his 
thirty-four years as the regularly elected Pastor of this Congregation, 
both in the Word and work of the Lord. We have 
full confidence of faith that, his work finished, he has now 
entered into that blessed "rest that remaineth for the people 
of God." "Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord from 
henceforth; Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from 
their labors, and their works do follow them." Be it further 

Resolved, That these resolutions be printed in the Pittsburgh 
newspapers, and that a copy be sent, with fraternal 
love in Christ, to the New York City Temple Congregation, 
the Brooklyn Tabernacle Congregation, the London Tabernacle 
Congregation and through them to all members of the 
International Bible Students Association, as an expression of 
our sympathy in our mutual loss, and of our prayer that the 
Lord's continued blessing be with them. 

We, the undersigned Chairman and Secretary of the Congregation 
herein named, do hereby certify that the foregoing 
was unanimously adopted by the Pittsburgh Congregation of 
Associated Bible Students, at a meeting held November 19, 
1916, at the Bible Students Auditorium, 305 Penn Avenue, 
Pittsburgh. Pa. 

W.E. SPILL, Chairman, 
R.H. BRICKER, Secretary. 



LETTERS OF RESIGNATION FROM EDITORIAL COMMITTEE 

MR. W.E. VAN AMBURGH, MR. H. CLAY ROCKWELL, 13-17 
Hicks St., Brooklyn, N.Y. 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

I have received and read with interest and care your 
valued letter of the 9th inst., and thoroughly appreciate the 
spirit of fellowship and consideration manifested. 

I am in full harmony with the judgment of the Editorial 
Committee and the Board of Directors that all the Editorial 
Staff should be in close personal touch, and not being situated 
so that I can take up my residence in Brooklyn, I hereby 
tender my resignation from the Editorial Staff to be effective 
at once. 

It is a matter of great satisfaction to me that there are 
able brethren on the ground, and nominated by our dear 
Pastor, who are probably more fully equipped than I to carry 
on the work outlined in the Will. 

I know it is unnecessary for me to say that I am in the 
closest and warmest head and heart sympathy and fellowship 
with all the work delegated to the various departments of 
the Society, and shall hold myself in readiness to respond to 
every opportunity for service that I can discern or you can 
designate. Yours in our Redeemer, W.E. PAGE. 



To A. I. RITCHIE, 



Vice-President W.T.B. & T. Society, 
Brooklyn, N.Y. 

DEAR BROTHER RITCHIE:- 

In harmony with the Will of our dear Brother Russell, 
a copy of which I received, together with your letter of the 
3rd inst., I am addressing you and through you the other 
members of the Editorial Staff of THE WATCH TOWER. 

While I love the Lord and His people devotedly, and 
while I would greatly appreciate the privilege of serving as 
a member of the Editorial staff of THE WATCH TOWER, I am 
compelled because of conditions to decline to accept such 
place. As you know I was a member of the Bethel Family 
at the time Brother Russell added my name in his Will to 
the Editorial staff; that for more than a year past I have 
not been a member of the Bethel Family and am not now, 
because it became necessary for me to take a position in the 
world to earn a living for my family. After prayer and due 
consideration, I believe it to be in harmony with the Lord's 
will that I decline to accept the position assigned to me by 
the Will of our dear Brother Russell, and I therefore decline 
to accept the same. 

I offer my resignation, humbly awaiting the Lord's leading. 
Should you at a later time, by reason of vacancy in the 
Editorial staff, understand it to be the Lord's will and in 
harmony with the provisions of Brother Russell's last Will 
that I serve, I hope and pray, by the Lord's grace, that I 
will be ready to respond fully and promptly. Again craving 
an interest in your prayers. 

Your brother and servant by the Lord's grace, 
E.W. BRENNEISEN. 



REDOLENT OF RICHEST PERFUME 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

At a meeting of our Church this evening, I was requested 
by a unanimous vote to express to you as best I 
can the sorrow of heart under which we are laboring, because 
of the death of our faithful and Beloved Pastor; and 
to assure you of our desire and determination to cooperate 
heartily, in our feeble way, with those who shall have the 
privilege and responsibility of supervising and directing the 
Harvest Work during what we believe will be but a brief 
period before the coming storm shall burst upon us in all 
its fierceness and fury. 

As to our deep sorrow, let us say that it is not an unmixed 
sorrow; for while we shall no more see his dear 
face, and no more hear his wise and loving words of godly 
instruction, his exhortations to holiness of life, and his fatherly 
counsel, yet we rejoice that his sufferings are forever past, that 
his unremitting toils are over, and that the scorpion-tongue 
of vituperation, slander and vilification can never again 
reach and give pain to his great, loving, tender heart. 

His example of self-sacrificing loyalty to God, the Truth 



and the Church, his patience, perseverance and indefatigable 
zeal, the sweetness of his spirit, his freedom from 
animosity and resentment under the most cruel and malignant 
persecution, will ever remain an incentive to us to 
emulate him in the attainment of these fruits of the Spirit. 
Truly the memory of him is most precious, and redolent 
of the richest perfume. Truly may we, without irreverence, 
apply the words of the poet to him: 
"Long, long be my heart 

With such memories filled. 
Like the vase in which roses 
Have once been distilled; 
You may break, you may shatter 

The vase if you will. 
But the scent of the roses 
Will cling to it still." 
Your brethren and sisters in our dear Redeemer, 
SUFFOLK ECCLESIA.-Va. 

R6017 : page 380 

HAVE CONFIDENCE IN THE LORD'S ARRANGEMENT 

DEAR BRETHREN IN CHRIST:- 

We are glad, dear Brethren, that through the providential 
leading of our dear Heavenly Father, in the affairs of His 
Church, an opportunity of service has been placed in our 
hands, respecting which we desire to take full advantage. 

Realizing the added responsibility which the Lord of the 
Harvest has seen wise to place in your hands at this time, 
through the removal of our dear Pastor from our midst, and 
anticipating your mingled feelings of loneliness and sorrow, 
and the loss which you, possibly more than any others of the 
Church still this side the veil have sustained, we hasten to 
extend to you our sincere, fervent love, and warmest sympathy 
in this your hour of special and peculiar trial. 

We wish to assure you, dear Brethren, of our full confidence 
in the wisdom of the Lord's arrangement, in that He 
now desires that the great work so faithfully and wisely 

R6018 : page 380 

introduced and carried on until the present time through the 
supervision of our Beloved Pastor, shall be continued without 
interruption through you as His chosen servants. 

We wish also to state that our earnest desire is to continue 
to cooperate with you in every possible way, in whatever 
work our dear Heavenly Father may yet have for His 
Church who still remain in the flesh. 

We pray for you, dear Brethren, that the Lord may pour 
out upon you very richly the spirit of wisdom and understanding 
in the knowledge and favor of the Lord, that you 
may be granted a knowledge of His will, together with the 
grace and strength which He has so graciously promised to 
all His faithful children. 

"The Lord bless thee and keep thee. The Lord make 



His face to shine upon thee and be gracious unto thee. The 

Lord lift up His countenance upon thee and give thee peace." 
TORONTO ECCLESIA.-Can. 



SORROW GIVES PLACE TO JOY 

DEAR BRETHREN IN CHRIST:- 

Our hearts join yours in sympathy at the taking away of 
our beloved Brother and Pastor Russell. How sorrowful it is 
to be separated from the one we love so dearly! Our hearts 
cannot help being filled with sorrow for the loss of this faithful 
servant of the Lord, who so much loved us as to lay down 
his life in our behalf. 

But we "sorrow not as others that have no hope." When 
we think of his many years of toil and suffering patiently 
endured for the sake of his Master, when we think of the 
bitter persecution by relentless foes inside and outside of the 
Church, the befouling of his good name, and the besmirching 
of his good reputation, we rejoice greatly to know that his 
great tribulation has forever ended. 

In fact, our sorrow is displaced by joy when we contemplate 
the glorious exaltation that is his. We know that 
he is not "asleep" in death, but "changed" and "raised incorruptible" 
—"caught up" "to meet the Lord," and so shall he 
ever be with the Lord. Yes, we acclaim, "Blessed" are you, 
dear Brother; you are at rest from your labors and your work 
follows with you. "-1 Cor. 15:51,52; 1 Thes. 4:17; Rev. 14:13. 

How we all the more long for the time when we shall 
similarly have finished our course with joy and been ushered 
into the presence of our adorable Lord together with His 
saints! Meantime it is ours to press on with renewed zeal 
until the work be done and we at last receive the crown. 

We anticipate your increased responsibilities, dear brethren, 
and we pray the necessary increase of the Lord's Spirit 
upon you in carrying on the work of the ministry. 

TWIN FALLS ASSOCIATED BIBLE STUDENTS.-Idaho. 



WORDS OF COMFORT AND CHEER 

TO THE WATCH TOWER:- 

WHEREAS it has pleased our dear Heavenly Father to 
call our Beloved Pastor home, and inasmuch as our hearts 
have been made sad because we may no longer hear his 
kindly voice nor behold his dear face in the flesh, we nevertheless 
rejoice in the spirit, being confident that he has experienced 
his glorious resurrection change, having heard the 
sweet "Well Done," and is now counted worthy to see our 
Lord as He is; 

Resolved, That in the death of our Beloved Pastor, 
Charles T. Russell, we have sustained the sorrowful 
loss of a wise and efficient Pastor, a true and noble Christian 
character, a kind and loving friend, a safe adviser and counselor. 



a masterful preacher and author, a true and faithful 
interpreter of the Scriptures and an ambassador of Christ 
appointed of God the Father to bring forth things new and 
old from the Storehouse of knowledge for the enlightening 
of the people and for the perfecting of the saints in this, 
the Laodicean stage of the Church; and 

Resolved, That inasmuch as the work of this loyal man 
of God has been completed on this side of the veil and as a 
result he has inherited glory, honor and immortality as a reward 
of faithful self-sacrifice even unto death, we, the members 
of the Richmond Class, having been influenced by his 
noble life and Christian character, and appreciating the perfume 
exhaled therefrom, feel constrained to renew our efforts 
to press on with vigor toward the Heavenly goal; and be it 
further. 

Resolved, That we will cooperate with our brethren at 
the Bethel Home, and others of like precious faith elsewhere 
in harmony with the W.T.B. & T. Soc'y and its various 
auxiliaries, in the promulgation of the gems of Truth so 
precious to our dear Pastor; and we solicit Pilgrim visits in 
the future as in the past. 

Again, we further resolve, that having profited by 
his life of self-sacrifice, which has brought to us untold 
blessings and growth in Christian character, we will continue 
to raise our voices in heartfelt gratitude and thanksgiving to 
our dear Heavenly Father and blessed Redeemer for the privileges 
and favors which have been ours through his untiring 
zeal and loving ministry. 

Praying that the Lord's abounding grace may continue to 
abide with, and the influence of the Holy Spirit may over-shadow 
and guide in love and humility all those in charge 
of the work at the Bethel Home and elsewhere, and trusting 
to be remembered at the Throne of Heavenly Grace by all 
who have passed from death unto life, and especially those 
upon whom the mantle of our Beloved Pastor has fallen, 

With fervent Christian love, RICHMOND ECCLESIA.-Va. 



"BE STRONG IN THE FAITH" 

OUR DEAR BRETHREN:- 

With the passing of our dearly Beloved Pastor beyond 
the veil, and with the realization of all that this means to 
us, comes the thought of our dear Brethren at Brooklyn, 
who were so closely associated with him in the work, and 
on whom will now fall the heavier responsibility. We 
hasten to extend to you our loving sympathy, and to assure 
you of our confidence in you as you attempt to carry 
on the work to its completion, praying for you the Lord's 
special guidance and direction as you seek to know and 
to do His will. 

What a comfort we find in our Heavenly Father's Word! 
How doubly precious are the Promises, and with what 
special force they come to us in this hour, as though 
written especially for us at this time. It is written, "The 



Lord will not forsake His people," and we know "He is 
faithful who promised." Therefore "let us hold fast the 
profession of our faith without wavering." (Heb. 10:23,24.) 
How fitting is our text for the year: "Be Strong in Faith" 
—faith that will trust Him where it cannot trace Him! 

And while the sense of our great loss comes to us with 
crushing force, yet how we do rejoice for him that he has 
gone to his reward and has entered into that glorious rest 
promised to the faithful ones. Surely he was faithful in 
all that the Lord gave him to do; and we can lift up our 
heads and rejoice, knowing our deliverance must be drawing 
very near! How this thought, together with his loving 
example, should spur us on with doubled zeal to make our 
own calling and election sure. Brethren, let us all strive 
more earnestly to be faithful— even unto death! 

Your Brethren in Christ, BOULDER CHURCH.-Colo. 



IMPLORING HEAVENLY GUIDANCE FOR THE WORK 

DEARLY BELOVED IN THE LORD:- 

Whereas it has, in the determination of our great, all-wise 
and loving Father, pleased Him to suddenly take from our 
midst our Beloved Brother and Pastor, C.T. Russell, and, 
as we believe, give him a share of joy and service in the 
spiritual phase of the Kingdom, we hereby humbly bow before 
His unerring decision in taking from us that "faithful 
servant," and render thanks for the many blessings received 
through his ministrations; for the light upon God's Word 
that has come to us, and the joy of life and hope for the 
future that has been brought to us through his services. 

We realize and appreciate the great responsibility that has 
so suddenly been cast upon those who are directly associated 
with the central executive part of the work still remaining 
while we are here in the flesh. In the midst of these conditions 
we turn to our loving Father, to whom we can come 
courageously through our blessed Lord and Savior, asking 

R6018 : page 381 

that wisdom may be granted you to continue the work as 
would be most pleasing to our dear Lord. 

We will daily continue to pray for God's blessings to go 
with the members of the Brooklyn Tabernacle and Bethel, 
and every member of our Father's family. 

DULUTH CHURCH.-Minn. 



CONFIDENCE IN SOCIETY'S REPRESENTATIVES 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

It was with mingled sorrow and rejoicing that we learned 
of the decease of our dearly Beloved Pastor. We sorrow because 
of our great loss, but rejoice as well because of his 



abundant gain. 

How we shall miss his wise counsel and helpful admonitions, 
the benediction of his radiant countenance, and the 
sympathetic touch of his hand! Yet our Heavenly Father 
has seen fit to remove him in the midst of his work to the 
place prepared for the saints beyond the veil, and we would 
bow humbly before that decree. Surely to be with Christ 
is far better! He had fought a good fight, he had kept the 
faith, his course was finished, and in obedience to the summons 
he is now with his Lord. Hallelujah, what a Savior! 

We would express our confidence and harmony with the 
Society's representatives at Headquarters, and our undivided 
sympathy and cooperation with those brethren and colaborers 
of the Bethel and Tabernacle who have stood so loyally and 
faithfully by our dear Brother. 

R6019: page 381 

We would unite our prayers with those of other Ecclesias 
for the Heavenly Father's guidance in every phase of 
the Harvest work. TRURO ECCLESIA.-Nova Scotia. 



PLEDGE LOYAL SUPPORT 

DEAR FELLOW-MEMBERS OF THE BODY OF CHRIST:- 

We desire to convey to you our deep Christian love and 
sympathy in the loss which all have sustained in the death 
of our Beloved Pastor, C.T. Russell. While we "sorrow 
not as do others," nevertheless we believe the dear family 
at Brooklyn will in a special sense miss our beloved 
Brother. We greatly rejoice on his behalf, believing that 
he has passed beyond the veil, has experienced his resurrection 
"change," and with the others of the faithful will 
henceforth be forever with the Lord. 

This Ecclesia, by a unanimous vote, pledges their loyal 
support in every way possible to those who shall continue 
to direct the affairs of the Society. We assure you, dear 
brethren, of our hearty cooperation so long as the Glad 
Tidings of the Kingdom shall be advanced in the same 
manner and spirit as during the life of our beloved Pastor. 
To this end you have our prayers. 
With mutual sympathy and Christian love, 

ASSOCIATED BIBLE STUDENTS.-New Brighton, Pa. 



PRAYERS FOR WISDOM, COURAGE, GRACE 

WHEREAS, The news that our dearly Beloved Pastor, C.T. 
Russell, has been suddenly taken from us, has filled us with 
deep emotion, which we know is shared by all who have received 
the benefit of his faithful teachings of Present 
Truth, and, although our hearts are filled with sorrow for 
our loss, yet we rejoice for him that he has gone to be 



forever with the Lord. 

We are thankful for the untiring faithfulness of his 
service for us, to build us up in the most holy Faith and 
for his example of personal purity. We realize that his 
loss will be sadly felt by the brethren left in charge of the 
work and upon whom great responsibility will fall. 

RESOLVED, That we extend to our dear brethren at the 
Bible House our heart-felt sympathy and condolences, assuring 
them that our earnest prayers will be for them, 
that they may be given the needed wisdom, courage and 
grace to continue the work which Brother Russell has left 
in their hands, until the due time comes for closing it up. 

We desire further to express our confidence that their 
service in the work will be actuated by the same loving 
spirit of self-sacrifice, which has been so beautifully expressed 
in the life and labors of our dearly Beloved Pastor 
and Brother. 

"Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord, that they 
may rest from their labors; and their works do follow 
them." 

BEAUMONT CLASS.-Tex. 



THUNDERBOLT THROUGH SOUL OF THE CHURCH 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

May the Lord greatly strengthen and bless the hearts of 
every one of you in this hour of great bereavement! Surely 
the Lord has sent a thunderbolt through the very soul of the 
Church! His hand is as visible in dear Brother Russell's death 
as it has been in his life. Our very nature is shaken and we 
think it will surely be blessed to the good of us all, in keeping 
with the Lord's promise. 

Be assured, dear brethren, you have our prayers, our sympathy, 
and oui' love as never before: and we shall esteem it 
our highest privilege as well as pleasure to cooperate with 
you to the fullest extent of our ability. 

May God bless you all in your loneliness! We feel 
lonely; but it must fall much heavier upon you than upon us. 
May we all be aroused by his noble example, and may we meet 
where partings are no more! 

It was not our privilege to be with you in person, but we 
were fully with you in spirit. 

On Sunday, Nov. 5th, we held a Pastor Russell Memorial 
service at Millville, N.J. The forenoon was given to praise 
and testimonies, using this subject: "The effect that Pastor 
Russell's life, and now His death, has had upon me." In the 
afternoon I addressed them upon this subject: "The Truth 
as applied to the Life and Character of Pastor Russell." We 
enjoyed blessed fellowship and hope good was done. 
O.L. SULLIVAN.-N.J. 



EXPRESS CONFIDENCE 



DEAR BRETHREN AT BROOKE YN:- 

Greetings in the name of our dear Lord and Redeemer! 
Whereas the death of our dearly Beloved Pastor has caused 
grief and sadness to come into our hearts; and realizing 
our great loss in that we are now deprived of his loving 
counsel and personal supervision over the Harvest Work, 
nevertheless we rejoice in the assurance that he is now 
with our glorified Lord and Master, and like Him. 

We desire to express to the Bethel Family, and to all of 
the Bible House associates of our dear Pastor, our loving 
sympathy and assurance of implicit confidence and hearty 
cooperation in carrying on, if such be the Father's will, the 
great work in which our Beloved Pastor so faithfully sacrificed 
his all, even unto death. 

Our prayer is that the Father of all mercies will bless 
your efforts in behalf of His cause; and that His grace 
may sustain and comfort you in this hour of sorrow, and 
be found sufficient for the added responsibility which now 
rests upon you. 

Your Brethren of the LOUISVILLE ECCLESIA.-Ky. 



UNQUALIFIED SUPPORT PROMISED 

DEAR BRETHREN IN THE LORD:- 

Needless to say, the announcement of our Pastor's passing 
beyond came to us with a measure of surprise. We are, 
nevertheless, rejoicing in the thought of his having entered 
abundantly into the reward promised to the "more than overcomers, 
and that he has received the "Well done, good and 
faithful servant." "The Lord giveth, and the Lord taketh 
away; blessed be the name of the Lord." We are glad that, 
by His grace, we are enabled to bow our hearts and minds in 
humble submission to the will of God, and to wait His good 
pleasure toward us in His own time and way. "It is the Lord, 
let Him do what seemeth Him good." 

We would like to take this opportunity of expressing to 
you our earnest and willing cooperation and unqualified support 
in carrying on that which remains of the Harvest work, 
in whatever manner the Lord would seem to indicate as being 
His will for us all. Should you require at any time our services 
in Western Canada, we would esteem it a great privilege 
to assume any responsibility entrusted to our care. Our desire 
in this is to express our continued loyalty toward, and willingness 
to serve the Lord, the Truth and the Brethren. 

WINNIPEG ECCLESIA.-Man. 



ASSURANCES OF COOPERATION 

DEAR BRETHREN IN CHRIST:- 

We desire to convey to you our sincere Christian love 
and sympathy in this dark hour of bereavement. Seldom 



have joy and sorrow been so sharply intermingled; for 
while we truly rejoice with you in the fact of the deliverance 
of our dear Pastor in the First Resurrection, and in 
the further evidence of the end being near, we as truly 
and sincerely share with you the natural sorrow so keenly 
felt in this trying hour. Language cannot express the 
love of our hearts for our dear Brother. 

Yet, dear Brethren, in humble and loving submission we 
say, "Thy will be done"; and as we stand beside that open 
grave, let us resolve that, come what will, we, too, will 
be found ready and willing at all times to lay down our 

R6019: page 382 

lives as meekly and as unselfishly as did he in defense 
of the Cause we all love so well. We assure you of our 
continued support and cooperation in the spreading of the 
Glad Tidings, and may we also hear the loving Father's "Well 
Done." NIAGARA FALLS, ONT. ECCLESIA. 



HEARTY DESIRE TO CONTINUE SUPPORT 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

At a special meeting called for the purpose of taking 
action on the death of our dearly Beloved Pastor, Charles 
Taze Russell, the following resolution was passed and 
unanimously adopted: 

RESOLVED, That inasmuch as it has pleased our Heavenly 
Father in His infinite wisdom to take from our midst 
"that Servant," our Beloved Pastor and Brother, we desire 
to convey to you, the dear ones of the Bethel Home and 
Brooklyn Tabernacle, a full assurance of our loyalty, our 
confidence, our love and our prayers, and a hearty desire 
to cooperate with you in the faithful continuance of the 
defense of the Truth and of the Harvest Work so nobly 
and loyally carried forward by our dear Brother Russell. 
ALBANY ECCLESIA.-N.Y. 



FAITH HAS REASSERTED ITSELF 

DEAR BRETHREN IN CHRIST:- 

We were shocked and grieved to learn of our dear Pastor's 
death! For a time we were so shaken and unsettled that we 
did not know which way to turn, but that feeling has worn 
off, and faith has reasserted itself. 

We rejoice that our Beloved Pastor has gained "the Crown 
of Life," and we would not wish to have him back to endure 
pain and weariness. We have faith that the Lord of the 
Harvest, who raised him up to do such a wonderful work, 
is still able to carry forward that work, through other agencies, 
to its completion. We extend to you our love and sympathy 



R6020 : page 382 

in this hour of trial, and assure you of our fervent 

prayers in your behalf— that the Lord's will be done and His 

name glorified, no matter what new conditions may arise. 

We pledge you our hearty support in any way we can 
render it, and assure you that it is our aim to follow you, 
as you follow Christ. 

We pray that no divisions may arise to distress and separate 
the Lord's flock, but that we may all be drawn into a 
more complete oneness in Him. Above all, we pray that the 
Lord's Spirit may rest richly upon those who shall in any 
measure take the place of our dear Pastor. 

Your brethren, by grace Divine, 

SPARTANBURG CLASS. -S.C. 



RENEWED DETERMINATION TO HOLD FAST 

DEAR BETHEL FAMILY:- 

We desire to convey to you all an expression of our 
love and sympathy, as was expressed unanimously by us 
in the following resolution: 

"That we convey to the Bethel Family and those so 
closely associated in the Society's work, our sincere sympathy 
and Christian love, assuring you of our renewed 
determination to hold fast the profession of our faith to 
the end, and to be loyal to the Truth, the Brethren and the 
Society, esteeming it, as the Lord's servant, in carrying on 
the work so nobly and faithfully conducted by our dear 
Brother Russell; and that with our Heavenly Father's help 
and guidance, we will remain loyal to the memory of him 
who laid down his life on behalf of the Brethren and in 
the Lord's service." 

Yours in the best of bonds. 

WILMINGTON ECCLESIA.-Del. 



WHAT MORE CAN HE SAY? 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

We decided unanimously to continue our relationship 
as in the past with the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT 
SOCIETY. By the Lord's grace we will cooperate with you 
to the best of our ability until we shall have finished our 
course, when by the power of our God through our Lord 
and Savior, we shall enter beyond the veil, where our 
labors shall cease. 

We extend our heartfelt sympathy in this hour of 
special trial which is upon you. As the dear brethren 
carried the silent form of our Beloved Pastor past us at 
the Carnegie Hall (Allegheny), yesterday, he seemed 
to say to us in hushed silence, "What more can I say than 
to you I have said?" 



We pray the Lord's continued guidance over you as 
you endeavor to finish the work. We ask an interest in your 
prayers. ECCLESIA AT SHARON.-Pa. 



DEAR BRETHREN:- 

The death of our dear Pastor, Charles T. Russell, created in 
us a state of gloom and sorrow that will long linger with us. 

We are unable to express our sorrow and the loss we 
feel in the death of our dear Brother Russell. 

We thank the Lord for this servant and for the message 
of Truth he has brought to us; and further do we thank 
Him that we were in that condition of heart and mind to 
receive that message. 

Dear Brethren, we desire to extend our sympathies to all 
who are engaged at the Brooklyn Tabernacle, and to express 
our appreciation of your resolution to continue in the service 
of the Glad Tidings of the Kingdom. We assure you of 
our cooperation. We will therefore continue to look to the 
Lord, to cast our cares upon Him and to pray for you, as 
we have for our Beloved Pastor. 

WILKESBARRE ECCLESIA.-Pa. 



RE V.D.M. QUESTIONS 

DEAR BRETHREN IN THE LORD:- 

We are sorry that no one here could attend, in person, the 
funeral of our dear Pastor, but we can assure you, all of us 
were with you in spirit, and remembered you continually at 
the Throne of Heavenly Grace. 

We are indeed glad to know that our dear Pastor had so 
arranged the affairs of the W.T.B. & T. Society that in the 
event of his death, the work would be carried on without 
interruption. 

Our hearts indeed go out to each and every one of you, 
and we can assure you that we will cooperate with you in the 
future as we have in the past. We shall also continue to 
remember you in our prayers daily. We pray that you will 
also continue to remember us daily in your prayers. We also 
hope we may be served from time to time by the dear Pilgrim 
brethren, and that we may continue to share in the Harvest 
work under your direction. 

Last Wednesday evening the Class by unanimous vote 
decided that in the future all Elders and Deacons should answer 
the V.D.M. Questions, and their answers should be 
passed upon by the Committee appointed by Brother Russell. 

The Elders here have been slow in sending their answers 
to these questions, not because of not being in harmony with 
them, but because some have not had the time; others did 
not have the questions, and others were timid about asking 
for them, until the class expressed their wish in the matter. 
All expect to have their answers mailed to you within the 
next two weeks. HOUSTON CHURCH.-Texas. 



FINGER-BOARD AT THE CROSS-ROADS 

BELOVED BETHEL FAMILY:- 

At our prayer meeting last evening, with crushed 
hearts and tear-dimmed eyes, all gave expression as to the 
high esteem and loving appreciation for the many instructive 
and helpful truths enjoyed through our Beloved Pastor, 
now entered into his reward. He has stood as a finger-board 
at the cross-roads of confusion, pointing us the 
true way as he for many years endured the chilling blasts 
of persecution from a cold, unthinking clergy and their 
following. Thank God for his ministrations of love and 
for the privilege of being associated with him! 

To the dear Bethel family, so closely associated with 
our dear Brother in the forefront of the battle, we send 
our love, and assure you that we will always remember you 
at the Throne of Heavenly grace. 

LONACONING ECCLESIA.-Md. 



NEED TO WEEP FOR OURSELVES 

DEAR BRETHREN IN THE ANOINTED :- 

Though your loss and ours as well is very painful, yet 
how we can rejoice to know our dearly beloved Pastor, "That 
Servant," has finished his course in joy and has heard that 
"Well Done." A new man has been born in Zion, and the 
Highest Himself has established him. "It is the Lord; let 
Him do what seemeth good." Questioning not the wisdom, 
the love and the power of Him with whom we have to do, 
we need not weep for the departed, but for ourselves. How 
kind and loving our Heavenly Father has been to him, by 
permitting him to pass beyond the veil ere this dark night 
grows darker, ere the fiery furnace has been heated with sevenfold 
heat! How thankful we feel! Praise His holy name! 
How much greater will be the need "for the tie that binds"! 
THE PRINCE RUPERT CHURCH.-B.C, Can. 

R6020 : page 383 

THANKFUL FOR PRIVILEGE OF COOPERATING 

DEAR BRETHREN IN CHRIST:- 

The Associated Bible Students here desire to express 
their Christian love and sympathy, especially to the dear 
Bethel Family, in this dark hour of bereavement. 

Beloved Brethren, we will, indeed, 'continue to look to 
the Lord, and be of good courage!" We are most thankful 
for the great privilege of cooperating with you as in 
the past, and assure you of our prayers, and also of "our 
resolution to continue in the service of the Glad Tidings of 
the Kingdom, by the Lord's grace, even unto death." 



We are so thankful our dear Pastor so arranged the 
affairs of the WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, 
and we have full confidence that the Lord will continue 
to direct the Harvest Work till it shall be fully completed. 
Oh, what an example we have in our dear Pastor to lay 
down our lives "in the work of the Lord"! 

MCLENNAN CHURCH.-Ont. 



WHOSE FACE WE SOON SHALL SEE 

BRETHREN THROUGHOUT THE WORLD:- 

We express our thankfulness to God for the gift of the 
help and fellowship of our beloved Brother, Charles Taze 
Russell. We thank our Father for the blessed example of 
true Christian fellowship manifested in the wise and faithful 
steward now passed beyond the veil into the eternal blessedness 
of the Heavenly courts. We thank God for the love 
of a true brother in Christ, for the spiritual and material 
aid rendered without thought of self, for the wonderful 
privilege of being enlightened to know the riches of the 
inheritance in Christ, to appreciate the hope of the High 
Calling, to gain a heart knowledge of the love of Christ 
in its lengths, breadths, heights and depths. We sorrow as 
over the passing of our best earthly friend and benefactor, but 
we rejoice with joy unspeakable as we celebrate in our hearts 
the first Heavenly birthday of our beloved Pastor Russell. 
And now to God be the glory, the honor and the praise for 
all that He hath wrought in us all through this much beloved 
one whose face we all hope soon to see, shining 
in the light of immortality. In Jesus' name. Amen. 
SCRANTON ECCLESIA.-Pa. 



PRAYERS FOR THE WORK UNTIL THE END 

DEARLY BELOVED BRETHREN:- 

We wish to express to you in this dark hour of bereavement 
our sincere, heartfelt sympathy, and to assure you that 
we are praying for you and will continue until the end. 

We are very grateful for all the assistance given us and 
ask the Lord's richest blessing ever to be upon you. We will 
gladly stand by you; and if there be anything we can do in 
any way, we will thank God for the privilege of serving. 

R6021 : page 383 

We are still firm in the Faith, and our eyes wait upon the 
Lord our God.— Psalm 123:1,2. 

"Blest be the tie that binds our hearts in Christian Love." 
Push on, dear brethren; fight the good fight of Faith, and let 
nothing come between us, no matter how severe, that will 
even scratch the link that binds us together! 

LEXINGTON ECCLESIA.-Ky. 



page 383 

REALIZE NEED OF CLOSER TIES NOW 

BELOVED BRETHREN IN CHRIST AT BETHEL HOME: 
To you we desire to make known our deep heart sympathy 
in this hour of mutual grief. We shall miss our 
Beloved Pastor greatly; nevertheless we also greatly rejoice 
on his behalf, believing that he has passed beyond 
the veil, has experienced his resurrection change, and will 
be henceforth forever with the Lord. "Precious in the sight 
of the Lord is the death of His saints." 

We realize, dear Brethren, now more than ever, the 
need of clinging closer to one another, yet leaning fully 
on our precious Redeemer. 

We assure you, not only of the great bond of sympathy, 
but our prayers shall ascend daily on your behalf, 
that our loving Father may guide and direct all those on 
whom the mantle of responsibility must necessarily fall 
the heaviest. SAN JOSE ECCLESIA.-Cal. 



WILL PRESS WITH VIGOR ON 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

Last night at our Praise and Testimony meeting a resolution 
was presented to the Class and unanimously adopted, 
to the intent that we will, as in the past, cooperate with 
you in every way we possibly can in the Harvest Work 
and toward the establishment of our dear Redeemer's 
Kingdom. In spirit we are with you during your sore 
trial. It is our determination to press with vigor on, and 
we surely will remember all of God's children, especially 
those at Brooklyn, at the Throne of Heavenly Grace. 

Hoping that we shall shortly be with our Lord and 
Master on the other side the veil, we remain. 

Your brethren by His grace, EASTON ECCLESIA.-Pa. 



LONG STILL MORE FOR THE KINGDOM 

DEAR FRIENDS:- 

Just a line to assure you of our warmest love and sympathy. 
We did not write sooner, as we knew you must be 
overwhelmed with letters. Our hearts are sore; but we are 
determined to press on and finish the work our beloved Pastor 
so nobly began and carried on to the end of his career. 
His example is an inspiration to us; his death makes us long 
still more for the Kingdom. We trust by the Lord's grace 
to be faithful, so that we may have the privilege of meeting 
our dear Brother again, in the presence of the King. Be 



assured of our prayers and cooperation. 

J. AND L. HUTCHINSON.-Pa. 



GREATEST BIBLE SCHOLAR OF OUR DAY 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

In the death of Pastor Russell we recognize the departure 
of the greatest Bible Student of our day, the channel through 
which God is speaking to His Church and to the world. We 
recognize in his books and literature an outline of God's 
Plan of Redemption, and we are determined to stand steadfast 
in (lie faith and to bind about us more firmly than 
ever that wonderful chain of faith in God's Plan of Redemption. 
We shall go forth in the world in the confidence 
of that Plan to spread the Good Tidings of great joy which 
shall be to all people— Resurrection and Restitution— and to 
do it with diligence to the end that we may make our calling 
and election sure. LINCOLN CHURCH.-Neb. 



WORK MUST BE KEPT ALIVE 

DEAR FRIENDS:- 

We deeply sympathize with you in the great affliction 
which has come upon you through the death of Pastor 
Russell, a man whose noble and exalted work in the ministry 
of Christ has set a shining example to the world, 
and whose memory will be a lasting spiritual stimulus to 
his many followers. 

Pastor Russell's good work must be kept alive, and 
the Overland Monthly offers its pages to you for the publication 
of such articles as may help to this end. 

In sincere and deep sympathy with your bereavement, 
we remain 

Yours to command in our line of help, 

OVERLAND MONTHLY. 



WILL STAND SHOULDER TO SHOULDER 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

We wish to give you the assurance that we will 
stand shoulder to shoulder in this dark hour, and gladly 
cooperate with you in carrying on the work to whatever 
extent it is possible for us to lend a hand. Quite a few 
of the friends have already expressed their determination 
to be more faithful and some have openly and publicly 
renewed their consecration before a huge audience in New 
York City Temple Sunday afternoon, Nov. 5. 

We therefore pray that the memory of our dear Pastor 
may never fade, and that with this in mind you may, with 
the Lord's grace and assistance, terminate the work which 



yet remains for the Church this side the Veil. 

HARRISBURG ECCLESIA.-Pa. 



WORDS FAIL TO EXPRESS 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

There comes a time to some of us when we realize that 
we are utterly unable to put into words the expressions we 
desire to convey, and this is just such an occasion. 

The Providence Class desire to express to you their deep 
Christian love and hearty appreciation for the many blessings 
they have received through the ministrations of our dear, 
departed Pastor and colaborers at Brooklyn, and to further 
state that it is their desire and purpose to cooperate with you 
in every possible way in the continuance of spreading the 
Gospel of the Kingdom. 

May the Lord's richest blessing be with you as you continue 
to serve His cause and His brethren, is our prayer. 
PROVIDENCE ECCLESIA.-R.I. 



page 385 

VOL. XXXVII. DECEMBER 15 No. 24 
A. D. 1916-A.M. 6045 



CONTENTS 

1915-AnnualReport-1916 .... 387 

The Colporteur Work 387 

Pilgrim Service 388 

Free Literature 388 

The Pastoral Work 388 

Harvest Work Continues 390 

Organization of the Work . . . 390 

"Ecce Homo!" (Poem) 391 

The Holy City 392 

The New Jerusalem 392 

The Glorified Temple .... 393 
Blessings to be Shed Upon Mankind . 394 
"Unto Us a Son is Given" .... 394 
The True Light of the World. . . 395 
The Antitypical Gideon's Band . . 395 

Interesting Items 396 

1917 Year Text Motto .... 396 
Your Good Hopes for 1917 . . . . 397 

Ministries of the Truth 399 

Index to The Watch Tower for 1916 . .400 

page 386 



PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS STREET, 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



This journal is published under the supervision of an 

Editorial Committee, at least three of whom have read 

and approved each and every article appearing in these 

columns. The names of the Editorial Committee are: W.E. 

VAN AMBURGH, J.F. RUTHERFORD, H.C. ROCKWELL, F.H. 

ROBISON, R.H. HIRSH. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, POLISH AND DANO-NORWEGIAN 
EDITIONS. SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N.Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



BROTHER RUSSELL'S CHRISTMASTIDE GREETINGS 

Shortly before his death Brother Russell gave instructions for the 
publication of a beautiful little card conveying his Christian greetings 
and best wishes to the New Creation, together with references to five 
recent WATCH TOWER articles which he considered particularly timely 
and helpful, also announcing the Year Text for 1917, over his signature. 
On the other side of this card is a rotogravure reproduction of the 
famous painting, "Christ Stilling the Storm on the Sea," as selected 
by our Pastor. According to his request, these cards are now being 
enclosed in all regular mail sent out from this office in acknowledgment 
of orders, etc. By this means practically all of our interested 
readers will receive one. Any who fail to receive a copy, may have 
one upon request. 

Anticipating a continued demand for this picture, he ordered an 
edition in regular post-card form, with space for message, which may 
be had at 10c per doz., postpaid. We have also a quantity of the 
same picture in post-card size, printed on heavy coated paper, with 
"Our Morning Resolve" on the reverse side. These may be had for 
6c per doz., postpaid. 



R6024 : page 386 

CONVENTION AT PITTSBURGH 



THE WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY is arranging for a 
Convention at Pittsburgh, Pa., to be held Saturday and Sunday, January 
6th and 7th, 1917. Several of the brethren from the Brooklyn 
Tabernacle will be present and address the Convention. The Saturday 
sessions will be held in CARNEGIE HALL in Allegheny, and those on 
Sunday at the Lyceum Theatre, in Pittsburgh. 

Any one desiring to make reservations for accommodation will 
please address Dr. W.E. Spill, 2509 Perrysville Ave., N.S., Pittsburgh, 
Pa. 

EXAMINATION OF ANSWERS TO V.D.M. QUESTIONS 

The Examining Board expects to complete its work before the end 
of the present month; but if for any reason its work should be delayed 
a little, we would advise that the election of any to represent 
your Class as either Elders or Deacons could be done on the same 

condition as that of the New York Congregation— subject to a successful 
examination of the answers to the questions. 



MEMOIRS OF PASTOR RUSSELL 

The Society is contemplating the publication, in book form, of 
Memoirs of Brother Russell, together with a number of his sermons. 
Further announcement will be made in due time. 

[CONTINUED ON PAGE 396.] 



My Morning Resolve 
My Earliest Thought I Desire Shall Be: 

"What shall I render unto the Lord for all His 
benefits toward me? I will take the Cup of Salvation 
and call upon the name of the Lord [for grace 
to help]. I will pay my Vows unto the Most 
High."-Psa. 116:12-14. 

Remembering the Divine call, "Gather My saints 
together unto Me, those that have made a Covenant 
with Me by sacrifice" (Psa. 50:5), I resolve 
that by the Lord's assisting grace I will today, as 
a saint of God, fulfil my Vows, continuing the work 
of sacrificing the flesh and its interests, that I may 



attain unto the Heavenly inheritance in joint-heirship 
with my Redeemer. 

I will strive to be simple and sincere toward all. 

I will seek not to please and honor self, but 
the Lord. 

I will be careful to honor the Lord with my 
lips, that my words may be unctuous and blessed 
to all. 

I will seek to be faithful to the Lord, the Truth, 
the brethren and all with whom I have to do, 
not only in great matters, but also in the little 
things of life. 

Trusting myself to Divine care and the Providential 
overruling of all my interests for my highest 
welfare, I will seek not only to be pure in heart, 
but to repel all anxiety, all discontent, all discouragement. 

I will neither murmur nor repine at what the 
Lord's providence may permit, because 
"Faith can firmly trust Him, 
Come what may." 



R6021 : page 387 

1 9 1 5-ANNU AL REPORT- 1916 

[Together with a Resume of the work of the 
various Branches of the service of the Society.] 

WE feel sure that the dear friends everywhere 
are eagerly awaiting the Report for 1916. 
Our fiscal year ends October 3 1 st. It may 
appear to some quite significant that it was 
on this very date that Brother Russell 
passed away, thus closing his earthly ministry 
with the end of the Society's business 
year. What more appropriate time could 
there be for us to turn aside for a little 
season and survey the Field! 

In the heat and excitement of battle one cannot take 
much time to look about or to inquire what others may 
be doing or who may possibly be falling. Each soldier 
is on the alert to carry out the commands given by the 
great Captain of our Salvation; but the Lord loves all 
the true soldiers, and occasionally calls them aside for 
a little breathing spell and refreshment, thus preparing 
them for the next and more vigorous campaign. The 
Lord's people will greatly rejoice over the progress made 
during the year— Nov. 1, 1915, to Nov. 1, 1916. 

Our Covenant with the Lord calls for a walk by faith. 
We are therefore not to expect to see the full results 
of our labors while on this side the veil, but our Lord is 
so loving and considerate that He frequently draws the 
curtain aside a little, that we may have a glimpse of the 
results following some of our labors of love. How such 



views rejoice our hearts! 

The year 1916 has been a very eventful one in many 
ways. We need not mention here those events particularly 
connected with the falling of the "kingdoms of this 
world." They are written by the world's historians. Our 
interests are centered in the establishment of "the Kingdom 
of God," for which the Church has so long been 
praying. At the beginning of the year we were in a more 
or less expectant attitude, not knowing what new experiences 
the Lord might have in store. We were certain 
that He would supply us with the waters of Truth and 
lead us to certain victories, if we but followed closely. 
There was much polishing and buckling on of the Armor 
of God, and preparing for whatever might be ahead. No 
one thought of faltering— the prize appeared brighter, 
and the goal nearer. Those inclined to criticize us had 
prophesied that, as 1914 had passed, and as their interpretation 
of our understanding of the Scriptures had 
failed to come to pass, the work would soon come to 
naught. How little do they realize the power of the Spirit 
of God in the hearts of the consecrated! And how far 
short of the reality is their knowledge of our glorious 
hopes and prospects! Considering the conditions— the 
comparatively small army of thoroughly consecrated and 
the great tension under which the whole world is straining 
—the results seem but little short of miraculous. But 
very few have become discouraged or have returned 
to their former pursuits. 

THE COLPORTEUR WORK 

Every well-equipped army is composed of several 
branches. The main branch is always the Infantry. It is 
the heavy fighting body, and the main reliance of every 
commander. So we might think of the Colporteurs. 
They are the soldiers who do the hard fighting at the 
front. Though each year since war-conditions prevail 
notices a change in the numbers, yet these noble soldiers 
of the Cross "close up ranks" and move on steadily and 
unfalteringly. We doubt not that the Lord will greatly 
reward this noble band. They have stormed many a redoubt 
of the enemy, and have been mighty in the Lord's 
hand to the pulling down of strongholds of evil and 
prejudice and planting the good Seed of the Kingdom. 

Owing to the fact that financial conditions were 
greatly strained in many localities, and that labor difficulties 
and local disturbances existed in others, the number 
of those who were able to devote most of their time 
to the work has been considerably less than in 1915. 
However, those who have remained have done better 
work on the average. For 1915, the average sale per Colporteur 
was a trifle over 406 STUDIES and 23 SCENARIOS. 
For 1916, the average sale per Colporteur was a little 
over 430 STUDIES, and 166 SCENARIOS. An average of 
372 Colporteurs were in the field for the year. 

The general advance in prices on all commodities 



hit this branch of the work very hard in some respects. 
During a number of months we were greatly hindered 
by not being able to secure sufficient cloth STUDIES to fill 
the Colporteurs' orders. Then the DE LUXE SCENARIOS 
ran short, and also the supply of Karatol volumes. The 
printers were unable to obtain delivery of the materials 
necessary to their manufacture. The paper shortage has 
greatly hindered the printers. Many of the Colporteurs 
made a specialty of the SCENARIO in territory which had 
already been canvassed a number of times for the STUDIES. 

Total output of STUDIES for year 265,495 

Total output of SCENARIOS 70,000 

Total output of Booklets 1 10,000 

Total 445,495 

Moreover, these faithful workers were careful to encourage 

the reading of the STUDIES, where they found them 

already in the homes. A number were thus awakened to 

the import of present conditions, and some to active co-operation. 

R6021 : page 388 

Who can say what the yield may be when 

the Master of the Harvest shall show forth all the increase? 

May the Lord richly bless the dear Colporteurs! 

THE PILGRIM SERVICE 

We might liken the Pilgrim force in some respects 
to the Cavalry division of the army. It is much smaller 
than the Colporteur list, and covers more territory, and 
the force must be moved more quickly. Its work for the 
past year compares very favorably with any other year of 
the entire Harvest campaign. Note the following figures: 

Number of Pilgrims 69 

Miles traveled 552,498 

Towns visited 6,575 

Public meetings held 1,507 

Semi-public meetings held 3,124 

Parlor meetings held 9,221 

Total attendance 809,393 

FREE LITERATURE 

We might term this the Grenadier Department of the 
army. It seeks out the hiding places of the enemy, and 
endeavors to leave little "bombs" in every available place. 
The output for 1916 has not quite equaled that of 1915. 
We cautioned the friends to be much more careful that 
each "bomb" be properly placed, so that no waste be 
made. The amount of free literature thus distributed is 
almost beyond our comprehension. The total output for 
the year was 22,158,000 BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLIES. To 
print these took over 598,000 pounds of paper, or 16 carloads. 
Who can estimate the number of strongholds of 
error which these "bombs" may have overthrown? But 



that is only an incidental feature of the work. The principal 
thing was the reflex action upon our own hearts. 
How we have rejoiced as we sought to carry the Message 
of Good Tidings to others and to free them from the 
shackles of error, even as we ourselves have been freed! 

The friends will be glad to know that we have some 
very excellent Volunteer matter for 1917, prepared by 
Brother Russell. On page 396 of this WATCH TOWER 
will be found an item especially upon this subject. 
We desire to make a word of explanation here: It is not 
so much a question of how many shots are fired as of how 
many are hits. Note the cost of this year's output in the 
financial report. The paper for next year will cost us 
more than twice as much as formerly. In other words, 
we were fortunately able to purchase paper last year at 
3-3/4c per pound. Next year it will cost us over 8c. 
This means that a dollar will not go so far now as fifty 
cents have gone heretofore. Therefore, it behooves us to 
be very careful to make every shot count and not to waste 
any. Better fire only five shots and make three hits than 
to fire twenty shots for the same number of hits. Noise 
or number does not count. The shots only are effective. 
Therefore judge cautiously as to your needs, and be sure 
to use all that you order. We shall be pleased to have 
your orders as quickly as possible. The matter will be 
ready Jan. 1 . "The World on Fire" is the leading article. 

THE NEWSPAPER WORK 

This had become greatly curtailed, owing to our dropping 
from the list many papers of small circulation, and 
further, to our policy of retrenchment necessitated by 

R6022 : page 388 

conditions produced by the war. Now that Brother 
Russell has passed beyond, the sermon feature will be 
discontinued entirely. The blessing of the Lord has 
rested upon this work far beyond our highest expectations. 
We remember when we thought if we could secure 
fifty newspapers to publish the sermons it would be a 
wonderful witness. About twenty years ago Brother 
Russell saw the great advantage of reaching the people 
by means of the public press. At that time the large 
sum of nearly half a million dollars seemed within his 
reach. He planned to use this for having the Truth 
spread broadcast through the magazines. Just as he expected 
to receive the money, the death of one man 
blocked the way. It was a great disappointment for 
awhile, but lie knew that the Lord was still at the head 
of the Harvest work. Later, with an astonishingly small 
sum, the Lord opened another way, and at one time about 
2,000 papers were publishing the sermons simultaneously 
and altogether over 4,000 papers published weekly reports. 
We asked for showers, and the Lord gave us 
rainfalls almost amounting to floods. What an evidence 



of His might and power to open doors whenever it may 
please Him and best serve His cause! 

Now that part of the work is past. Has He anything 
else to take its place? We think so. We believe that 
even a greater work is just at our doors, and that it will 
prove to be a richer blessing to the Church itself. The 
way is opening for thousands to enter into the work 
"while it is yet day," and they are hastening before the 
"night cometh when no man can work." The Colporteur 
work, the Pilgrim work, the Volunteer work, the PHOTO-DRAMA, 
and the "lightnings" of the Lord now observed 
on every hand have prepared the soil of the 
hearts of men. Each loyal soldier not already enlisted in 
some branch will be asking for the privilege to be a 
participant in the great battle of victory for the overthrow 
of Babylon. Already Babylon is gathering her 
hosts. We can hear the rumbling of the companies and 
the divisions as they are being assembled; and we think 
that it will not be long before she will have her army in 
full battle array. Hence we, like David of old, wish to 
have our slings loaded with pebbles from the Brook of 
Truth and to hurl them while Babylon is preparing for 
the battle. Let each remember that before one can enlist 
under the lead of our glorious and victorious Captain, 
it is well to take the oath of full allegiance to Him— to 
make a whole-hearted consecration and take up the cross 
and follow Him, else we cannot expect to share the glories 
of the Kingdom, soon to be established. We refer to 

THE PASTORAL WORK 

This seems to us to be another great forward movement 
against the embattlements of the Adversary. The 
campaign is opening up so rapidly that it is difficult to 
keep up with the rush. We can almost hear the noise 
of the gathering of the companies all over the country. 
Letters are pouring in from all sides asking for information, 
and many are already in the thick of the battle. 
We have been hindered by not being able to secure the 
needed "ammunition" to equip all the companies. The 
"munition factories"— our printers— have been greatly 
delayed in filling our orders; but we have promise now 
of speedy delivery, and soon we hope to see the battle 
being waged along the entire front. 

We wish we could tell you many of the interesting 
and encouraging incidents taking place in this service. 
We give one: In one of the larger cities the sisters had 
loaned a book to a gentleman. He read it, became very 
much interested, and said that he would be glad to pay 
for as many books as the Class could loan. When informed 
that they could use 700, he promptly gave his 
check for the needed amount. A letter now going out 
to the Pastoral workers gives other interesting and helpful 
information to these dear colaborers. 

THE DRAMA 



The PHOTO-DRAMA and the EUREKA DRAMA are still 
a valuable means of reaching many. The country districts 
are glad to have the opportunity of seeing the beautiful 

R6022 : page 389 

slide-pictures, even though they may not see the 

"movies." As a result we are receiving many inquiries 
from rural districts, which show a considerable interest. 
We are able to furnish the PHOTO-DRAMA to Classes in 
the following foreign languages: Armenian, Dano-Norwegian, 
French, German, Greek, Italian, Spanish, Polish 
and Swedish. 

There are twenty-one DRAMAS in active service, exhibiting 
mostly on Sundays; very few working during 
the week. These twenty-one are being operated mostly 
by the Classes of the larger cities, even where the DRAMA 
has been previously exhibited with success. We are receiving 
some glowing reports. One of these, from 
Toronto, Canada, informs us that in a hall seating 1,000, 
frequently hundreds are turned away at a single exhibition. 
Those attending are showing marked interest and 
are leaving many cards of inquiry. The PHOTO-DRAMA 
has also been shown upon several of the large American 
battleships, and many have manifested marked interest. 
It was also shown to the soldiers down upon the Mexican 
border, and good reports are coming from there. We 
have two more DRAMAS ready for use. If any of the 
large Classes are so situated that they could handle the 
PHOTO-DRAMA for a season, the Society will be pleased 
to hear from them; and if they do not have local operators 
arrangements could probably be made to supply 
them on short notice. Our latest information is that the 
DRAMA has witnessed to about twelve millions. Many 
classes have in this way been doubled, and prejudice 
against the Truth has been dispelled as perhaps could 
not otherwise have been accomplished. 

THE WATCH TOWER 

We are not printing so many extra copies for samples 
and for supplying back numbers as formerly, but we are 
printing about 47,000 each issue, except in the case of 
the Memorial Number, for which we are expecting a wide 
circulation. Orders for large numbers of these continue 
to come from Classes and friends. We do not know 
of a better issue to allay prejudice against Present Truth. 
It is very cheap at 5c. for 32 pages. THE WATCH TOWER 
is also published in the German, Polish, Swedish, Dano-Norwegian 
and French languages, but the Memorial Number 
in only English, German and Polish. 

We have long considered THE WATCH TOWER list the 
best criterion in regard to the general interests of the 
Harvest work, but there is still good reason to believe 
that the list does not include more than half the names 



it should. We are dependent upon the brethren to make 
known to others the merits of this publication and to urge 
all to send in their subscriptions. We remind them again 
of our willingness to cancel the debt of any receiving 
THE WATCH TOWER on credit who will advise us of their 
inability to pay. 

It must be gratifying to all to observe in THE WATCH 
TOWER columns the letters of sympathy and expressions 
of continued loyalty to the Society and to the Harvest 
work. These letters cover every section of the country, 
and incoming mails from foreign lands show the same 
spirit of sympathy and confidence— that He who began 
the good work is both able and willing to complete it. 

SUMMARY OF THE WORK 

The foreign branch of the service has been to some 
extent hindered, especially in Germany and France. The 
work in England has gone on without much change, and 
we have good reports from the dear brethren there. We 
hope to publish some very interesting letters soon. 

As this is the report for the last year our dear Brother 
Russell was connected with the work, we feel sure that 
all have an added interest in it. 

Our mail for the past year has been very encouraging: 

Letters received 134,849 

Letters and cards sent out 152,944 

You will observe that last year's report closed with a 
loan to balance the account. Therefore the report for 
the year just closed commenced with no balance on hand: 

RECEIPTS 

Good Hopes and Tract Fund 
donations $149,726.21 

EXPENDITURES 

Pilgrim service 30,967.71 

Free literature. Lecture 

Bureau, etc 60,596.74 

For the Blind 845.00 

For the various Conventions 1,985.36 

Pastoral work 269.60 

For the Foreign Fields... 32,850.23 

Paid on loan 20,000.00 

Leaving a balance on hand to 

commence the year 2,211.57 

$149,726.21 

As we see the vast possibilities opening up before us 
for the incoming year, we trust that each will carefully 
consider what share he or she may have in the work. 
As has been customary for a number of years, in order 
that the Society might outline its work with as much 
definiteness as possible— lay plans and make contracts— 



we give the friends an opportunity of advising us as 
soon as possible how much they estimate they will be able 
to give to the work for the coming year. Please remember 
that this is in no sense a solicitation. We know that 
all are glad to give to the best of their ability; that many 
have local expenses for Class and other needs; and yet 
that all desire to assist the general work as much as 
possible— as the Lord hath prospered them. 

We are glad to show a safe balance on hand and to 
report that the receipts during the past month are encouraging. 

R6023 : page 389 

We are governing ourselves accordingly- 
making preparations for the wisest and most judicious 
use of our stewardship. We doubt not the Lord's continued 
interest in the Cause which we all love so much, 
and His intention to carry to completion that which we 
believe He began. Continue to pray for us, as we always 
do for you. 

Finally, as expressed in the motto text of Brother Russell's 
selection for 1917: "The Lord bless thee, and keep 
thee; the Lord make His face shine upon thee, and be 
gracious unto thee; the Lord lift up His countenance upon 
thee, and give thee peace."— Numbers 6:24-26. 

REPORT FROM 1886-1891 

We feel sure that all will be greatly interested in a 
quotation from the first published report— extending from 
1886 to 1891 -published in THE WATCH TOWER in the 
latter year. We append the part as follows: 

"PREACHING THE GOSPEL OF THE KINGDOM" 

"The handful of Harvest laborers and the money at our 
disposal seem insignificant in contrast with the hundreds of 
missionaries and the millions of dollars spent by Catholic 
and Protestant societies in their support and in publishing 
abroad the doctrinal errors handed down from the Dark 
Ages, which tend to pervert and subvert the teachings of the 
Scriptures. But such is the zeal which the 'present truth' 
inspires, that 'a little one is able to chase a thousand, and 
two to put ten thousand to flight.' (Deut. 32:30.) Although 
few and untitled, and generally without great worldly learning 
—in these respects resembling those sent out by our Lord 
with the Kingdom Message at the First Advent— the faithful 
band of Harvest workers is busily engaged (some giving all 
their time and others able to give only a portion of it) in 
seeking out the 'wheat' class— the sickle of Truth which they 
bear separating 'the wheat' from the 'tares.' 

"Few know these Colporteurs as the Lord's real representatives, 
or recognize that dignity which the Lord sees in 

R6023 : page 390 



their humility and self-sacrifice. Missionaries? No, say the 
world and the nominal Church, ours are the missionaries, 
who go to foreign lands. Yes, says the Lord, these are My 
missionaries, charged with a grand mission— to 'gather My 
saints together unto Me; those that have made a Covenant 
with Me by sacrifice.' They shall be Mine, saith the Lord, 
in the day when I come to make up My jewels.' 

"Ministers? No, say the world and the nominal Church, 
only ours who wear clerical garments and preach from our 
pulpits are God's ministers. Yes, says the Lord, My servants 
(ministers) they are because they serve Me, dispensing Present 
Truth to My household. I have sent forth the Message 
which they bear. He that despiseth them despiseth Me, and 
he that receiveth the sealing in the forehead which I send by 
them will know the doctrine, that it is of Me. 'My sheep 
know My voice.' 

"During the past six years, annual reports of the work 
have not been made, for the reason that the reports would 
not have shown so well as we would have liked, and might 
have been discouraging rather than encouraging, some years. 
But the past year has been so favorable, and the responses 
already received to the suggestion in a recent TOWER have 
been so encouraging, that we have concluded to report each 
year hereafter, good or bad. We accordingly report now 
the TOWER MISSIONARY WORK in spreading the Gospel of the 
Kingdom for the six years past: 

"WATCH TOWER TRACT SOCIETY 

"SECRETARY'S REPORT 

"FROM JANUARY 1, 1886, TO DECEMBER 1, 1891 

"EXPENDITURES: 

"Paid balance, debt, owing January 1, 1886. $516.17 
"Expended in publishing and circulating 
Tracts and sample copies of WATCH 
TOWER and in sending TOWER to the 

Lord's poor 8,625.03 

$9,141.20 

"From Old Theology Tract subscriptions... $1,1 13.63 

"From Tract Fund Donations 8,027.57 

$9,141.20 

"It will thus be seen that we started Dec. 1st, 1891, with 
an evenly balanced ledger. But since figures are not apt to 
come out so exactly, it may be proper to remark that we had 
expended considerably more than our receipts, which would 
have shown a debt owing; but five friends of the Cause subscribed 
the balance so as to permit us to start the new fiscal 
year, beginning Dec. 1st, free from debt. 

"Tracts published and distributed 841,095" 



R6023 : page 390 

HARVEST WORK CONTINUES 

"Gather My saints together unto Me; those that have 
made a Covenant with Me by sacrifice."— Psalm 50:5. 

IT WAS the Lord who said that the gathering-time 

would be in the end of the Age; that 

He would then be present as Master of the 

Harvest; that His colaborers in the Harvest 

field would be His truly consecrated followers, 

acting as His messengers. He furthermore 

stated that during the Harvest time 

He would make one "faithful and wise servant. ..ruler 

over His household to give 

them meat in due season."— Matthew 24:45. 

Since "that Servant" has been gathered into the Garner 
of the Lord, should we expect the work of the 
Harvest to cease immediately? Surely not! We should 
expect it to continue until every member of the Kingdom 
class is fully gathered unto the Lord! The Harvest work 
consists of two distinct parts: (1) The promulgation of 
the Kingdom Message, which serves as a trumpet to call 
the people of God out from Babylon and to draw them 
closer to the Lord; and (2) the ripening and perfecting 
of the saints in character-likeness to the Master, and their 
entrance finally into the Heavenly Home. 

"That Servant" means a special messenger to the 
Church as this time. "Meat in due season" means the 
Message of the Kingdom to the Church, given at the 
time the Lord intended it should be given. The fact that 
the messenger has been gathered into the Kingdom should 
in no wise affect the Message, which remains with the 
Church as food and to be handed out to other hungry 
ones, until every one of the Lord's little ones has been 
gathered into the Kingdom. 

Who, then, will proclaim the Message? We answer. 
Every truly consecrated child of God who appreciates his 
or her privilege. All who are begotten and anointed 
of the Holy Spirit are commissioned to do this work. 
(Isaiah 61:1-3.) The Message of the Kingdom has been 
put in such form that everyone who possesses the Master's 
Spirit may use it for his own blessing and for the 
blessing of others. Our full consecration to the Lord 
means that all of our money, our time, strength, influence, 
everything, is devoted to His Cause. Whatever natural 
qualifications we thus have for serving the Lord provide 
an opportunity for us to serve in whatever place we are 
best situated for service. 

The Volunteers will continue to hand out the precious 
"meat in due season" which the Lord has furnished 
through His chosen Servant, that thereby some of His 
people yet in Babylon may be awakened. 

The Colporteurs will continue to bear to the hungering 
ones the precious Food contained in the Six Volumes 



of SCRIPTURE STUDIES. Evidently such food is all-sufficient 
for anyone to make his calling and election sure. 

The Pilgrim brethren will continue to make their 
usual visits to the Classes to aid, to teach and comfort 
them, and to serve the public as opportunity affords. 

Pastoral Workers will find much to do in searching 
out those who have heard the Truth at some public 
meeting and who may be needing further assistance in 
the way of getting out of Babylon before her downfall. 

The Elders of the various Classes who have the Spirit 
of the Lord will earnestly cooperate with the members 
of their respective Classes and in helping them to better 
understand the Berean lessons. Serving in humility and 
love and walking circumspectly, they will contribute 
much to the development in others of the character-likeness 
of the Master. 

The PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION will continue to perform 
the portion of the work the Lord intends it to do. 

Every truly consecrated child of God will, by his or 
her ability and opportunity, daily preach the Message. 
The world cannot intelligently read and understand the 
Bible, but can read and understand the daily life of 
Christians with whom they come in contact. "Actions 
speak louder than words." As the Lord continues to 
provide the money, so shall the Society continue to use 
it for the promulgation of the Gospel, looking for and expecting 
Divine wisdom and guidance in the proper use of it. 

ORGANIZATION OF THE WORK 

It is recognized that everything must be done decently 
and in order; that there must be a regular organization 
to properly carry on any work. How, then, may the 
Harvest work be thus conducted since Brother Russell 
is no longer in our midst? Many of the friends throughout 
the country are asking this and other questions, and 
we take pleasure in answering: 

R6024 : page 390 

THE WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 
was organized in the year 1884 as a means of putting 
forth the Message of the Kingdom in an orderly and 
systematic manner. The Corporation is controlled and 
managed by its Board of Directors and officers. The 
Board of Directors is composed of seven members. The 
Charter of the Corporation provides that the Board of 
Directors shall be self-perpetuating; that is to say, when 
a vacancy occurs by death or resignation the surviving 
members are empowered to fill such vacancy. Brother 
Russell was a member of the Board of Directors. Two 

R6024: page 391 

days after his death the Board met and elected Brother 
A.N. Pierson as a member of the Board to fill the 



vacancy caused by Brother Russell's change. The seven 
members of the Board as now constituted are A.I. 
Ritchie, W.E. Van Amburgh, H.C. Rockwell, J.D. 
Wright, I.F. Hoskins, A.N. Pierson and J.F. Rutherford. 

The Board of Directors thereupon provided for an 
Executive Committee of three, and elected as that Committee 
Brothers A.I. Ritchie, W.E. Van Amburgh and 
J.F. Rutherford. This Executive Committee lias general 
supervision of all the work of the Society, both in 
America and abroad, subject to the control of the Board 
of Directors of the Society. 

The Charter of THE WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT 
SOCIETY provides that the officers shall be elected annually 
by those who have contributed to the funds of the Society, 
and that those officers must be elected from among the 
Board of Directors. Brother Russell was the President 
of THE WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY from 
its organization until his death. The next annual election, 
as provided by the Charter, will be held Saturday, January 
6th, 1917, at Pittsburgh, at which time officers will 
be elected; viz., a President, Vice President, and Secretary 
and Treasurer. 

THE WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY is 
the most wonderful and unusual Corporation on earth. 
It is the strongest corporation, not financially, but strong 
because it has been, and still is, used of the Lord for 
the carrying on of His work. It is unusual in this: that 
all who are in any wise connected with it gladly render 
their services without salary; those giving all of their 
time taking only the bare necessities of life. It will continue 
in the same manner as in the past to spread the 
Gospel, so long as the Lord indicates this as His will. 

THE WATCH TOWER 

This publication is the medium through which the 
Kingdom Message is brought regularly to the members 
of the "Household." "That Servant" used this medium 
to give out the "meat in due season." By his last Will 
and Testament he provided for the continuance of THE 
WATCH TOWER by a duly constituted Editorial Committee. 
The names of the members of this Editorial Committee 
appear upon the title page of each issue of THE WATCH 
TOWER. It is the province of this Committee to put in 
proper form and publish, twice each month, that which 
goes to the Church. THE WATCH TOWER is not the organ 
of the Editorial Committee. It is the official organ of 
the Church. It is the only publication in the world declaring 
the presence of the King and announcing the nearness 
of His Kingdom. Therefore, dear brethren, THE WATCH 
TOWER is your journal. It is the journal of every one 
in harmony with Present Truth, and its publication is 
for the benefit of all such. It will continue to publish 
only that which is in harmony with what "that Servant" 
has heretofore given to the "Household of Faith." 

Shall we, then, continue to recognize in our Class-studies 



the Berean Bible lessons prepared by Brother 
Russell? Shall we continue to speak in our Class-studies 
of Brother Russell as the Lord's Servant who brought 
"meat in due season to the household of faith." Yes, 
indeed! Why not? If the Lord was pleased to use him 
for many years to give the "meat in due season" to the 
Church, then it is still "meat in due season," and the 
Berean lessons are essential for the development of those 
who shall be made partakers of the Kingdom. Should 
we now disregard the food contained in the STUDIES IN 
THE SCRIPTURES and other publications of THE WATCH 
TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY, it would mean that 
we were repudiating or disregarding that which the Lord 
has graciously provided for our benefit. We must make 
the distinction between Brother Russell as a creature and 
his official capacity as "that servant" of the Master to 
give out the "meat in due season." To disregard the 
Message would mean to disregard the Lord. 

Let us be courageous and faithful, dear brethren. Let 
us remember that in unity there is strength. The Lord 
will continue His work until it is finished. He will gather 
all of His true children into the Garner in due time. 
Shall we be of those thus gathered? That will depend 
upon whether or not we hold fast to that which we have; 
whether or not we remain loyal to the Lord and to His 
Message of the Kingdom. 

The Lord's "faithful and wise servant" finished his 
work and left with us his message. His last words to 
the Church, as set forth in his Will and Testament, show 
how essential it is for every one who would enter the 
Kingdom to continue loyal, and faithfully develop the 
fruits and graces of the Spirit. He said, "I entreat you 
all that you continue to progress and to grow in grace, 
in knowledge, and above all in Love, the great fruit of 
the Spirit, in its various diversified forms. I exhort to 
meekness, not only with the world, but with one another; 
to patience with one another and with all men, to gentleness 
with all, to brotherly-kindness, to godliness, to 
purity. I remind you that all these things are necessary 
for us— necessary that we may attain the promised Kingdom; 
and that the Apostle has assured us that if we do 
these things we shall never fail, but that 'so an entrance 
shall be ministered unto us abundantly into the everlasting 
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.'" 



R5995: page 391 

ECCE HOMO! 

[In loving remembrance of Pastor Russell and his Ministry.] 

"Loved and hated! Revered and reviled! 
Spurned and courted! Flattered, defiled! 
With never a falter and never a frown 



He kept to his moorings, and laid his life down 

In the place where God put him. What more can be said 

For soldier or hero? For living or dead? 

He wept with the anguished; he smiled with the glad: 

He lifted the fallen; he heartened the sad; 

He pitied the sinner, inspired the saint; 

He strengthened the feeble, recovered the faint. 

God gave him a Message— he gave it to men: 

He patiently told it again and again. 

"When men's eyes were blinded and ears could not hear. 

And men's souls were stunted by folly or fear. 

When minds were beclouded by dullness or doubt 

He maneuvered the Message and turned it about 

Till 'the wayfaring man, tho a fool,' could behold 

And hear the glad Gospel he patiently told. 

And yet will like rabble as stood by the Cross, 

Not knowing their folly, not sensing their loss. 

Flouting and scouting and wagging their head, 

Stand by in contempt while we weep o'er our dead. 

Dishonoring the prophet of this, their own time. 

And crowning him saint when the World sees their crime. 

"Behold now the Man?— Or wait world-old way 
To pay him the tribute we owe him today? 
Stand reverently now, with uncovered head. 
And look on 'that Servant' and honor the dead! 
A Man has gone from us, leaving none in his place, 
Yet his Message of Truth men can never efface. 
He'd the mind of a master, the heart of a child. 
The courage of Caesar, a soul undefiled. 
He'd the love of a father, a shepherd's kind care. 
The faults of a human and sympathy rare. 
He lifted a standard and held it up high. 
He lived— ready to live and ready to die!" 



R6024 : page 392 

THE HOLY CITY 

-DECEMBER 17.-REVELATION 21:1-4,22-27.- 

THE NEW JERUSALEM-THE NEW SPIRITUAL GOVERNMENT 
OF THE MILLENNIAL AGE-THE NEW HEAVENS AND EARTH 
SYMBOLIC EXPRESSIONS INDICATIVE OF NEW CONDITIONS 
TO PREVAIL UNDER MESSIAH'S RULE-THE NEW SPIRITUAL 

GOVERNMENT TO BE INVISIBLE-IN ANOTHER FIGURE 
CALLED THE TEMPLE OF GOD-THE EARTHLY REPRESENTATIVES 
OF THE MESSIANIC KINGDOM-THOSE WHO 
WILL CONSTITUTE THE HEAVENLY PHASE. 

"Behold, the Tabernacle of God is with men. 
and He shall dwell with them, and they shall be 
His peoples."— Verse 3. R.V. 



PARADISE, the Garden of God, was applicable 
as a name to Eden, where our first parents 
resided while they were still in harmony 
with God— before their disobedience. The 
same name is Scripturally applied to the new 
earth when Restitution blessings shall, during 
the Millennium, have brought it to perfection 
as the abode of those who under Divine 
favor shall then prove worthy of life everlasting. 

It was to this Paradise that the Apostle Paul was in 
vision "caught away" when given a glimpse of various 
features of the Divine Plan, not then due to be understood 
by the Church in general— "things not lawful to be 
uttered." (2 Corinthians 12:4.) The Apostle St. John was 
similarly caught away in vision, and shown some of the 
wonders of the Paradise epoch. But these were only in 
symbols, which he was permitted to report, and which 
have been comparatively misapprehended, until now, in 
the Lord's due time, the Holy Spirit is guiding His people 
into the Truth of this subject, as well as upon others; for 
"the time is at hand," and the information is "meat in due 
season" for the Household of Faith. 

Elsewhere this Paradise of the future is referred to 
by the Apostles as "the third heaven," and as "a new 
heavens and a new earth." (2 Corinthians 12:2; 2 Peter 3:13.) 
They are not referring to new planets, nor to 
heavens ranged one above another, as many have supposed, 
but to the third of three great periods of time, 
beginning with man's creation and extending into the 
illimitable future. The first of these periods, termed the 
first heavens and earth— the old order of things— passed 
away with the Deluge of Noah's day. The second period, 
"the heavens and the earth which are now," the present 
order of things, are reserved of God to pass away with 
a great symbolic fire of trouble— revolution, etc.— which 
will utterly destroy the present spiritual powers and the 
present social arrangements.— 2 Peter 3:6,7; Galatians 1:4; 
Zephaniah 3:8,9. 

The third great period is to be a "world without end," 
under Divine administration. This will be the third 
heavens and the third earth, or the new heavens and the 
new earth, which will differ from the present condition 
of things in that they will be righteous! whereas the 
present arrangement is imperfect, unrighteous. The "new 
heavens" will consist of the new spiritual ruling powers 
of the future— Christ the Head, and the Church His 
Body. The present heavens consist of the nominal religious 
systems which, while claiming Christ for their 
Head, nevertheless bow in a very large degree to Antichrist, 
"the god of this world," "the prince of this world," 
"who now worketh in the children of disobedience," and 
who is captivating and blinding the whole world, with 
the exception of the few whose eyes of understanding 
have been opened, who are under special blessing and 
leading, who are taught of God— the Little Flock, "heirs 



of the Kingdom."— Ephesians 2:2; 2 Cor. 4:4. 
"THE PARADISE OF GOD" 

It is to this new heavens and new earth condition, this 
Paradise of God, that today's Study introduces us. As 
the "new heavens" do not mean a new place for God's 
Throne, so the "new earth" does not mean another planet. 
The "new heavens" are a new condition, the spiritual 
power and control of Christ and His glorified Church; 
so the "new earth" means a new social order on this 
planet— "the new heavens and earth"— constituting the 
world to come— "wherein dwelleth righteousness." (2 Peter 3: 10-13.) 
The declaration of our lesson is that the former 
heavens and the former earth— which are now— will then 
have passed away and will be no more. All present institutions 
are to perish utterly in the great Time of 
Trouble with which this Age is very shortly to end. 

"And there shall be no more sea." As we have already 
seen, the sea is a symbol for the masses of people 
in a restless and unstable, anarchistic condition— just as 
the land represents the social order, and as the mountains 
represent the kingdoms of the present time. As there 
is no reference to the physical earth and the physical 
heavens being destroyed, so there is no reference to the 
physical sea being obliterated. The symbol signifies that 
under the new arrangement, under the control of the 
new Heaven— spiritual powers— the reconstructed social 
order will be so satisfactory, so complete, so thorough, 
that there will be no more sea class— no more restless 
people, no more dissatisfied masses, no more anarchists. 
Everything will be reduced to law and order; and under 
the new regime law and order will secure justice to every 
creature, obliterating the differences of wealth and power 
as they now exist.— Isaiah 2: 12-22. 

THE NEW JERUSALEM 

In the symbolism of Scripture a city represents a government; 
as, for instance, symbolic Babylon is denominated 
"that great city [government] which ruleth over 
the kings of the earth." (Revelation 17:18.) The New 
Jerusalem symbolizes the new spiritual Government of 
the Millennial Age. It is not earth-born; it is not reared 
by men; but, as pictured in today's Study, it descends from 
God out of Heaven. That is, it is spiritual in every sense 
of the word— of God and not of men. It is for this 
Kingdom, this Government, that our Lord taught His 
disciples to pray, "Thy Kingdom come; Thy will be done 
on earth, as it is done in Heaven." 

The declaration that the City is adorned as a bride 
for her husband implies its beauty, grandeur and perfection, 
as a bride's adornment on such an occasion is particular 
and elaborate lo the last degree. Additionally, the 
statement reminds us that in the government of the future 
the world's judges are to be the saints selected throughout 



the Gospel Age and qualified through faithfulness 
in trial and tribulation. (1 Cor. 6:2.) In the Scriptures 
these are frequently called "the Bride, the Lamb's Wife" 
and Joint-heir in the Kingdom. 

We are not to think of this Holy City as being composed 
of literal stones, coming down through the air. On 
the contrary, we are to remember that the saints of the 
Gospel Age are "living stones," as the Apostles explain. 
(1 Peter 2:4-7; Ephesians 2:19-22.) This glorious City 
will not be visible to the natural eye. Neither Christ nor 
the saints in glory can be seen of men. Only those who 
are changed from human to spiritual nature will see 
these matters in full. But the whole world will quickly 
be made aware of the fact that a new Government has 
been instituted— a government of righteousness and all 
power— and that thereafter whosoever doeth righteousness 
shall be blessed, but that whosoever doeth evil shall 
be punished proportionately. 

R6024 : page 393 

The entire Gospel Age has been devoted to the preparation 
of this New Jerusalem. As a whole, it comprises 
all of the saints, from our Lord Jesus Christ down 
to the last member of the Church. Not until all of the 
members of the Body of Christ have been chosen, found 
faithful, fitted and prepared for their places will this City 
of God descend to earth in power and come into possession 
or control of the earth. The coming of the New 
Jerusalem to the earth is the symbolic representation of 
the establishment of God's Kingdom in the earth; for a 
city is a well-known symbol representing government, 
control. Thus Washington City represents the United 
States government; Petrograd, the Russian government; 
Paris, the French government; Rome, the Italian; Berlin, 
the German; London, the British; etc. 

THE GLORIFIED TEMPLE 

The third verse of today's Study associates this City 
with the other figure of a symbolic Temple which the 
Lord is now preparing, and of which the saints will constitute 
the "living stones" and "pillars." It is declared 
that the Tabernacle of God [His Dwelling] shall be with 
men in this City [Government or Kingdom]. It will be 
His Temple; and the world of mankind will approach 
God in it, to receive the Divine blessings, just as Israel 
approached the typical Tabernacle and the Temple in their 
typical religious services. Thus God, represented in His 
Church— The Christ, Head and Body— will dwell with 
the world of mankind during the Millennial Age, and they 
shall be His people; that is to say, all mankind will be 
treated from the standpoint of reconciliation. The Propitiation-price 
for the sins of the whole world having 

been paid, and the due time having come for the manifestation 
of Divine favor, all peoples shall be treated as 



the Lord's people. None of them shall be treated as 
aliens, strangers, foreigners from God and His promises. 

While the Millennial Kingdom will be the Kingdom 
of God's dear Son, it will also be the Kingdom of God; 
for God's dear Son and His Joint-heir, the Church, will 
be in absolute accord with the Father; and all that shall 
be done under their control will fully and completely represent 
the Divine will respecting men. Nevertheless, it 
will be a Kingdom separate from the remainder of the 
Universe, as the Apostle Paul indicates. (1 Cor. 15:24,25,28.) 
"He must reign until He hath put all enemies 
under His feet.... And when all things shall be subdued 
unto Him, then shall the Son also be subject to Him 
that did put all things under Him. ...Then cometh the 
end, when He shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God, 
even the Father"— at the close of the Millennial Reign. 

THE WORK OF THE KINGDOM 

Since God is the Author of all the blessings of Redemption 
and Restitution, and since every good and every perfect 
gift cometh down from Him, the record appropriately 
declares that "God shall wipe away all tears from their 
eyes"— the eyes of mankind. Though Christ and the 
Church will do it, nevertheless the Heavenly Father will 
be recognized as the First Cause, the Fountain of Blessings. 
The wiping away of tears implies a gradual work, 
such as we see shall be the process of that glorious time. 
At the beginning of the Messianic Reign mankind will 
not be exempt from weakness, trial and difficulty; but 
as they conform to the laws of the Kingdom all cause 
for distress will gradually pass away; and the Restitution 
blessings will gradually lift them out of death into perfect 
life.-Acts 3:19-23. 

In verse 4 the work of the whole Millennial Age is 
summed up in a few words. What a glorious sunburst 
of blessing is in these words! What a grand fulfilment 
of St. Peter's declaration respecting the Times of Restitution! 
This declaration, however, applies to the very end 
of the Millennial Age rather than to any previous part 
of that Age; for other accounts show us unmistakably 
that there will be imperfections, chastisements and stripes 
throughout that Age, while mankind are being lifted up 
As our Lord expressed it, the raising up of mankind 
throughout the Millennium will be a "resurrection by judgment" 
—chastisements, disciplines.— John 5:28,29. R.V. 

Even at the close of that Age, as we are shown in 
another pen-picture of that time, there will be a severe 
trial and testing to demonstrate to what extent the enforced 
obedience of the Messianic Reign shall have rightly 
affected the hearts of those who experience its blessings, 
so that they shall love righteousness and hate iniquity. 
(Revelation 20:7,8.) In that final test any who shall manifest 
that his heart contains anything aside from loyalty 
to God and to the principles of righteousness shall have 
his part in the Second Death. 



Verse 5 comprehends the entire Millennial Age. Our 
Lord Jesus Christ, then in the Throne of earth's dominion, 
declares, "Behold, I make all things new." This expression 
does not relate merely to rocks, trees, etc., but 
to the great work which our Lord undertook; namely, the 
regeneration of humanity— of as many of Adam's race 
as will, under favorable conditions of knowledge, develop 
characters in full accordance with the Divine will. The 
end of the Millennial Age will see the work completed. 
All of the wicked— all who will not hear the voice of that 
Prophet, Teacher, King— will be cut off from amongst 
the people in the Second Death. But all the willing and 
obedient will be made new, brought to the complete perfection 
contemplated in the original Divine Plan. 

THE HEAVENLY CITY RESPLENDENT 

Here our Study turns to a consideration of the City, 
the glorified Church, the Kingdom class, those who during 
the Millennial Age will be "Kings and priests unto God, 
and reign upon the earth" for "a thousand years." (Revelation 1:6; 
5:10; 20:4,6.) This City class, the glorified 
Church, it is declared will have need of neither sun nor 
moon. Nothing in this statement indicates that the world 
will not both need and have sunlight and moonlight during 
the Millennial Age and subsequently.— Psalm 72:5. 

While it will be true that the Church, as spirit beings, 
will not need the literal sunlight and moonlight, nevertheless 
this is not the thought of Verse 23. Both sun 
and moon here are symbolical, as in Revelation 12:1. 
The sun signifies the light of this Gospel Age. The moon 
signifies the typically reflected light of the Gospel in the 
Law and the Prophets of the Jewish Dispensation. The 
glorified Church will have no need of the light which in 
the present time she so much enjoys through the Word 
and the Spirit. Instead, she will have a much more excellent 
glory. To this St. Paul refers when he says, 
"Now [with all the light, privileges and opportunities 
which we enjoy, as respects the representations of God 
through the Law and the Prophets and through the instructions 
and leadings of the Spirit in the present Age] 
we see through a glass darkly, but then face to face; now 
we know in part; then we shall know even as we are 
known."— 1 Corinthians 13:12. 

The Church, the Temple of God, will be so filled with 
all the fulness of God, when made like her glorious Lord 
(1 John 3:2), that nothing could add to her blessings 
of knowledge and Divine favor. She will be so filled with 
the glory of God that from her, as from her Lord and 
Head, shall proceed the light of the glory of God, which 
shall heal and bless the world during the Millennial Age. 
This is the Sun of Righteousness to which our Lord referred 
in Matthew 13:43: "Then shall the righteous 

R6024 : page 394 



shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father"— 

our Lord Jesus, the Head of the Church, of course being 

included. The Prophet mentions the same Sun of Righteousness, 

saying, "The Sun of Righteousness shall arise 

with healing in His beams." (Malachi 4:2.) Nevertheless 

we are not to lose sight of the fact that Christ is the 

Head of the Church, even as the Father is the Head of 

Christ Jesus. (1 Cor. 1 1:3.) Hence the Lord God Almighty 

and the Lamb will always be an inner Temple in 

this great Temple which God has provided for the world's 

blessing during Restitution Times.— Verse 22. 

THE BLESSINGS SHED FORTH UPON MANKIND 

When this Sun of Righteousness shall shine forth, its 
blessings of healing, refreshment and life— mental, moral 
and physical— shall fall upon all mankind; and the nations 
shall walk in the light therefrom. Old MSS. do not 
contain the words "of them that are saved" (Verse 24). 
Indeed, it is because the nations are NOT SAVED that they 
need this special light during the Millennial Age, in order 
to their enlightenment, their salvation, their Restitution. 
Nor do the words "and honor" occur in old MSS. "And 
the kings of the earth do bring their glory into it." 

The expressions, "nations" and "kings," are not to be 
understood as signifying that during the Millennial Age 
the world of mankind will be divided into nationalities 
and kingdoms as at present. The word "nations" here 
signifies peoples, and is intended to show that all peoples, 
not merely the Israelites, will be thus favored under 
God's Kingdom. The word "kings" represents those 
princes, or chief ones, who during the Millennial Age will 
be the representatives of the Heavenly, spiritual, invisible 
Kingdom of Christ. 

These princes, as we have already seen, will be Abraham, 
Isaac, Jacob and all the faithful Prophets of the 
previous Ages, who loved God before the Call to the 
Kingdom and to the Bride class went forth. Therefore 
they cannot be of the Bride class; but because of their 
faithfulness they will be the princes whom the Lord will 
establish in all the earth. First, however. He will make 
them perfect human beings and will qualify them for their 
office, as a reward for their faithfulness to God in the 
dark times in which they lived— their manifestation of 
love for righteousness and their trust in the Omnipotent 
One.-Psalm 45:16; Hebrews 1 1:39,40; Luke 13:28. 

The bringing of their glory into the City, the Kingdom, 
signifies their acknowledgment of this Heavenly Kingdom, 
their rendering of tributes of praise, thanksgiving, 
worship and obedience to it as God's Agency. This 
rendering of glory to the Kingdom will continue throughout 
the entire Millennial Age; for the princes throughout 
the earth will make known to the peoples that not in 
their own name or authority do they rule and execute 
judgment and establish righteousness, but in the name of 
the glorified Christ, Head and Body, whose representatives 



they are. The result will be that all peoples will 
ascribe honor, praise, majesty and glory to the Lord's 
Anointed, through whom Redemption and Restitution is 
being accomplished.— Verse 26. 

Then, in consideration of the fact that this book of 
symbols, while relating to the future, is addressed to 
God's consecrated Church of the present time— The Elect 
—and in view of the fact that this message would be 
more or less understood by those who would seek to make 
their calling and election sure to a part in the glorious 
New Jerusalem, Verse 27 is added, declaring that "in 
nowise shall there enter into it anything that defileth, 
neither whatsoever worketh abomination nor maketh a lie; 
but they which are written in the Lamb's Book of Life." 

The Lamb's Book of Life we must understand to include 
only those who attain to the position of joint-heirship 
with Christ, those whose names are written in Heaven 
during this Gospel Age and who are faithful to their 
Covenant. (Psalm 50:5.) What an incentive we have 
here to faithfulness! What a warning against the slightest 
sympathy with anything unclean, untrue, or in anywise 
contrary to the Divine standard of holiness! If we 
appreciate the glorious Divine provision for the Church 
and for the world, these promises will have their influence 
upon us; and under that influence we shall strive to keep 
our garments unspotted from the world, to be without 
spot or wrinkle or any such thing, that thus we may abide 
in our Lord's love, and in the due time be "meet for the 
inheritance of the saints. "-Col. 1:12-14; Heb. 4:14-16. 



R6024 : page 394 

"UNTO US A SON IS GIVEN" 

-DECEMBER 24.-ISAIAH 9:2-7.- 

A PICTURE OF MESSIAH AND HIS MILLENNIAL KINGDOM-DARKNESS 
STILL MEASURABLY COVERS THE WORLD-THE LIGHT 
OF THE WORLD SHINING FROM CHRIST AND HIS FOLLOWERS 
-THE RISING OF THE SUN OF RIGHTEOUSNESS TO SCATTER 
THE DARKNESS-THE WORLD TO BE CLEANSED FROM 
ALL OPPOSITION TO THE DIVINE GOVERNMENT-MESSIAH 
TO BE THE AGENCY THROUGH WHICH EARTH'S CLEANSING 
AND LIGHTING WILL BE ACCOMPLISHED. 

"For unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the 
Government shall be upon His shoulder; and His name shall 
be called Wonderful, Counselor, Mighty God, 
Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace."— Verse 6. 

WE AGREE with Leeser's translation of the 
Old Testament that the first verse of the 
chapter from which today's Study is taken 
should properly be the last verse of the preceding 



chapter— that the second verse of our 
lesson begins a new topic. With it, therefore 
the Study for today properly begins. 

Verse 2. After the Hebrew idiom this 
statement pertaining to the future reads as 
if it related to something in the past— just 
as in Verse 6 we read, "Unto us a Child is born," whereas 
Jesus was not born at that time nor until several centuries 
later. The promised great Light is not yet shining upon 
the people. Mankind still dwell in the land of the Shadow 
of Death. The shadows of the demoralized, sinful, dying 
condition of Adam's race affect all of life's interests for 
the whole world of mankind. As the Apostle explains 
subsequently, "The whole creation groaneth and travaileth 
in pain together until now."— Romans 8:22. 

We are still in the time when "darkness covers the 
earth [civilized society], and gross darkness the people 
[the heathen]." True, there is a measure of light in the 
world. True, also, that light emanated from our dear 
Redeemer, His words and His works; and it still shines 
forth from all who are truly His, all whose hearts are 
illuminated by His promises and His Spirit. But this is 
not the light which is to scatter all of earth's darkness 
and to cause all mankind to appreciate the glory of God. 
It is merely "the light that is in you"— in believers. It is 
a light of faith, a light of hope, a light of love ignited in 
the hearts of the Little Flock, who shine as lighted candles 
in the world and who are admonished to shine brightly. 

Our Lord's light shone into a little corner of the world 
called Palestine: and from His lamp many followers have 

R6024 : page 395 

lighted their lamps. To these the Master's instruction is, 
"Let your light so shine before men that they may see 
your good works, and glorify your Father which is in 
Heaven"; "Put not your light under a bushel, but upon a 
lampstand, that it may give light unto all in the House." 
But He adds, "Every one that doeth evil hateth the light, 
neither cometh to the light, lest his deeds be reproved."— 
Matthew 5:15,16; John 3:20; 2 Cor. 4:4. 

THE TRUE LIGHT OF THE WORLD 

That the True Light is not now shining, that the Sun 
of Righteousness has not yet arisen with healing in His 
beams, is fully evidenced by the gross darkness of heathendom 
and by the lesser darkness of Christendom. In proportion 
as Jesus' true followers have kept their lights 
trimmed and burning, in that proportion a measure of 
light has spread throughout the world. But all this is 
merely the shining of light in the midst of darkness and 
at the present time and under present conditions a light 
wholly inadequate to dispel the night and to bring in the 
glorious Day for which the whole creation groans and 
waits. That glorious Day cannot come until the Lord 



shall first have found the members of His Body, who together 
with Himself shall constitute the Sun of Righteousness. 
-Malachi 4:2; Matthew 13:43. 

The glorious prospect is that very soon the Church 
of Christ will be completed, that soon the Sun of Righteousness 
will shine. Soon its rays will light the uttermost 
parts of the earth. Then ultimately every child 
of Adam, sharer in his curse, shall be a sharer in Messiah's 
great work of blessing by being brought under the 
influence of that great Light which will constitute the 
Millennial Age a Day of glory and of knowledge of the 
Lord— the Golden Age of prophecy. 

The prophecy of Verse 2 of our Study goes beyond 
the living of that time and assures us that the Light will 
shine to those who are in the shadow of death— those 
who are in Hades, in darkness. Upon every member of 
Adam's race the light must shine; for Christ hath tasted 
death for all. As all of Adam's children were condemned 
before their birth, so Christ died for all, and the majority 
before their birth. As surely as they shared in the curse 
that came upon Father Adam, so surely will they receive 
a blessing from the redemptive work of our Lord Jesus 
Christ.-Romans 5:17,18. 

MULTIPLICATION BY RESURRECTION 

Verse 3. "Thou hast multiplied the nation, thou hast 
increased their joy; they joy before Thee according to 
the joy in harvest, as men rejoice when they divide the 
spoil." This, the Revised Version rendering, is evidently 
the correct one. This pictures the world of mankind during 
the Millennial Age, brought forth from the bondage 
of death, released from the Adamic curse, rejoicing as 
those who are dividing a spoil— sharing in something 
which is not theirs, something which has fallen to them. 
It will be just so. The blessings of the Millennium will 
be distributed as Divine bounty; the curse will be rolled 
away; the Sun of Righteousness will shine for all with 
healing in His beams, bringing Restitution to all; and none 
will forfeit the blessings except those who wilfully refuse 
them and who do despite to God's favor. 

The same is true now to those who receive Divine 
mercy. It is a gift; they can do nothing for it; they 
are merely assured that they are forgiven. The difference 
is that now only a very few have the eye to see, 
the ear to hear and the heart to appreciate God's mercy 
as it is told us in the Good Tidings which can be understood 
only by the hearing of faith. By and by, after 
the selection of the elect class, the Church, sight and 
knowledge will largely take the place of faith. The world 
will then realize the grace of God in Christ Jesus, forgiving 
their sins and providing them with life everlasting 
if they will accept it; and they will rejoice to divide 
the great spoil, the great gift of God.— Romans 6:23. 

Verse 4 delineates the cause for this rejoicing. It will 
be because the great oppressor, Satan, will no longer have 



control. His yoke of sin, sorrow, pain and death, his rod 
and his staff of affliction and slavery, will be broken forever, 
as the Lord explains. (Revelation 20: 1-3.) The 
victory over the Adversary is not to be a slow and gradual 
one, not to be accomplished by missions or any human 
power; but the Lord Himself will interpose His Power, 
"as in the day of Midian." 

THE ANTITYPICAL GIDEON'S BAND 

The day of Midian was the day when Gideon and his 
little band of Israelites met the hosts of Midian. (Judges 7: 15-22.) 
Suddenly, at the breaking of the pitchers and 
the blowing of the rams' horns, the Lord overwhelmed the 
powerful enemies of His people and granted them a miraculous 
deliverance. Gideon evidently prefigured our 
Lord Jesus; and his little band prefigured the Little Flock 
of Christ— the saints, the Very Elect. It was after the 
testing, the sifting, of Gideon's little band that the Lord 
granted the great deliverance. Thus will it be at the end of 
this Age. As soon as the antitypical Gideon's Band, the 
Royal Priesthood under the captaincy of their Lord Jesus 
Christ, shall have given their Message and shall have let 
their feeble lights shine out, the Lord will grant the great 
victory for truth and righteousness through a Time of 
Trouble which will eventuate in the binding of Satan and 
the release of all the oppressed. 

We read of the grand consummation, the end of sin 
and trouble, in Verse 5, which Leeser translates thus: 
"For all the weapons of the fighters in the battle's tumult 
and the garments rolled in blood shall be burned, become 
fuel for the fire." The interpretation of this figurative 
statement is that all of the weapons of Satan, all the accessories 
of sin and death, everything that pertained to 
this great conflict between righteousness and unrighteousness 
which has prevailed in the world for centuries, shall 
be utterly destroyed. The picture shows us the world 
cleansed from every evidence of opposition to the Divine 
Government and the Law of Righteousness, and accords 
well with the statement in Revelation 5: 13. 

HOW WILL IT BE BROUGHT ABOUT? 

Verse 6 gives us the explanation of the process by 
which the foregoing prophecy of blessing and release 
from the oppressor shall be accomplished. The Lord 
would draw the attention of all having the hearing ear 
to the fact that no such blessing and enlightenment could 
be possible until first Messiah should come. He would 
also show that Messiah would be born after the manner 
of mankind, but would nevertheless be the Son of the 
Living God. 

How beautiful, how simple, is the entire statement 
from the standpoint of faith! Yet how possible it is for 
the wisdom of this world to stumble over even such simple 
statements as these, and to claim, as Higher Critics do. 



that this prophecy was wholly to the Israelites of Isaiah's 
day, and that the promised one was King Hezekiah! 
Blessed are our eyes if they see, and our ears if they hear, 
the true meaning of this prophecy and thus permit us to 
recognize in it the Messiah, the Sent of God, Immanuel— 
"God with us"— to be the great Deliverer and to accomplish 
for us all the wonderful things which God hath 
promised by all the holy Prophets since the world began, 
confirming His Promise made to Abraham: "In thy Seed 

R6024 : page 396 

shall all the families of the earth be blessed."— Acts 3:19-2 1 ; 
Genesis 12:3; Galatians 3:8,16,29. 

Continuing, the prophecy pictures the Child grown to 
manhood, and the government placed upon His shoulders 
—the responsibility falling upon Him as a royal mantle 
from the Heavenly Emperor, Jehovah. The prophecy 
steps over the earthly trials and sufferings of our Redeemer, 
the Head, and of the Church, His Body, throughout 
this Gospel Age. It ignores the names Beelzebub, 
Prince of devils, Man of Sorrows, etc.; and it points us 
to the complete and glorified Messiah at His Second Advent, 
as viewed from the standpoint of Jehovah and from 
the standpoint from which ultimately the whole world 
shall recognize Him, when every knee shall bow and 
every tongue confess to Him, to the glory of the Father. 

"HALLOWED BE THY NAME" 

A name stands for or represents the character, disposition, 
qualities or powers of an individual. Thus all 
these names, these titles, given to our Lord in Verse 6, 
represent His majesty, dignity, power and glory. Our 
Lord is already recognized by His true followers, who 
know Him as the most wonderful Counselor. No other 
counsel, no other teaching is like His. The world in 
general has yet to learn this fact respecting Him; but 
before the close of the Millennium it will be generally 
known. If after mankind shall have confessed Him as 
the wonderful, wise Counselor, Guide, Teacher, any of 
them shall then wilfully and deliberately ignore and reject 
His teachings, and shall sin wilfully and intentionally, 
such must die the Second Death. 

Our Lord Jesus is recognized now by His true followers 
as the Mighty Lord, the Mighty God, but not as 
the Father. (1 Cor. 8:6.) He is the Father's Representative, 
Voice, Mouthpiece, the well-beloved Son whom 
the Father has clothed with glory, honor and immortality, 
and given all power in Heaven and in earth necessary 
to the accomplishment of the great work entrusted to 
Him, His fitness for which He demonstrated by His love 
and His loyalty even unto the death of the Cross. 

Our Lord Jesus will be the Everlasting Father of the 
human race in the sense that Adam, their father, failed 
to give them life, and that our Lord redeemed Adam and 



all his posterity, thus becoming the Author of everlasting 

life to all who will obey Him. This will include all of 

the human family that will attain to everlasting life, except 

the Church class of this Gospel Age, who are chosen 

from out the world and begotten of the Heavenly Father 

to a new, spiritual nature. (1 Peter 1:3.) These spirit-begotten 

ones are separate and distinct from the world, 

and are Scripturally designated the New Creation. They 

are spoken of as the brethren of Christ in one figure, and 

as His Bride and Joint-heirs in another, but never as 

His children. To the world, however. He will be the 

Everlasting Father, or Life-giver through whom they may 

have everlasting life— life to all eternity— if they will 

become obedient to Jehovah's arrangements. 

Another of our Lord's titles shall be that of the Prince 
of Peace. While His Kingdom will be introduced by the 
great Time of Trouble such as never before was, the 
trouble will not be of His producing. It will be the 
legitimate result of the wrong course of sin and selfishness 
fostered by the great oppressor, Satan. The Prince 
of Peace will subdue all enemies, all sin, all unrighteousness, 
all insubordination to the Divine will. He will 
neither fail nor be discouraged. Nothing shall hinder the 
accomplishment of this great mission entrusted to Him 
by the Father. His love of peace shall not hinder Him 
from dashing the nations to pieces as a potter's vessel, in 
order that righteousness shall be established upon a firm 
and sure foundation.— Psalm 2:9; Revelation 2:26,27. 

"UPON THE THRONE OF DAVID" 

Verse 7. The word David signifies beloved; and the 
kingdom entrusted to King David was God's Kingdom in 
a typical form, which was never to pass away. (1 Chronicles 29:23; 
2 Samuel 7:16.) It was maintained by the 
Lord down to the time of Zedekiah, when we are told 
that the crown and the scepter of authority and power 
were removed to be overturned until He should come 
whose RIGHT it is.-Ezekiel 21:27. 

Our Lord in the flesh, as a descendant of King David, 
was the legitimate Heir to that Kingdom of David which 
was to have no end. But instead of establishing His 
Kingdom at His First Advent, He declared, "My Kingdom 
is not of this world"— not of this Age, not of this 
Dispensation— and began the selection of the Little Flock 
who in the world to come— the Millennial Age— will be 
His joint-heirs and associates in the Millennial Kingdom. 
This work of selecting the Church— the kings, rulers, 
priests— has since been in progress; and we have the assurance 
of God's Word that it will reach a final and 
glorious consummation worthy of our God. 

When Christ and the glorified Church shall reign over 
the earth, their Rule will be the continuation or exaltation 
of the Kingdom of God which was begun in King 
David and Natural Israel. This greater David, this 
greater Beloved of the Father, full of grace and truth. 



will establish righteousness in the earth with judgment— 

with punishments for wrong-doing and rewards for right-doing. 

"The zeal of the Lord of Hosts will perform this." 



page 396 

INTERESTING ITEMS 
[CONTINUED FROM SECOND PAGE.] 

1917 VOLUNTEER LITERATURE 

The Society will have this ready for shipment about January 1. 
It was prepared by Brother Russell, and is specially appropriate for 
the times in which we are living. The leading article is: "The World 
on Fire." When ordering please mention B.S.M., Vol. 9, No. 1. 

Classes are requested to place their orders as soon as possible that 
the Society may be able to estimate the quantity to be printed. In 
ordering do not figure on more than one copy for each English-speaking 
home. Where there are no Ecclesias, individual orders will be received. 
Volunteer numbers are supplied free of charge, transportation 
charges collect. 



HYMNS OF DAWN-KARATOL EDITION 

We now have the MILLENNIAL DAWN HYMNAL (with music) bound 
in black karatol, round corners, red edges, embossed in oriental gold 
leaf: price 50c; postpaid. We also have a good supply of the regular 
cloth-bound Hymnals, on which the price has not been advanced; 35c 
postpaid. Small flexible edition, without music, 10c each. 



1917-YEAR TEXT MOTTO-1917 

As our Year Text Brother Russell chose these words, "The Lord bless 
thee, and keep thee; the Lord make His face shine upon thee, and be 
gracious unto thee; the Lord lift up His countenance upon thee, and 
give thee peace." (Numbers 6:24-26.) Price, postpaid, 60c per dozen; 
10c each. 

ADVERTISING PUBLIC MEETINGS 

Owing to the very high price of paper the BIBLE STUDENTS 
MONTHLY will not hereafter be used to advertise public meetings for 
Pilgrims and others. We would suggest the use of cards and newspaper 
columns instead. We will be glad to furnish cuts of the 
speakers as usual. 



WATCH TOWER RENEWALS 



The friends are now so accustomed to looking at their WATCH 
TOWER wrapper for acknowledgment of receipt of renewal of subscription 
that we will not longer send post-card acknowledgment as 
heretofore. When a dollar is sent for renewal of your subscription 
the date on the outside of your wrapper will be advanced one year. 



"POEMS OF DAWN" 

Many of the friends are not aware that since the first edition of 
"Poems of Dawn," a second has been issued containing two indexes- 
alphabetical and topical— and twenty-one additional poems— Karatol, 
50c; Leather, 75c, postpaid. 



LEESER BIBLE 

The publishers advise us that there will be no more of these at 
prices on our former list. We are able, however, to secure a larger 
Leeser Bible, 7x10, at $2.25, cloth, postpaid. 

page 397 

YOUR "GOOD HOPES" FOR 1917 

[The plan here proposed we designate "GOOD HOPES," 
because nothing is actually promised— only your generous 
hopes expressed, based upon your future prospects as they 
now appear to you. The plan has proved not only so beneficial 
to the cause of Truth but also so blessed to the hopers, for 
some years past, that we again commend it to all as Scriptural 
and good. Those who desire to make use of this plan 
can fill out both of these memoranda. One should be kept 
for the refreshment of your memory; the other mail to us.] 

— TO THE — 

"WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY." 

Dear Friends:— I have read with interest of the openings 
for the STUDIES and Tract work in foreign lands and here 
at home. I need not tell you that I am deeply interested in 
the spread of the Glad Tidings of the lengths and breadths, 
the heights and depths of redeeming love expressed for us 
in God's great Plan of the Ages. 

I am anxious to use myself— every power, every talent, 
voice, time, money, influence, all— to give to others this 
knowledge, which has so greatly blessed, cheered and comforted 
my own heart and placed my feet firmly upon the 
Rock of Ages. 

I have been considering carefully, and praying to be instructed, 
how to use my various talents more to my Redeemer's 
glory and for the service of His people— those 
blinded by human tradition who are, nevertheless, hungering 



for "the good Word of God," and those also who are 

naked, not having on the wedding garment of Christ's imputed 

righteousness, the unjustified, who stand, at best, in 

the filthy rags of their own righteousness. I have decided 

that so far as my "money talent" goes, I will follow the rule 

so clearly laid down for us by the great Apostle Paul (1 Cor. 16:2), 

and will lay aside on the first day of each week, according 

to my thankful appreciation of the Lord's blessings 

during the preceding week. Out of this fund I wish to contribute 

to the several parts of the Lord's work carried on by 

our Tract Society. Of course, I cannot in advance judge 

or state particularly what the Lord's bounty may enable 

me to set apart weekly, and hence you will understand the 

sum indicated to be merely my conjecture or hope, based 

upon present prospects. I will endeavor to contribute more 

than I here specify; and should I not succeed in doing as 

well, the Lord will know my heart and you, also, will know 

of my endeavors. 

My only object in specifying in advance what I hope to 
be able to do in this cause is to enable those in charge of 
the work of publishing and circulating the Tracts, etc., to 
form estimates, lay plans, make contracts, etc., with some idea 
of what I will at least try to do in the exercise of this, my 
highly appreciated privilege. 

My present judgment is that during the coming year, by 
self-denial and cross-bearing, I shall be able to lay aside on 
the first day of each week for Home and Foreign Mission 
Work (to assist in circulating SCRIPTURE STUDIES in foreign 
languages, and in publishing the BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLY 
in various languages, and in supplying these gratuitously to 
brethren who have the heart and opportunity to circulate 
them widely, and in meeting the expenses of brethren sent 
out as Lecturers to preach the Divine Plan of Salvation, and 
in general to be expended as the officers of the Society may 
deem best), the amount of per week. 

To comply with United States Postal Laws, all or any 
portion of my donation may be applied as subscription price 
for WATCH TOWER sent to the Lord's poor or others, as the 
Society's officers may deem advisable. 

That the work be not hindered, I will endeavor to send 
you what I shall have laid aside for this cause at the close 
of each quarter. I will secure a Bank Draft, Express Order 
or Postal Money Order as I may find most convenient, and 
will address the letter to 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 

BROOKLYN TABERNACLE, 13-17 HICKS ST., BROOKLYN, N.Y. 
or, London Tabernacle, Lancaster Gate W., England; or, 
Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne, Australia. 

(Name) 

(Post Office) (State) 



page 398 

WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTIONS 
ON "GOOD HOPES" ACCOUNT. 

The friends who contribute to the "Good Hopes" (described 
on the reverse of this sheet) at times desire to send 
THE WATCH TOWER to friends who are not yet interested 
enough to subscribe for themselves, or to deeply interested 
friends who are too poor to subscribe and backward about 
accepting our Lord's Poor offer. They are invited to give us 
such addresses below— the expense to be deducted from their 
donations. Give full name and address, and write very 
plainly, please, mentioning the length of the subscriptions: 



WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTION RENEWALS 

Most of our subscriptions end with the year, so we take 
this opportunity to remark that we shall be glad to hear 
promptly from such as desire the visits of THE WATCH TOWER 
continued. The Lord's Poor friends have been requested to 
send their applications in May. When names are dropped and 
afterward renewed it makes us unnecessary trouble. When 
desiring to know date of expiration look on your TOWER 
wrapper. Date is given in lower left-hand corner. 

A PRIVILEGE AND A SERVICE 

We are convinced that THE WATCH TOWER lists do not 
contain the names of many of those deeply interested in its 
teachings. The total is small enough surely, and we are not 
content that the name of any should be missing. We believe 
that all such will be stimulated and encouraged on the "narrow 
way" by its semi-monthly appearance on their table, 
reminding them afresh of spiritual matters which the world, 
the flesh and the Devil continually tend to crowd out of mind 
and heart. 

We have at times required that all desiring THE WATCH 
TOWER on credit, or free, as "the Lord's Poor," should make 
personal application; now we request every subscriber to inquire 
among those whom he knows to be interested in Present 
Truth, and to obtain the consent of all such to send in their 
subscriptions either on credit or free, as their circumstances 
may necessitate. Any getting it on credit may at any future 
time request that the debt be canceled, and we will cheerfully 
comply. We desire that as nearly as possible THE WATCH 
TOWER lists shall represent all deeply interested in its message. 

Our object is not the gain of "filthy lucre," but "the perfecting 
of the saints for the work of ministry"— present and 
to come. (Eph. 4: 12.) We offer no premiums, desiring the 
cooperation of such only as appreciate the privilege of being 
coworkers with us in this ministry. 

*CREATION DRAMA SCENARIO 



This is a condensed statement of the Divine Plan of the 
Ages— profusely illustrated— much information in little space. 
The ninety-six short, pithy lectures of the CREATION DRAMA 
can be supplied in print as follows: 

De Luxe, gold edges, embossed, 400 
illustrations $1.00 postpaid 

Cloth, burnished edges, embossed, 400 
illustrations 65 

Paper in three booklets, complete, per set.. .25 " 

A Newspaper edition in 4 Parts 05 " 

IN GERMAN, SPANISH, ITALIAN, GREEK, POLISH, 
ARMENIAN: 

Cloth bound, complete 65 " 

Paper " " 25 " 

Newspaper edition, 3 Parts, 2c ea.; per set. .05 " 
IN SWEDISH: Cloth bound 65 " 

Newspaper edition, 2c ea.; per set 05 " 

CHOICE MOTTO CARDS- 19 16-191 7 

We have, as usual, very choice sorts. These cards are 
made in Europe, hence subject to heavy expenses for freight 
and duty, especially since the war began. Nevertheless, we 
can supply them in the United States and Canada at less than 
retail European prices, because we supply them at about cost 
price— that is to say, about one-half the usual American prices. 
Besides this, we prepay postage or express charges. Our 
object is to encourage the embellishment of the homes of the 
Lord's people with faith-stimulating and courage-inspiring 
texts tastefully prepared. To facilitate the handling of these 
motto cards we assort them in packets, carefully packed, at 
the following prepaid rates: 

Packet Ma— Twelve mottoes, small and medium, 50c. 

Number Mb— Fourteen medium and small cards, $1. 

Number Mc— Thirteen large, medium and small cards, $1. 

Number Md— Four large and medium cards, $1. 

Where $5 worth of these are sent to one address the saving 
in packing and expressage would be 50c, making the price 
$4.50. Order by number only. 

*DAILY HEAVENLY MANNA 

Those who use this book as we recommend are surely 
being blessed. Thousands testify to the help thus received. 
Its daily text should be read and commented on freely by all. 
Then the MANNA comment should be read. This book contains 
the same texts and comments as all former editions. 
Every alternate leaf is blank-ruled for use as an autograph 
and birthday record. Its value increases as additional autographs 
of friends are secured. It is printed on bond paper. 

The following wholesale rates postpaid are granted to all 
WATCH TOWER subscribers: 
Purple cloth, gold embossed, gilt edges; English and 

Polish $0.60 

Dark blue cloth, silver embossed, German 60 



Leatherette, blue edges, Swedish and Norwegian 60 

Leatherette, genuine gold edges, Swedish and 

Norwegian 1.10 

Genuine Morocco, gold edges, English, Polish and 

Norwegian 2.00 

We hope this little book will find a place at every breakfast 
table, that spiritual refreshment may thus be enjoyed 
with the natural food. 

MISCELLANEOUS 

Hymns of Dawn, with music (Karatol) $ .50 

Hymns of Dawn, with music (cloth) 35 

Hymns of Dawn, without music (flexible) 10 

Poems of Dawn (Karatol) 50 

Poems of Dawn (Leather) 75 

Bible Talks in Simple Language (half leather) 1.25 

Memorizing Text-Cards (100 in pkg.— assortments. No. 

1 and 2), per pkg 30 

Scriptural Post Cards (assorted), doz. 15c; per 100. 1.00 
CHARTS (Blue Prints, soft cloth): 

Plan of the Ages, 5 ft. $1.85; 8 ft 2.50 

Chronology of the Bible, 7-1/2 ft 2.00 

Tabernacle of the Wilderness, 7-1/2 ft 2.00 

BINDERS for THE WATCH TOWER: 

Spring Back (holds 1 yr.) 60 

CROSS & CROWN PINS (Gold, with red enamel): 

5/8"-No. 1 Ladies' Style, No. 2 Gents', each 1.15 

l/2"-No. 3 Gents' Style, No. 4 Ladies', each 1 .00 

5/8" celluloid, per doz., 25: each 03 

Missionary Envelopes, per 100 .30: per 1000 3.00 

Vow Bookmarks (paper) per 100 .25; (silk) each 05 

*Booklets (on Hell, Spiritism, Evolution, Tabernacle 

Shadows, Our Lord's Return) 10 

♦Question Booklets on each Vol. of SCRIPTURE STUDIES 

and on THE TABERNACLE, each .07; per doz 84 

Report on Foreign Missions, each 05 

THE WATCH TOWER (semi-monthly), per year 1.00 

The Divine Plan of the Ages (Za), WATCH TOWER 

form, ea 10 

What Say the Scriptures about Hell (Hz.), WATCH 

TOWER form, ea 05 

Judge Rutherford's Defense of Pastor Russell, each 10c, 

per 100 8.00 

THE BIBLE STUDENTS MONTHLY, per year 12 

Tracts in all languages FREE 



*Colporteurs and Class Secretaries may deduct one-half from above 
prices on MANNAS, BOOKLETS and SCENARIOS if shipment consists of 50 
or more volumes, charges collect. 



