Announcements
PREACHING WITH A VIEW TO GIVING A WITNESS
Preaching may have a variety of aims. It may convert, it may comfort and encourage and it may put people on notice. The proclamation of “this good news of the kingdom” in these momentous days accomplishes all three of these aims. (Matt. 24:14, NW) Are you rejoicing by sharing in the privilege of giving the witness? You may still have a part in it by reaching the people with the good news The Watchtower is carrying. A year’s subscription for this magazine and three booklets will be offered for $1 during April.
CONSIDER THE THRILL THAT AWAITS YOU!
Have you thrilled at the tremendous growth of gospel preaching regularly reported from such countries as Germany and Italy? Would you enjoy hearing from and talking with brothers who survived totalitarian persecution because of their faithfulness to Jehovah? From a few thousand witnesses in Hitler’s torture camps just ten years ago, the number of gospel-preachers in West Germany alone has grown to an amazing 48,000! Just nine years ago the Yearbook said: “Efforts are now being made to give the people of Italy opportunity to hear the truth,” but it was not then known whether that would prove possible. Now there are over 2,500 publishers in that land! Would you like to visit them? Then attend the 1955 series of European assemblies. Arrangements for international travel, however, take time, so they should be made as quickly as possible.
“MAKE SURE OF ALL THINGS”
A wise person will “make sure of all things” that affect his welfare. He looks carefully to the things he eats and wears, and does not indifferently assume that whatever is offered to him is worth his acceptance. How much more should he “make sure of all things” that stand related to his spiritual and eternal welfare! He should properly make sure that the things he accepts and believes are sound, reasonable, true and Scriptural. By use of the 416-page book “Make Sure of All Things” in minutes you can quickly locate and examine common teachings and beliefs in the light of the Bible’s inspired record. You may obtain a copy for only 75c.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
April 17: Maintaining Happiness by Dispelling Complaint, ¶1-19. Page 177.
April 24: Pursue the Things That Are Upbuilding, ¶1-22, Page 183.

